the - - the one thing Needful ' now , what I want be , fact . teach these boy and girl nothing but fact . fact alone be want in life . plant nothing else , and root out everything else . you can only form the mind of reason animal upon fact : nothing else will ever be of any service to they . this be the principle on which i br up my own child , and this be the principle on which I bring up these child . stick to fact , sir ! ' the scene be a plain , bare , monotonous vault of a school - room , and the speaker 's square forefinger emphasize he observation by underscor every sentence with a line on the schoolmaster 's sleeve . the emphasis be help by the speaker 's square wall of a forehead , which have he eyebrow for it be base , while he eye find commodious cellarage in two dark cafe , overshadow by the wall . the emphasis be help by the speaker 's mouth , which be wide , thing , and hard set . the emphasis be help by the speaker 's voice , which be inflexible , dry , and dictatorial . the emphasis be help by the speaker 's hair , which bristle on the skirt of he bald head , a plantation of fir to keep the wind from its shining surface , all cover with knob , like the crust of a plum pie , as if the head have scarcely warehouse - room for the hard fact store inside . the speaker 's obstinate carriage , square coat , square leg , square shoulder , - nay , he very neckcloth , train to take he by the throat with a unaccommodating grasp , like a stubborn fact , as it be , - all help the emphasis . ' in this life , we want nothing but fact , sir ; nothing but fact ! ' the speaker , and the schoolmaster , and the third grow person present , all back a little , and sweep with they eye the inclin plane of little vessel then and there arrange in order , ready to have imperial gallon of fact pour into they until they be full to the brim . chapter ii - murder the , sir . a man of reality . a man of fact and calculation . a man who proceed upon the principle that two and two be four , and nothing over , and who be not to be talk into allow for anything over . , sir - peremptorily - . with a rule and a pair of scale , and the multiplication table always in he pocket , sir , ready to weigh and measure any parcel of human nature , and tell you exactly what it come to . it be a mere question of figure , a case of simple arithmetic . you might hope to get some other nonsensical belief into the head of , or , or , or ( all supposititious , non-existent person ) , but into the head of - no , sir ! in such term always mentally introduce himself , whether to he private circle of acquaintance , or to the public in general . in such term , no doubt , substitute the word 's boy and girl , ' for ' sir ,' now present to the little pitcher before he , who be to be fill so full of fact . indeed , as he eagerly sparkle at they from the cellarage before mention , he seem a kind of cannon load to the muzzle with fact , and prepare to blow they clean out of the region of childhood at one discharge . he seem a galvanizing apparatus , too , charge with a grim mechanical substitute for the tender young imagination that be to be storm away . ' number twenty , ' say , squarely point with he square forefinger , 'I do not know that girl . who be that girl ? ' ' , sir , ' explain number twenty , blush , stand up , and curtsey . ' be not a name , ' say . ' do not call yourself . call yourself . ' ' it be father as call I , sir , ' return the young girl in a trembling voice , and with another curtsey . ' then he have no business to do it , ' say . ' tell he he must not . . let I see . what be you father ? ' ' he belong to the horse -rid , if you please , sir . ' frown , and wave off the objectionable call with he hand . ' we do not want to know anything about that , here . you must not tell we about that , here . you father break horse , do not he ? ' ' if you please , sir , when they can get any to break , they do break horse in the ring , sir . ' ' you must not tell we about the ring , here . very well , then . describe you father as a horsebreaker . he doctor sick horse , I dare say ? ' ' oh yes , sir . ' ' very well , then . he be a veterinary surgeon , a farrier , and horsebreaker . give I you definition of a horse . ' ( throw into the greatest alarm by this demand . ) ' number twenty unable to define a horse ! ' say , for the general behoof of all the little pitcher . ' number twenty possess of no fact , in reference to one of the commonest of animal
animal ! some boy 's definition of a horse . , yours . ' the square finger , move here and there , light suddenly on , perhaps because he chance to sit in the same ray of sunlight which , dart in at one of the bare window of the intensely white - wash room , irradiate . for , the boy and girl sit on the face of the inclined plane in two compact body , divide up the centre by a narrow interval ; and , be at the corner of a row on the sunny side , come in for the beginning of a sunbeam , of which Bitzer , be at the corner of a row on the other side , a few row in advance , catch the end . but , whereas the girl be so dark - eyed and dark - haire , that she seem to receive a deeper and more lustrous colour from the sun , when it shine upon she , the boy be so light - eyed and light - hair that the self - same ray appear to draw out of he what little colour he ever possess . he cold eye would hardly have be eyes , but for the short end of lash which , by bring they into immediate contrast with something paler than themselves , express they form . he short - cropped hair might have be a mere continuation of the sandy freckle on he forehead and face . he skin be so unwholesomely deficient in the natural tinge , that he look as though , if he be cut , he would bleed white . ' Bitzer , ' say . ' you definition of a horse . ' ' . Graminivorous . Forty tooth , namely twenty - four grinder , four eye - tooth , and twelve incisive . shed coat in the spring ; in marshy country , shed hoofs , too . Hoofs hard , but require to be shod with iron . age know by mark in mouth . ' thus ( and much more ) . ' now girl number twenty , ' say . ' you know what a horse be . ' she curtsey again , and would have blush deeper , if she could have blush deeper than she have blush all this time . , after rapidly blink at with both eye at once , and so catch the light upon he quivering end of lash that they look like the antenna of busy insects , put he knuckle to he freckled forehead , and sit down again . the third gentleman now step forth . a mighty man at cutting and drying , he be ; a government officer ; in he way ( and in most other people 's too ) , a profess pugilist ; always in training , always with a system to force down the general throat like a bolus , always to be hear of at the bar of he little public - office , ready to fight all . to continue in fistic phraseology , he have a genius for come up to the scratch , wherever and whatever it be , and prove himself a ugly customer . he would go in and damage any subject whatever with he right , follow up with he leave , stop , exchange , counter , bear he opponent ( he always fight all ) to the rope , and fall upon he neatly . he be certain to knock the wind out of common sense , and render that unlucky adversary deaf to the call of time . and he have it in charge from high authority to bring about the great public - office , when commissioner should reign upon earth . ' very well , ' say this gentleman , briskly smile , and fold he arm . ' that be a horse . now , let I ask you girl and boy , would you paper a room with representation of horse ? ' after a pause , one half of the child cry in chorus , ' yes , sir ! ' upon which the other half , see in the gentleman 's face that yes be wrong , cry out in chorus , ' no , sir ! ' - as the custom be , in these examination . ' of course , no . why would not you ? ' a pause . one corpulent slow boy , with a wheezy manner of breathing , venture the answer , because he would not paper a room at all , but would paint it . ' you must paper it , ' say the gentleman , rather warmly . ' you must paper it , ' say , ' whether you like it or not . do not tell we you would not paper it . what do you mean , boy ? ' 'I will explain to you , then , ' say the gentleman , after another and a dismal pause , ' why you would not paper a room with representation of horse . do you ever see horse walk up and down the side of room in reality - in fact ? do you ? ' ' yes , sir ! ' from one half . ' no , sir ! ' from the other . ' of course no , ' say the gentleman , with a indignant look at the wrong half . ' why , then , you be not to see anywhere , what you do not see in fact ; you be not to have anywhere , what you do not have in fact . what be call , be only another name for fact . ' nod he approbation . ' this be a new principle , a discovery , a
a great discovery , ' say the gentleman . ' now , I will try you again . suppose you be go to carpet a room . would you use a carpet have a representation of flower upon it ? ' there be a general conviction by this time that ' no , sir ! ' be always the right answer to this gentleman , the chorus of be very strong . only a few feeble straggler say yes : among they . ' number twenty , ' say the gentleman , smile in the calm strength of knowledge . blush , and stand up . ' so you would carpet you room - or you husband 's room , if you be a grow woman , and have a husband - with representation of flower , would you ? ' say the gentleman . ' why would you ? ' ' if you please , sir , I be very fond of flower , ' return the girl . ' and be that why you would put table and chair upon they , and have people walk over they with heavy boot ? ' ' it would not hurt they , sir . they would not crush and wither , if you please , sir . they would be the picture of what be very pretty and pleasant , and I would fancy - ' 'Ay , ay , ay ! but you must not fancy , ' cry the gentleman , quite elate by come so happily to he point . ' that be it ! you be never to fancy . ' ' you be not , ,' solemnly repeat , 'to do anything of that kind . ' ' fact , fact , fact ! ' say the gentleman . and ' fact , fact , fact ! ' repeat . ' you be to be in all thing regulate and govern , ' say the gentleman , ' by fact . we hope to have , before long , a board of fact , compose of commissioner of fact , who will force the people to be a people of fact , and of nothing but fact . you must discard the word Fancy altogether . you have nothing to do with it . you be not to have , in any object of use or ornament , what would be a contradiction in fact . you do not walk upon flower in fact ; you can not be allow to walk upon flower in carpet . you do not find that foreign bird and butterfly come and perch upon you crockery ; you can not be permit to paint foreign bird and butterfly upon you crockery . you never meet with quadruped go up and down wall ; you must not have quadruped represent upon wall . you must use , ' say the gentleman , ' for all these purpose , combination and modification ( in primary colour ) of mathematical figure which be susceptible of proof and demonstration . this be the new discovery . this be fact . this be taste . ' the girl curtsey , and sit down . she be very young , and she look as if she be frightene by the matter - of - fact prospect the world afforde . ' now , if , ' say the gentleman , ' will proceed to give he first lesson here , , I shall be happy , at you request , to observe he mode of procedure . ' be much obliged . ' , we only wait for you . ' so , begin in he best manner . he and some one hundred and forty other schoolmaster , have be lately turn at the same time , in the same factory , on the same principles , like so many pianoforte leg . he have be put through a immense variety of pace , and have answer volume of head - breaking question . Orthography , etymology , syntax , and prosody , biography , astronomy , geography , and general cosmography , the sciences of compound proportion , algebra , land -survey and level , vocal music , and draw from model , were all at the end of he ten chill finger . he have work he stony way into 's most 's schedule b , and have take the bloom off the higher branch of mathematics and physical science , french , german , latin , and . he know all about all the of all the world ( whatever they be ) , and all the histories of all the people , and all the name of all the rivers and mountain , and all the productions , manners , and custom of all the country , and all they boundary and bearing on the two and thirty point of the compass . ah , rather overdone , . if he have only learn a little less , how infinitely better he might have teach much more ! he go to work in this preparatory lesson , not unlike in the : look into all the vessel range before he , one after another , to see what they contain . , good . when from thy boil store , thou shal fill each jar brim full by - and - by , dost thou think that thou will always kill outright the robber Fancy lurk within - or sometimes only maim he and distort he ! chapter iii - a walk homeward from the school , in a state of considerable satisfaction . it be he school , and he intend it to be a model . he intend every child in it to be a model - just as the young Gradgrind be all model . there be five young Gradgrind , and they be model every one .
. they have be lecture at , from they tenderest year ; course , like little hare . almost as soon as they could run alone , they have be make to run to the lecture - room . the first object with which they have a association , or of which they have a remembrance , be a large black board with a dry Ogre chalk ghastly white figure on it . not that they know , by name or nature , anything about a fact forbid ! I only use the word to express a monster in a lecturing castle , with know how many head manipulate into one , take childhood captive , and drag it into gloomy statistical den by the hair . no little have ever see a face in the moon ; it be up in the moon before it could speak distinctly . no little have ever lear not the silly jingle , Twinkle , twinkle , little star ; how I wonder what you be ! no little have ever know wonder on the subject , each little have at five year old dissect the great like a , and drive 's like a locomotive engine - driver . no little have ever associate a cow in a field with that famous cow with the crumple horn who toss the dog who worry the cat who kill the rat who eat the malt , or with that yet more famous cow who swallow : it have never hear of those celebrity , and have only be introduce to a cow as a graminivorous ruminating quadru with several stomach . to he matter - of - fact home , which be call , direct he step . he have virtually retir from the wholesale hardware trade before he build , and be now look about for a suitable opportunity of make a arithmetical figure in parliament . be situate on a moor within a mile or two of a great town - call in the present faithful guide - book . a very regular feature on the face of the country , be . not the least disguise tone down or shade off that uncompromising fact in the landscape . a great square house , with a heavy portico darken the principal window , as its master 's heavy brows overshadow he eye . a calculate , cast up , balance , and prove house . six window on this side of the door , six on that side ; a total of twelve in this wing , a total of twelve in the other wing ; four - and - twenty carry over to the back wing . a lawn and garden and a infant avenue , all rule straight like a botanical account - book . gas and ventilation , drainage and water - service , all of the primest quality . Iron clamp and girder , fire - proof from top to bottom ; mechanical lift for the housemaid , with all they brush and broom ; everything that heart could desire . everything ? well , I suppose so . the little Gradgrinds have cabinet in various departments of science too . they have a little conchological cabinet , and a little metallurgical cabinet , and a little mineralogical cabinet ; and the specimen be all arrange and label , and the bit of stone and ore look as though they might have be break from the parent substance by those tremendously hard instrument they own name ; and , to paraphrase the idle legend of , who have never find he way into they nursery , if the greedy little Gradgrind gras at more than this , what be it for good gracious goodness ' sake , that the greedy little Gradgrinds grasp it ! they father walk on in a hopeful and satisfied frame of mind . he be a affectionate father , after he manner ; but he would probably have describe himself ( if he have be put , like , upon a definition ) as 'an eminently practical ' father . he have a particular pride in the phrase eminently practical , which be consider to have a special application to he . whatsoever the public meeting hold in , and whatsoever the subject of such meeting , some be sure to seize the occasion of alluding to he eminently practical friend . this always please the eminently practical friend . he know it to be he due , but he due be acceptable . he have reach the neutral ground upon the outskirt of the town , which be neither town nor country , and yet be either spoiled , when he ear be invade by the sound of music . the clashing and bang band attach to the horse - ride establishment , which have there set up its rest in a wooden pavilion , be in full bray . a flag , float from the summit of the temple , proclaim to mankind that it be 's 's horse - ride ' which claim they suffrage . Sleary himself , a stout modern statue with a money - box at its elbow , in a ecclesiastical niche of early Gothic architecture , take the money . , as some very long and very narrow strips of print bill announce , be then inaugurat the entertainment with she graceful equestrian flower - act . among the other pleasing but always strictly moral wonder which must be see to be believe , be that afternoon to ' elucidate the diverting accomplishment of he highly train perform dog Merryleg . ' he be also to exhibit ' he astounde feat of throw seventy - five hundred - weight in rapid succession backhand over he head , thus form a fountain of solid iron in mid-air , a feat never before attempt in this or any
any other country , and which have elicit such rapturous plaudit from enthusiastic throng it can not be withdrawn . ' the same be to ' enlive the varied performance at frequent interval with he chaste Shaksperean quip and retort . ' Lastly , he be to wind they up by appear in he favourite character of , of , in ' the highly novel and laughable hippo - comedietta of the 's to . ' take no heed of these triviality of course , but pass on as a practical man ought to pass on , either brush the noisy insect from he thought , or consign they to the house of correction . but , the turning of the road take he by the back of the booth , and at the back of the booth a number of child be congregate in a number of stealthy attitude , strive to peep in at the hidden glory of the place . this bring he to a stop . ' now , to think of these vagabonds , ' say he , ' attract the young rabble from a model school . ' a space of stunted grass and dry rubbish be between he and the young rabble , he take he eyeglass out of he waistcoat to look for any child he know by name , and might order off . almost incredible though distinctly see , what do he then behold but he own metallurgical Louisa , pee with all she might through a hole in a deal board , and he own mathematical Thomas abase himself on the ground to catch but a hoof of the graceful equestrian flower - act ! dumb with amazement , cross to the spot where he family be thus disgrace , laid he hand upon each er child , and say : ' Louisa !! !! ' both rose , red and disconcert . but , look at she father with more boldness than do . indeed , do not look at he , but give himself up to be take home like a machine . ' in the name of wonder , idleness , and folly ! ' say , lead each away by a hand ; ' what do you do here ? ' ' want to see what it be like , ' return , shortly . ' what it be like ? ' ' yes , father . ' there be a air of jad sullenness in they both , and particularly in the girl : yet , struggle through the dissatisfaction of she face , there be a light with nothing to rest upon , a fire with nothing to burn , a starve imagination keep life in itself somehow , which brighten its expression . not with the brightness natural to cheerful youth , but with uncertain , eager , doubtful flash , which have something painful in they , analogous to the change on a blind face grope its way . she be a child now , of fifteen or sixteen ; but at no distant day would seem to become a woman all at once . she father think so as he look at she . she be pretty . would have be self - willed ( he think in he eminently practical way ) but for she bring - up . ' , though I have the fact before I , I find it difficult to believe that you , with you education and resource , should have bring you sister to a scene like this . ' 'I bring he , father , ' say , quickly . 'I ask he to come . ' 'I be sorry to hear it . I be very sorry indeed to hear it . it make no better , and it make you worse , . ' she look at she father again , but no tear fall down she cheek . ' you ! and you , to whom the circle of the sciences be open ; and you , who may be say to be replete with fact ; and you , who have be train to mathematical exactness ; and you , here ! ' cry . 'In this degrad position ! I be amaz . ' 'I be tired , father . I have be tire a long time , ' say . ' tire ? of what ? ' ask the astonished father . 'I do not know of what - of everything , I think . ' ' not another word , ' return . ' you be childish . I will hear no more . ' he do not speak again until they have walk some half - a - mile in silence , when he gravely break out with : ' what would you best friend say , ? do you attach no value to they good opinion ? what would say ? ' at the mention of this name , he daughter steal a look at he , remarkable for its intense and search character . he see nothing of it , for before he look at she , she have again cast down she eye ! ' what ,' he repeat presently , ' would say ? ' all the way to , as with grave indignation he lead the two delinquent home , he repeat at interval ' what would say ? ' - as if have be . - not be , who be ? why , be as near be 's bosom friend , as a man perfectly devoid of sentiment can approach that spiritual relationship towards another man perfectly devoid of sentiment . so near be - or , if the reader should prefer it , so far off . he be a rich man : banker , merchant , manufacturer , and what not . a big , loud
loud man , with a stare , and a metallic laugh . a man make out of a coarse material , which seem to have be stretch to make so much of he . a man with a great puffed head and forehead , swell vein in he temple , and such a strained skin to he face that it seem to hold he eye open , and lift he eyebrow up . a man with a pervad appearance on he of be inflate like a balloon , and ready to start . a man who could never sufficientely vaund himself a self - make man . a man who be always proclaim , through that brassy speak - trumpet of a voice of he , he old ignorance and he old poverty . a man who be the of humility . a year or two younger than he eminently practical friend , look older ; he seven or eight and forty might have have the seven or eight add to it again , without surprise anybody . he have not much hair . one might have fancie he have talk it off ; and that what be leave , all stand up in disorder , be in that condition from be constantly blow about by he windy boastfulness . in the formal drawing - room of , stand on the hearthrug , warm himself before the fire , deliver some observation to on the circumstance of its be he birthday . he stand before the fire , partly because it be a cool spring afternoon , though the sun shone ; partly because the shade of be always haunt by the ghost of damp mortar ; partly because he thus take up a commanding position , from which to subdue . 'I have not a shoe to my foot . as to a stocking , I do not know such a thing by name . I pass the day in a ditch , and the night in a pigsty . that be the way I spend my tenth birthday . not that a ditch be new to I , for I be bear in a ditch . ' , a little , thin , white , pink - eyed bundle of shawl , of surpassing feebleness , mental and bodily ; who be always take physic without any effect , and who , whenever she show a symptom of come to life , be invariably stun by some weighty piece of fact tumbl on she ; hope it be a dry ditch ? ' no ! as wet as a sop . a foot of water in it , ' say . ' enough to give a baby cold ,' consider . ' ? I be bear with inflammation of the lung , and of everything else , I believe , that be capable of inflammation , ' return . ' for year , ma 'am , I be one of the most miserable little wretch ever see . I be so sickly , that I be always moan and groan . I be so ragged and dirty , that you would not have touch I with a pair of tong . ' faintly look at the tong , as the most appropriate thing she imbecility could think of do . ' how I fight through it , I do not know , ' say . 'I be determined , I suppose . I have be a determined character in later life , and I suppose I be then . here I be , Gradgrind , anyhow , and nobody to thank for my be here , but myself . ' meekly and weakly hope that he mother - ' my mother ? , ! ' say . , stun as usual , collapse and give it up . ' my mother leave I to my grandmother , ' say ; ' and , accord to the best of my remembrance , my grandmother be the wickedest and the worst old woman that ever liv . if I get a little pair of shoe by any chance , she would take th'ey off and sell th'ey for drink . why , I have know that grandmother of mine lie in she bed and drink she four -teen glass of liquor before breakfast ! ' , weakly smile , and give no other sign of vitality , look ( as she always do ) like a indifferently executed transparency of a small female figure , without enough light behind it . ' she keep a chandler 's shop , ' pursue , ' and keep I in a egg - box . that be the cot of my infancy ; a old egg - box . as soon as I be big enough to run away , of course I run away . then I become a young vagabond ; and instead of one old woman knock I about and starve I , everybody of all ag knock I about and starve I . they be right ; they have no business to do anything else . I be a nuisance , a incumbrance , and a pest . I know that very well . ' he pride in have at any time of he life achieve such a great social distinction as to be a nuisance , a incumbrance , and a pest , be only to be satisfy by three sonorous repetition of the boast . 'I be to pull through it , I suppose , . whether I be to do it or not , ma 'am , I do it . I pull through it , though nobody throw I out a rope . , errand - boy , vagabond , labourer , porter , clerk , chief manager , small partner , of . those be the antecedent , and the culmination . of not he
he letter from the outside of the shop , , and be first able to tell the time upon a dial - plate , from study the steeple clock of 's , , under the direction of a drunken cripple , who be a convict thief , and a incorrigible vagrant . of , of you district school and you model school , and you training school , and you whole kettle - of - fish of school ; and of , tell you plainly , all right , all correct - he have not such advantage - but let we have hard - headed , solid-fisted people - the education that make he will not do for everybody , he know well - such and such he education be , however , and you may force he to swallow boiling fat , but you shall never force he to suppress the fact of he life . ' be heat when he arrive at this climax , of stop . he stop just as he eminently practical friend , still accompany by the two young culprit , enter the room . he eminently practical friend , on see he , stop also , and give a reproachful look that plainly say , ' behold you ! ' ' well ! ' bluster , ' what be the matter ? what be young in the dump about ? ' he spoke of young , but he look at . ' we be pee at the circus , ' mutter , haughtily , without lift up she eye , 'and father catch we . ' , , ' say she husband in a lofy manner , 'I should as soon have expect to find my child read poetry . ' ' dear I , ' whimper . ' how can you , and ! I wonder at you . I declare you be enough to make one regret ever have have a family at all . I have a great mind to say I wish I have not . then what would you have do , I should like to know ? ' do not seem favourably impress by these cogent remark . he frown impatiently . ' as if , with my head in it be present throbb state , you could not go and look at the shell and mineral and thing provide for you , instead of circuse ! ' say . ' you know , as well as I do , no young people have circus master , or keep circuse in cabinet , or attend lecture about circuse . what can you possibly want to know of circuse then ? I be sure you have enough to do , if that be what you want . with my head in its present state , I could not remember the mere name of half the fact you have get to attend to . ' ' that be the reason ! ' poute . ' do not tell I that be the reason , because it can not be nothing of the sort , ' say . ' go and be somethingological directly . ' be not a scientific character , and usually dismiss she child to they study with this general injunction to choose they pursuit . in truth , 's stock of fact in general be woefully defective ; but in raise she to she high matrimonial position , have be influence by two reason . firstly , she be most satisfactory as a question of figure ; and , secondly , she have 'no nonsense ' about she . by nonsense he mean fancy ; and truly it be probable she be as free from any alloy of that nature , as any human be not arrive at the perfection of a absolute idiot , ever be . the simple circumstance of be leave alone with she husband and , be sufficient to stun this admirable lady again without collision between herself and any other fact . so , she once more die away , and nobody mind she . ' , ' say , draw a chair to the fireside , ' you be always so interested in my young people - particularly in - that I make no apology for say to you , I be very much vex by this discovery . I have systematically devote myself ( as you know ) to the education of the reason of my family . the reason be ( as you know ) the only faculty to which education should be address . ' and yet , , it would appear from this unexpected circumstance of to - day , though in itself a trifling one , as if something have crept into 's and 's mind which be - or rather , which be not - I do not know that I can express myself better than by say - which have never be intend to be develop , and in which they reason have no part . ' ' there certainly be no reason in look with interest at a parcel of vagabonds , ' return . ' when I be a vagabond myself , nobody look with any interest at I ; I know that . ' ' then come the question ; say the eminently practical father , with he eye on the fire , 'in what have this vulgar curiosity its rise ? ' 'I will tell you in what . in idle imagination . ' 'I hope not , ' say the eminently practical ; 'i confess , however , that the misgiving have cross I on my way home . ' ' in idle imagination , , ' repeat . 'a very bad thing for anybody , but a cursed bad thing for a girl like . I should ask 's pardon for strong expressions , but that she know
know very well I be not a refin character . whoever expect refinement in I will be disappoint . I have not a refin bring up . ' ' , ' say , ponder with he hand in he pocket , and he cavernous eye on the fire , ' whether any instructor or servant can have suggest anything ? or can have be read anything ? whether , in spite of all precaution , any idle story - book can have get into the house ? because , in mind that have be practically form by rule and line , from the cradle upward , this be so curious , so incomprehensible . ' ' stop a bit ! ' cry , who all this time have be stand , as before , on the hearth , burst at the very furniture of the room with explosive humility . ' you have one of those stroller 's child in the school . ' ' , by name , ' say , with something of a stricken look at he friend . ' now , stop a bit ! ' cry again . ' how do she come there ? ' ' why , the fact be , I see the girl myself , for the first time , only just now . she specially apply here at the house to be admit , as not regularly belong to we town , and - yes , you be right , , you be right . ' ' now , stop a bit ! ' cry , once more . ' see she when she come ? ' ' certainly do see she , for she mention the application to I . but see she , I have no doubt , in 's presence . ' ' pray , , ' say , ' what pass ? ' 'Oh , my poor health ! ' return Gradgrind . ' the girl want to come to the school , and want girl to come to the school , and and both say that the girl want to come , and that want girl to come , and how be it possible to contradict they when such be the fact ! ' ' now I tell you what , ! ' say . ' turn this girl to the right about , and there be a end of it . ' 'I be much of you opinion . ' ' do it at once , ' say , ' have always be my motto from a child . when I think I would run away from my egg - box and my grandmother , I do it at once . do you the same . do this at once ! ' ' be you walk ? ' ask he friend . 'I have the father 's address . perhaps you would not mind walk to tow with I ? ' ' not the least in the world , ' say , 'as long as you do it at once ! ' so , throw on he hat - he always throw it on , as express a man who have be far too busily employ in make himself , to acquire any fashion of wear he hat - and with he hand in he pocket , saunter out into the hall . 'I never wear glove , ' it be he custom to say . 'I do not climb up the ladder in they . - should not be so high up , if I have . ' be leave to saunter in the hall a minute or two while go up - stair for the address , he open the door of the child 's study and look into that serene floor - clothed apartment , which , notwithstand its book - case and its cabinet and its variety of learned and philosophical appliance , have much of the genial aspect of a room devote to hair - cutting . languidly lean upon the window look out , without look at anything , while young stood sniff revengefully at the fire . and , two younger Gradgrinds , be out at lecture in custody ; and little , after manufacture a good deal of moist pipe - clay on she face with slate - pencil and tear , have fall asleep over vulgar fraction . ' it be all right now , : it be all right , young , ' say ; ' you will not do so any more . I will answer for it be be all over with father . well , , that be worth a kiss , be not it ? ' ' you can take one , , ' return , when she have coldly paused , and slowly walk across the room , and ungraciously raise she cheek towards he , with she face turn away . ' always my pet ; be not you , ? ' say . ' good - bye , ! ' he go he way , but she stand on the same spot , rub the cheek he have kiss , with she handkerchief , until it be burn red . she be still do this , five minute afterwards . ' what be you about , ? ' she brother sulkily remonstrate . ' you will rub a hole in you face . ' ' you may cut the piece out with you penknife if you like , . I would not cry ! ' - the , to which Messrs . and now walk , be a triumph of fact ; it have no greater taint of fancy in it than herself . let we strike the key - note , , before pursue we tune . it be a town of red brick , or of brick that would have be red if the smoke and
and ash have allow it ; but as matter stand , it be a town of unnatural red and black like the pain face of a savage . it be a town of machinery and tall chimney , out of which interminable serpent of smoke trail themselves for ever and ever , and never get uncoiled . it have a black canal in it , and a river that run purple with ill - smell dye , and vast pile of building full of window where there be a rattling and a trembl all day long , and where the piston of the steam - engine work monotonously up and down , like the head of a elephant in a state of melancholy madness . it contain several large street all very like one another , and many small street still more like one another , inhabit by people equally like one another , who all go in and out at the same hour , with the same sound upon the same pavement , to do the same work , and to whom every day be the same as yesterday and to - morrow , and every year the counterpart of the last and the next . these attribute of be in the main inseparable from the work by which it be sustain ; against they be to be set off , comfort of life which find they way all over the world , and elegancy of life which make , we will not ask how much of the fine lady , who could scarcely bear to hear the place mention . the rest of its feature be voluntary , and they be these . you see nothing in but what be severely workful . if the member of a religious persuasion build a chapel there - as the member of eighteen religious persuasion have do - they make it a pious warehouse of red brick , with sometimes ( but this be only in highly ornamental example ) a bell in a birdcage on the top of it . the solitary exception be the ; a stucco edifice with a square steeple over the door , terminate in four short pinnacle like florid wooden leg . all the public inscription in the town be paint alike , in severe character of black and white . the jail might have be the infirmary , the infirmary might have be the jail , the town - hall might have be either , or both , or anything else , for anything that appear to the contrary in the graces of they construction . fact , fact , fact , everywhere in the material aspect of the town ; fact , fact , fact , everywhere in the immaterial . the school be all fact , and the school of design be all fact , and the relation between master and man be all fact , and everything be fact between the lie - in hospital and the cemetery , and what you could not state in figure , or show to be purchaseable in the cheapest market and saleable in the dearest , be not , and never should be , world without end , amen . a town so sacr to fact , and so triumphant in its assertion , of course get on well ? why no , not quite well . no ? dear I ! no . do not come out of its own furnace , in all respects like gold that have stand the fire . first , the perplex mystery of the place be , who belong to the eighteen denomination ? because , whoever do , the labouring people do not . it be very strange to walk through the street on a morning , and note how few of they the barbarous jangling of bell that be drive the sick and nervous mad , call away from they own quarter , from they own close room , from the corner of they own street , where they lounge listlessly , gaze at all the church and chapel go , as at a thing with which they have no manner of concern . be it merely the stranger who notice this , because there be a native organization in itself , whose member be to be hear of in the of every session , indignantly petition for act of parliament that should make these people religious by main force . then come the , who complain that these same people would get drunk , and show in tabular statement that they do get drunk , and prove at tea party that no inducement , human or ( except a medal ) , would induce they to forego they custom of get drunk . then come the chemist and druggist , with other tabular statement , show that when they do not get drunk , they take opium . then come the experienced chaplain of the jail , with more tabular statement , outdo all the previous tabular statement , and show that the same people would resort to low haunt , hide from the public eye , where they hear low singing and see low dancing , and mayhap join in it ; and where a . , a twenty - four next birthday , and commit for eighteen month ' solitary , have himself say ( not that he have ever show himself particularly worthy of belief ) he ruin begin , as he be perfectly sure and confident that otherwise he would have be a tip - top moral specimen . then come and , the two gentleman at this present moment walk through , and both eminently practical , who could , on occasion , furnish more tabular statement derive from they own personal experience , and illustrate by case they have know and see , from which it clearly appear -
- in short , it be the only clear thing in the case - that these same people be a bad lot altogether , gentlemen ; that do what you would for they they be never thankful for it , gentleman ; that they be restless , gentleman ; that they never know what they want ; that they live upon the best , and buy fresh butter ; and insist on coffee , and reject all but prime part of meat , and yet be eternally dissatisfied and unmanageable . in short , it be the moral of the old nursery fable : there be a old woman , and what do you think ? she live upon nothing but victual and drink ; Victual and drink be the whole of she diet , and yet this old woman would never be quiet . be it possible , I wonder , that there be any analogy between the case of the Coketown population and the case of the little Gradgrinds ? surely , none of we in we sober sensis and acquaint with figure , be to be tell at this time of day , that one of the foremost element in the existence of the work - people have be for score of year , deliberately set at nuy ? that there be any Fancy in they demand to be bring into healthy existence instead of struggling on in convulsion ? that exactly in the ratio as they work long and monotonously , the craving grow within they for some physical relief - some relaxation , encourage good humour and good spirit , and give they a vent - some recognize holiday , though it be but for a honest dance to a stirring band of music - some occasional light pie in which even have no finger - which crave must and would be satisfied aright , or must and would inevitably go wrong , until the law of the creation be repeal ? ' this man live at 's , and I do not quite know 's , ' say . ' which be it , ? ' know it be somewhere down town , but know no more respecte it . so they stop for a moment , look about . almost as they do so , there come run round the corner of the street at a quick pace and with a frightened look , a girl whom recognize . ' ! ' say he . ' stop ! where be you go ! stop ! ' number twenty stop then , palpitat , and make he a curtsey . ' why be you tear about the street , ' say , 'in this improper manner ? ' 'I be - I be run after , sir , ' the girl pan , ' and I want to get away . ' ' run after ? ' repeat . ' who would run after you ? ' the question be unexpectedly and suddenly answer for she , by the colourless boy , , who come round the corner with such blind speed and so little anticipate a stoppage on the pavement , that he bring himself up against 's waistcoat and rebound into the road . ' what do you mean , boy ? ' say . ' what be you do ? how dare you dash against - everybody - in this manner ? ' pick up he cap , which the concussion have knock off ; and back , and knuckl he forehead , plead that it be a accident . ' be this boy run after you , ? ' ask . ' yes , sir , ' say the girl reluctantly . ' no , I be not , sir ! ' cry . ' not till she run away from I . but the horse - rider never mind what they say , sy ; they be famous for it . you know the horse -rider be famous for never mind what they say , ' address . ' it be as well know in the town as - please , sir , as the multiplication table be not know to the horse - rider . ' try with this . ' he frightene I so , ' say the girl , ' with he cruel face ! ' 'Oh ! ' cry . 'Oh ! a not you one of the rest ! a not you a horse - rider ! I never look at she , sir . I ask she if she would know how to define a horse to - morrow , and offer to tell she again , and she run away , and I run after she , sir , that she might know how to answer when she be ask . you would not have thought of say such mischief if you have not be a horse - rider ? ' 'her calling seem to be pretty well know among 'em , ' observe . ' you would have have the whole school peeping in a row , in a week . ' ' truly , I think so , ' return he friend . ' Bitzer , turn you about and take yourself home . Jupe , stay here a moment . let I hear of you running in this manner any more , boy , and you will hear of I through the master of the school . you understand what I mean . go along . ' the boy stop in he rapid blinking , knuckle he forehead again , glance at , turn about , and retreate . ' now , girl , ' say , ' take this gentleman and I to you father 's ; we be go there . what have you get in that bottle you be carry ? ' ' , ' say .
. ' dear , no , sir ! it be the nine oils . ' ' the what ? ' cry . ' the nine oils , sir , to rub father with . ' ' then , ' say , with a loud short laugh , ' what the do you rub you father with nine oil for ? ' ' it be what we people aways use , sir , when they get any hurts in the ring , ' reply the girl , look over she shoulder , to assure herself that she pursuer be gone . ' they bruise themselves very bad sometimes . ' ' serve th'ey right , ' say , ' for be idle . ' she glance up at he face , with mingl astonishment and dread . ' by ! ' say , ' when I be four or five year younger than you , I have worse bruise upon I than ten oil , twenty oil , forty oil , would have rub off . I do not get them by posture - making , but by be ban about . there be no rope - dance for I ; I dance on the bare ground and be larru with the rope . ' , though hard enough , be by no means so rough a man as . he character be not unkind , all thing consider ; it might have be a very kind one indeed , if he have only make some round mistake in the arithmetic that balance it , year ago . he say , in what he mean for a reassuring tone , as they turn down a narrow road , ' and this be 's ; be it , ? ' ' this be it , sir , and - if you would not mind , sir - this be the house . ' she stop , at twilight , at the door of a mean little public - house , with de red light in it . as haggard and as shabby , as if , for want of custom , it have itself take to drink , and have go the way all drunkard go , and be very near the end of it . ' it be only cross the bar , sir , and up the stair , if you would not mind , and wait there for a moment till I get a candle . if you should hear a dog , sir , it be only Merrylegs , and he only bark . ' ' Merrylegs and nine oils , eh ! ' say , enter last with he metallic laugh . ' pretty well this , for a self - make man ! ' - 's the name of the public - house be the 's Arms . the 's leg might have be more to the purpose ; but , underneath the win horse upon the sign - board , the 's arm be inscribe in letter . beneath that inscription again , in a flow scroll , the painter have touch off the line : good malt make good beer , walk in , and they will draw it here ; good wine make good brandy , give we a call , and you will find it handy . Fram and glaze upon the wall behind the dingy little bar , be another Pegasus - a theatrical one - with real gauze let in for he wing , golden star stick on all over he , and he ethereal harness make of red silk . as it have grow too dusky without , to see the sign , and as it have not grow light enough within to see the picture , and receive no offence from these ideality . they follow the girl up some steep corner - stair without meet any one , and stop in the dark while she go on for a candle . they expect every moment to hear give tongue , but the highly train perform dog have not bark when the girl and the candle appear together . ' Father be not in we room , sir , ' she say , with a face of great surprise . ' if you would not mind walk in , I will find he directly . ' they walk in ; and , have set two chair for they , s away with a quick light step . it be a mean , shabbily furnished room , with a bed in it . the white night- cap , embellish with two peacock 's feather and a pigtail bolt upright , in which have that very afternoon enliven the varied performance with he chaste Shaksperean quip and retort , hang upon a nail ; but no other portion of he wardrobe , or other token of himself or he pursuit , be to be see anywhere . as to , that respectable ancestor of the highly train animal who go aboard the ark , might have be accidentally shut out of it , for any sign of a dog that be manifest to eye or ear in the 's arm . they hear the door of room above , open and shutt as go from one to another in quest of she father ; and presently they hear voice expressing surprise . she come bounde down again in a great hurry , open a battered and mangy old hair trunk , find it empty , and look round with she hand clasp and she face full of terror . ' Father must have go down to the , sir . I do not know why he should go there , but he must be there ; I will bring he in a minute ! ' she be go directly , without she bonnet ; with she long , dark , childish
childish hair streame behind she . ' what do she mean ! ' say . ' back in a minute ? it be more than a mile off . ' before could reply , a young man appear at the door , and introduce himself with the word , ' by you leave , gentlemen ! ' walk in with he hand in he pocket . he face , close - shaven , thin , and sallow , be shade by a great quantity of dark hair , brush into a roll all round he head , and part up the centre . he leg be very robust , but shorter than leg of good proportion should have be . he chest and back be as much too broad , as he leg be too short . he be dress in a Newmarket coat and tight - fit trousers ; wear a shawl round he neck ; smelt of lamp - oil , straw , orange - peel , horse ' provender , and sawdust ; and look a most remarkable sort of , compound of the stable and the play - house . where the one begin , and the other end , nobody could have tell with any precision . this gentleman be mention in the bill of the day as . , so justly celebrate for he daring vaulting act as the of the ; in which popular performance , a diminutive boy with a old face , who now accompany he , assist as he infant son : be carry upside down over he father 's shoulder , by one foot , and hold by the crown of he head , heel upward , in the palm of he father 's hand , accord to the violent paternal manner in which wild huntsman may be observe to fondle they offspring . make up with curl , wreat , wing , white bismuth , and carmine , this hopeful young person soar into so please a Cupid as to constitute the chief delight of the maternal part of the spectator ; but in private , where he characteristic be a precocious cutaway coat and a extremely gruff voice , he become of the , turfy . ' by you leave , gentlemen , ' say . Childer , glance round the room . ' it be you , I believe , that be wish to see ! ' ' it be , ' say . ' he daughter have go to fetch he , but I can not wait ; therefore , if you please , I will leave a message for he with you . ' ' you see , my friend , ' put in , ' we be the kind of people who know the value of time , and you be the kind of people who do not know the value of time . ' 'I have not , ' retort , after survey he from head to foot , ' the honour of know you , - but if you mean that you can make more money of you time than I can of mine , I should judge from you appearance , that you be about right . ' ' and when you have make it , you can keep it too , I should think , ' say . ' Kidderminster , stow that ! ' say . ( master Kidderminster be 's mortal name . ) ' what do he come here cheek we for , then ? ' cry master Kidderminster , show a very irascible temperament . ' if you want to cheek we , pay you ochre at the door and take it out . ' ' Kidderminster , ' say , raise he voice , ' stow that ! - , ' to , be address myself to you . you may or you may not be aware ( for perhaps you have not be much in the audience ) , that have miss he tip very often , lately . ' ' Has - what have he miss ? ' ask , glance at the potent Bounderby for assistance . ' Misse he tip . ' ' offer at the four time last night , and never do 'em once , ' say . ' Misse he tip at the banners , too , and be loose in he ponging . ' ' do not do what he ought to do . be short in he leaps and bad in he tumbling , ' Childers interpret . 'Oh ! ' say , ' that be tip , be it ? ' ' in a general way that be miss he tip , ' Childer answer . ' nine oils , Merrylegs , missing tip , garter , banner , and , eh ! ' ejaculate , with he laugh of laugh . ' Queer sort of company , too , for a man who have raise himself ! ' ' lower yourself , then , ' retort . ! if you have raise yourself so high as all that come to , let yourself down a bit . ' ' this be a very obtrusive lad ! ' say Gradgrind , turn , and knitt he brows on he . ' we would have have a young gentleman to meet you , if we have know you be come , ' retort , nothing abash . ' it be a pity you do not have a bespeak , be so particular . you be on the - , be not you ? ' ' what do this unmannerly boy mean , ' ask , eye he in a sort of desperation , ' by - ? ' ' there ! get out , get out ! ' say , thrust he young friend from the room , rather in the prairie manner . ' -
- or - , it do not much signify : it be only tight - rope and slack - rope . you be go to give I a message for ? ' ' yes , I be . ' ' then , ' continue , quickly , 'my opinion be , he will never receive it . do you know much of he ? ' 'I never see the man in my life . ' 'I doubt if you ever will see he now . it be pretty plain to I , he be off . ' ' do you mean that he have desert he daughter ? ' 'Ay ! I mean , ' say , with a nod , ' that he have cut . he be goose last night , he be goose the night before last , he be goose to - day . he have lately get in the way of be always goose , and he can not stand it . ' ' why have he be - so very much - Goose ? ' ask , force the word out of himself , with great solemnity and reluctance . ' he joint be turn stiff , and he be get use up , ' say Childer . ' he have he point as a Cackler still , but he can not get a live out of they . ' ! ' repeat . ' here we go again ! ' 'a speaker , if the gentleman like it better , ' say . , superciliously throw the interpretation over he shoulder , and accompany it with a shake of he long hair - which all shook at once . ' now , it be a remarkable fact , sir , that it cut that man deeper , to know that he daughter know of he be goose , than to go through with it . ' ' good ! ' interrupt . ' this be good , ! a man so fond of he daughter , that he run away from she ! this be devilish good ! ! ha ! now , I will tell you what , young man . I have not always occupy my present station of life . I know what these thing be . you may be astonish to hear it , but my mother - run away from I . ' . . reply pointedly , that he be not at all astonished to hear it . ' very well , ' say . be bear in a ditch , and my mother run away from I . do I excuse she for it ? no . have I ever excuse she for it ? not I . what do I call she for it ? I call she probably the very worst woman that ever live in the world , except my drunken grandmother . there be no family pride about I , there be no imaginative sentimental humbug about I . I call a spade a spade ; and I call the mother of of , without any fear or any favour , what I should call she if she have be the mother of of . so , with this man . he be a runaway rogue and a vagabond , that be what he be , in . ' ' it be all the same to I what he be or what he be not , whether in or whether in , ' retort , face about . 'I be tell you friend what be the fact ; if you do not like to hear it , you can avail yourself of the open air . you give it mouth enough , you do ; but give it mouth in you own building at least , ' remonstrate with stern irony . ' do not give it mouth in this building , till you be call upon . you have get some building of you own I dare say , now ? ' ' perhaps so , ' reply , ratt he money and laugh . ' then give it mouth in you own building , will you , if you please ? ' say Childer . ' because this be not a strong building , and too much of you might bring it down ! ' Eyeing from head to foot again , he turn from he , as from a man finally dispose of , to . ' send he daughter out on a errand not a hour ago , and then be see to slip out himself , with he hat over he eye , and a bundle tie up in a handkerchief under he arm . she will never believe it of he , but he have cut away and leave she . ' ' pray , ' say Gradgrind , ' why will she never believe it of he ? ' ' because those two be one . because they be never asunder . because , up to this time , he seem to dote upon she , ' say Childer , take a step or two to look into the empty trunk . both and walk in a curiious manner ; with they leg wider apart than the general run of man , and with a very knowing assumption of be stiff in the knee . this walk be common to all the male member of 's company , and be understand to express , that they be always on horseback . ' poor ! he have better have apprentice she , ' say Childer , give he hair another shake , as he look up from the empty box . ' now , he leave she without anything to take to . ' ' it be creditable to you , who have never be apprentice , to express that opinion , ' return , approvingly .
. 'I never apprentice ? I be apprentice when I be seven year old . ' 'Oh ! indeed ? ' say , rather resentfully , as have be defraude of he good opinion . 'I be not aware of its be the custom to apprentice young person to - ' ' Idleness , ' put in with a loud laugh . ' no , by the ! nor I ! ' ' she father always have it in he head , ' resume Childer , feign unconsciousness of 's existence , ' that she be to be teach the deuce - and - all of education . how it get into he head , I can not say ; I can only say that it never get out . he have be pick up a bit of reading for she , here - and a bit of writing for she , there - and a bit of ciphering for she , somewhere else - these seven year . ' . take one of he hand out of he pocket , strok he face and ching , and look , with a good deal of doubt and a little hope , at . from the first he have seek to conciliate that gentleman , for the sake of the desert girl . ' when get into the school here ,' he pursue , ' she father be as pleased as punch . I could not altogether make out why , myself , as we be not stationary here , be but comer and goer anywhere . I suppose , however , he have this move in he mind - he be always half - crack - and then consider she provide for . if you should happen to have look in to - night , for the purpose of tell he that you be go to do she any little service , ' say , strok he face again , and repeat he look , ' it would be very fortunate and well - time ; very fortunate and well - time . ' 'On the contrary , ' return . 'I come to tell he that she connection make she not a object for the school , and that she must not attend any more . still , if she father really have leave she , without any connivance on she part - Bounderby , let I have a word with you . ' upon this , politely betake himself , with he equestrian walk , to the landing outside the door , and there stand strok he face , and softly whistl . while thus engage , he overhear such phrasis in 's voice as ' no . I say no . I advise you not . I say by no means . ' , from , he hear in he much lower tone the word , ' but even as a example to , of what this pursuit which have be the subject of a vulgar curiosity , lead to and end in . think of it , , in that point of view . ' meanwhile , the various member of 's company gradually gather together from the upper region , where they be quarter , and , from stand about , talk in low voice to one another and to , gradually insinuate themselves and he into the room . there be two or three handsome young woman among they , with they two or three husband , and they two or three mother , and they eight or nine little child , who do the fairy business when require . the father of one of the family be in the habit of balance the father of another of the family on the top of a great pole ; the father of a third family often make a pyramid of both those fathers , with master Kidderminster for the apex , and himself for the base ; all the fathers could dance upon roll cask , stand upon bottle , catch knife and ball , twirl hand - basin , ride upon anything , jump over everything , and stick at nothing . all the mother could ( and do ) dance , upon the slack wire and the tight - rope , and perform rapid act on bare - back steed ; none of they be at all particular in respect of show they leg ; and one of they , alone in a chariot , drive six in hand into every town they come to . they all assume to be mighty rakish and know , they be not very tidy in they private dress , they be not at all orderly in they domestic arrangement , and the combine literature of the whole company would have produce but a poor letter on any subject . yet there be a remarkable gentleness and childishness about these people , a special inaptitude for any kind of sharp practice , and a untiring readiness to help and pity one another , deserve often of as much respect , and always of as much generous construction , as the every - day virtue of any class of people in the world . last of all appear : a stout man as already mention , with one fix eye , and one loose eye , a voice ( if it can be call so ) like the effort of a broken old pair of bellow , a flabby surface , and a muddled head which be never sober and never drink . ' Thquire ! ' say , who be trouble with asthma , and whose breath come far too thick and heavy for the letter 's , ' you thervant ! Thith ith a bad pieto of bithnith , thith ith . you have hear of my and hith dog be thuppoth to have morrithed ? '
' he address , who answer ' yes . ' ' well , ,' he return , take off he hat , and rub the lining with he pocket - handkerchief , which he keep inside for the purpose . ' Ith it you intenthion to do anything for the poor girl , ? ' 'I shall have something to propose to she when she come back , ' say . ' to hear it , . not that I want to get rid of the child , any more than I want to thtand in she way . I be willing to take she prentith , though at she age ith late . my voithe ith a little huthky , , and not eathy hear by they ath do not know I ; but if you have be chill and heat , heat and chill , chill and heat in the ring when you wath young , ath often ath I have be , you voithe would not have latht out , , no more than mine . ' 'I dare say not , ' say . ' what thall it be , , while you wait ? Thall it be ? give it a name , ! ' say , with hospitable ease . ' nothing for I , I thank you , ' say . ' do not thay nothing , . what doth you friend thay ? if you have not take you feed yet , have a glath of bitterth . ' here he daughter - a pretty fair - haired girl of eighteen , who have be tie on a horse at two year old , and have make a will at twelve , which she always carry about with she , expressive of she die desire to be draw to the grave by the two piebald pony - cry , ' , hush ! she have come back ! ' then come , run into the room as she have run out of it . and when she see they all assemble , and see they look , and see no father there , she break into a most deplorable cry , and take refuge on the bosom of the most accomplished tight - rope lady ( herself in the family - way ) , who knelt down on the floor to nurse she , and to weep over she . ' Ith a internal thame , upon my thoul it ith , ' say . 'o my dear father , my good kind father , where be you go ? you be go to try to do I some good , I know ! you be go away for my sake , I be sure ! and how miserable and helpless you will be without I , poor , poor father , until you come back ! ' it be so pathetic to hear she say many thing of this kind , with she face turn upward , and she arm stretch out as if she be try to stop he departing shadow and embrace it , that no one speak a word until ( grow impatient ) take the case in hand . ' now , good people all , ' say he , ' this be wanton waste of time . let the girl understand the fact . let she take it from I , if you like , who have be run away from , myself . here , what be you name ! you father have abscond - desert you - and you must not expect to see he again as long as you live . ' they care so little for plain fact , these people , and be in that advanced state of degeneracy on the subject , that instead of be impress by the speaker 's strong common sense , they take it in extraordinary dudgeon . the man mutter ' shame ! ' and the woman ' Brute ! ' and , in some haste , communicate the follow hint , apart to . 'I tell you what , . to thpeak plain to you , my opinion ith that you have better cut it thort , and drop it . they be a very good natur have people , my people , but they be accuthtom to be quick in they movementh ; and if you do not act upon my advithe , I be damn if I do not believe they will pill you out of ' winder . ' be restrain by this mild suggestion , find a opening for he eminently practical exposition of the subject . ' it be of no moment , ' say he , ' whether this person be to be expect back at any time , or the contrary . he be go away , and there be no present expectation of he return . that , I believe , be agree on all hand . ' ' Thath agree , . thick to that ! ' from . ' well then . I , who come here to inform the father of the poor girl , , that she could not be receive at the school any more , in consequence of there be practical objection , into which I need not enter , to the reception there of the child of person so employ , be prepare in these altered circumstance to make a proposal . I be willing to take charge of you , , and to educate you , and provide for you . the only condition ( over and above you good behaviour ) I make be , that you decide now , at once , whether to accompany I or remain here . also , that if you accompany I now , it be understood that you communicate no more with any of you friend who be here present .
. these observation comprise the whole of the case . ' ' at the thame time , ' say , 'I mutht put in my word , Thquire , though that both thide of the banner may be equally theen . if you like , , to be prentitht , you know the natur of the work and you know you companionth . , in whothey lap you be a lie at prethent , would be a mother to you , and would be a thithter to you . I do not pretend to be of the angel breed myself , and I do not thay but what , when you mill ' you tip , you would find I cut up rough , and thwear a oath or two at you . but what I thay , , ith , that good tempered or bad tempered , I never do a horto a injury yet , no more than thwearing at he went , and that I do not expect I thall begin otherwito at my time of life , with a rider . I never wath much of a , , and I have the my thay . ' the latter part of this speech be address to , who receive it with a grave inclination of he head , and then remark : ' the only observation I will make to you , , in the way of influence you decision , be , that it be highly desirable to have a sound practical education , and that even you father himself ( from what I understand ) appear , on you behalf , to have know and feel that much . ' the last word have a visible effect upon she . she stop in she wild cry , a little detach herself from , and turn she face full upon she patron . the whole company perceive the force of the change , and draw a long breath together , that plainly say , ' she will go ! ' ' be sure you know you own mind , ,' caution she ; 'I say no more . be sure you know you own mind ! ' ' when father come back , ' cry the girl , burst into tear again after a minute 's silence , ' how will he ever find I if I go away ! ' ' you may be quite at ease , ' say , calmly ; he work out the whole matter like a sum : ' you may be quite at ease , , on that score . in such a case , you father , I apprehend , must find out - ' ' . Thath my name , . not atham of it . know all over , and alwayth paythe ith way . ' ' must find out , who would then let he know where you go . I should have no power of keep you against he wish , and he would have no difficulty , at any time , in finding of . I be well know . ' ' well know , ' assent , rol he loose eye . ' you be one of the thort , , that keepth a prethiouth thight of money out of the houthey . but never mind that at prethent . ' there be another silence ; and then she exclaim , sobb with she hand before she face , ' oh , give I my clothes , give I my clothes , and let I go away before I break my heart ! ' the woman sadly bestir themselves to get the clothes together - it be soon do , for they be not many - and to pack they in a basket which have often travel with they . sit all the time upon the ground , still sobb , and cover she eye . and he friend stand near the door , ready to take she away . stand in the middle of the room , with the male member of the company about he , exactly as he would have stand in the centre of the ring during he daughter 's performance . he want nothing but he whip . the basket pack in silence , they bring she bonnet to she , and smoothe she disorder hair , and put it on . then they press about she , and bend over she in very natural attitude , kiss and embrace she : and bring the child to take leave of she ; and be a tender - hear , simple , foolish set of woman altogether . ' now , , ' say . ' if you be quite determined , come ! ' but she have to take she farewell of the male part of the company yet , and every one of they have to unfold he arm ( for they all assume the professional attitude when they find themselves near ) , and give she a part kiss - master Kidderminster except , in whose young nature there be a original flavour of the misanthrope , who be also kny to have harbour matrimonial view , and who moodily withdraw . be reserve until the last . open he arm wide he take she by both she hand , and would have spring she up and down , after the riding - master manner of congratulate young lady on they dismounting from a rapid act ; but there be no rebound in , and she only stand before he cry . ' good - bye , my dear ! ' say . ' you will make you fortun , I hope , and none of we poor folkth will ever trouble you , I will pound it . I with you father have not take hith dog with he ; ith a ill -
- conwenienth to have the dog out of the billth . but on thecond thoughth , he would not have perform without hith mathter , tho ill ath broad ath ith long ! ' with that he regard she attentively with he fix eye , survey he company with he loose one , kiss she , shook he head , and hand she to as to a horse . ' there the ith , ,' he say , sweep she with a professional glance as if she be be adjust in she seat , ' and the 'll do you juthtithe . good - bye , ! ' ' good - bye , ! ' ' good - bye , ! ' ' bless you , dear ! ' in a variety of voice from all the room . but the riding - master eye have observ the bottle of the nine oil in she bosom , and he now interpose with ' leave the bottle , my dear ; ith large to carry ; it will be of no uto to you now . give it to I ! ' 'no , no ! ' she say , in another burst of tear . 'Oh , no ! pray let I keep it for father till he come back ! he will want it when he come back . he have never think of go away , when he send I for it . I must keep it for he , if you please ! ' ' Tho be it , my dear . ( you thee how it ith , ! ) farewell , ! my latht wordth to you ith thith , to the termth of you engagement , be obedient to the , and forget uth . but if , when you be grow up and married and well off , you come upon any horthey - ride ever , do not be hard upon it , do not be croth with it , give it a Bethpeak if you can , and think you might do wurth . people mutht be amuth , , thomehow , ' continue , render more pursy than ever , by so much talk ; ' they can not be alwayth a work , nor yet they can not be alwayth a learning . make the betht of uth ; not the wurtht . I have get my live out of the horthe - ride all my life , I know ; but I conthider that I lay down the philothophy of the thubject when I thay to you , Thquire , make the betht of uth : not the wurtht ! ' the philosophy be propound as they go downstairs and the fix eye of - and its rolling eye , too - soon lose the three figure and the basket in the darkness of the street . - . Bounderby be a bachelor , a elderly lady preside over he establishment , in consideration of a certain annual stipend . be this lady 's name ; and she be a prominent figure in attendance on 's car , as it roll along in triumph with the of humility inside . for , have not only see different day , but be highly connect . she have a great aunt live in these very time call . , decease , of whom she be the relict , have be by the mother 's side what still call . ' Stranger of limited information and dull apprehension be sometimes observ not to know what a Powler be , and even to appear uncertain whether it might be a business , or a political party , or a profession of faith . the better class of mind , however , do not need to be inform that the Powler be a ancient stock , who could trace themselves so exceedingly far back that it be not surprising if they sometimes lose themselves - which they have rather frequently do , as respect horse - flesh , blind - hookey , monetary transaction , and the ' . the late , be by the mother 's side a Powler , marry this lady , be by the father 's side a . lady Scadgers ( a immensely fat old woman , with a inordinate appetite for 's meat , and a mysterious leg which have now refuse to get out of bed for fourteen year ) contrive the marriage , at a period when be just of age , and chiefly noticeable for a slender body , weakly support on two long slim prop , and surmount by no head worth mention . he inherit a fair fortune from he uncle , but owed it all before he come into it , and spend it twice over immediately afterwards . thus , when he die , at twenty - four ( the scene of he decease , , and the cause , brandy ) , he do not leave he widow , from whom he have be separate soon after the honeymoon , in affluent circumstance . that bereaved lady , fifteen year older than he , fall presently at deadly feud with she only relative , ; and , partly to spite she ladyship , and partly to maintain herself , go out at a salary . and here she be now , in she elderly day , with the Coriolanian style of nose and the dense black eyebrow which have captivate Sparsit , make 's tea as he take he breakfast . if have be a Conqueror , and a captive princess whom he take about as a feature in he state-procession , he could not have make a greater flourish with she than he habitually do . just as it belong to he boastfulness to depreciate he own extraction , so it belong to it to exal 's . in
in the measure that he would not allow he own youth to have be attend by a single favourable circumstance , he brighten . 's juvenile career with every possible advantage , and showere waggon - load of early rose all over that lady 's path . ' and yet , sir ,' he would say , ' how do it turn out after all ? why here she be at a hundred a year ( I give she a hundr , which she be pleased to term handsome ) , keep the house of of ! ' Nay , he make this foil of he so very widely know , that third party take it up , and handle it on some occasion with considerable briskness . it be one of the most exasperating attribute of , that he not only sang he own praise but stimulate other man to s they . there be a moral infection of clap - trap in he . Stranger , modest enough elsewhere , start up at dinner in , and boast , in quite a rampant way , of . they make he out to be the arm , the - , , , , the of , a 's house be he castle , and , and save the Queen , all put together . and as often ( and it be very often ) as a orator of this kind bring into he peroration , ' Prince and lord may flourish or may fake , a breath can make they , as a breath have make , ' - it be , for certain , more or less understand among the company that he have hear of . ' , ' say , ' you be unusually slow , sir , with you breakfast this morning . ' ' why , ma 'am , ' he return , 'I be think about 's whim ;' , for a bluff independent manner of speak - as if somebody be always endeavour to bribe he with immense sum to say , and he would not ; ' 's whim , ma 'am , of bring up the tumbling - girl . ' ' the girl be now wait to know , ' say Sparsit , ' whether she be to go straight to the school , or up to the Lodge . ' ' she must wait , ma 'am , ' answer , ' till I know myself . we shall have down here presently , I suppose . if he should wish she to remain here a day or two longer , of course she can , ma'am . ' ' of course she can if you wish it , . ' 'I tell he I would give she a shake - down here , last night , in order that he might sleep on it before he decide to let she have any association with . ' ' indeed , ? very thoughtful of you ! ' 's nose undergo a slight expansion of the nostril , and she black eyebrow contract as she take a sip of tea . ' it be tolerably clear to I , ' say , ' that the little puss can get small good out of such companionship . ' ' be you speak of young , ? ' ' yes , ma 'am , I be speak of . ' ' you observation be limit to " little puss , " ' say Sparsit , ' and there be two little girl in question , I do not know which might be indicate by that expression . ' ' , ' repeat . ' , . ' ' you be quite another father to , . ' take a little more tea ; and , as she bend she again contract eyebrow over she steam cup , rather look as if she classical countenance be invoke the infernal gods . ' if you have say I be another father to - young , I mean , not my friend - you might have be nearer the mark . I be go to take young Tom into my office . go to have he under my wing , ma'am . ' ' indeed ? rather young for that , be he not , sir ? ' 's ' sir , ' in addressing , be a word of ceremony , rather exacte consideration for herself in the use , than honour he . 'I be not go to take he at once ; he be to finish he educational cramming before then , ' say . ' by the , he will have enough of it , first and last ! he would open he eye , that boy would , if he know how empty of learn my young maw be , at he time of life . ' which , by the by , he probably do know , for he have hear of it often enough . ' but it be extraordinary the difficulty I have on score of such subject , in speak to any one on equal term . here , for example , I have be speak to you this morning about tumbler . why , what do you know about tumbler ? at the time when , to have be a tumbler in the mud of the street , would have be a godsend to I , a prize in the lottery to I , you be at the . you be come out of the italian Opera , ma 'am , in white satin and jewel , a blaze of splendour , when I have not a penny to buy a link to light you . ' 'I certainly , sir , ' return , with a dignity serenely mournful , ' be familiar with the italian at a very early age . ' '
' Egad , ma 'am , so be I , ' say , ' - with the wrong side of it . a hard be the pavement of its use to make , I assure you . people like you , ma 'am , accustom from infancy to lie on down feather , have no idea how hard a paving - stone be , without try it . no , no , it be of no use my talk to you about tumbler . I should speak of foreign dancers , and the West of , and , and lord and lady and honourable . ' 'i trust , sir , ' rejoin , with decent resignation , ' it be not necessary that you should do anything of that kind . I hope I have lear not how to accommodate myself to the change of life . if I have acquire a interest in hearing of you instructive experience , and can scarcely hear enough of they , I claim no merit for that , since I believe it be a general sentiment . ' ' well , ma 'am , ' say she patron , ' perhaps some people may be pleased to say that they do like to hear , in he own unpolished way , what , of , have go through . but you must confess that you be bear in the lap of luxury , yourself . come , ma 'am , you know you be bear in the lap of luxury . ' 'I do not , sir , ' return Sparsit with a shake of she head , ' deny it . ' be oblige to get up from table , and stand with he back to the fire , look at she ; she be such a enhancement of he position . ' and you be in crack society . Devilish high society , ' he say , warm he leg . ' it be true , sir , ' return , with a affectation of humility the very opposite of he , and therefore in no danger of jostl it . ' you be in the tiptop fashion , and all the rest of it , ' say . ' yes , sir , ' return , with a kind of social widowhood upon she . ' it be unquestionably true . ' , bend himself at the knee , literally embrace he leg in he great satisfaction and laugh aloud . and be then announce , he receive the former with a shake of the hand , and the latter with a kiss . ' can be send here , ? ' ask . certainly . so be send there . on come in , she curtsey to , and to he friend , and also to ; but in she confusion unluckily omit . Observe this , the blustrous have the follow remark to make : ' now , I tell you what , my girl . the name of that lady by the teapot , be . that lady act as mistress of this house , and she be a highly connected lady . consequently , if ever you come again into any room in this house , you will make a short stay in it if you do not behave towards that lady in you most respectful manner . now , I do not care a button what you do to I , because I do not affect to be anybody . so far from have high connection I have no connection at all , and I come of the scum of the earth . but towards that lady , I do care what you do ; and you shall do what be deferential and respectful , or you shall not come here . ' 'i hope , , ' say , in a conciliatory voice , ' that this be merely a oversight . ' 'My friend suggest , , ' say , ' that this be merely a oversight . very likely . however , as you be aware , ma 'am , I do not allow of even oversight towards you . ' ' you be very good indeed , sir , ' return , shak she head with she State humility . ' it be not worth speak of . ' Sissy , who all this time have be faintly excuse herself with tear in she eye , be now wave over by the master of the house to . she stand look intently at he , and stand coldly by , with she eye upon the ground , while he proceed thus : ' Jupe , I have make up my mind to take you into my house ; and , when you be not in attendance at the school , to employ you about , who be rather a invalid . I have explain to - this be - the miserable but natural end of you late career ; and you be to expressly understand that the whole of that subject be past , and be not to be refer to any more . from this time you begin you history . you be , at present , ignorant , I know . ' ' yes , sir , very , ' she answer , curtsey . 'I shall have the satisfaction of cause you to be strictly educate ; and you will be a live proof to all who come into communication with you , of the advantages of the training you will receive . you will be reclaim and form . you have be in the habit now of read to you father , and those people I find you among , I dare say ? ' say , beckon she nearer to he before he say so , and drop he voice . 'Only to father and Merrylegs
Merrylegs , sir . at least I mean to father , when be always there . ' ' never mind , , ' say , with a passing frown . 'I do not ask about he . I understand you to have be in the habit of read to you father ? ' 'o , yes , sir , thousand of time . they be the happiest - o , of all the happy time we have together , sir ! ' it be only now when she sorrow break out , that look at she . ' and what , ' ask , in a still lower voice , ' do you read to you father , ? ' ' about the Fairy , sir , and the dwarf , and the Hunchback , and the Geny , ' she sob out ; 'and about - ' ' ! ' say , ' that be enough . never breato a word of such destructive nonsense any more . , this be a case for rigid training , and I shall observe it with interest . ' ' well , ' return , 'I have give you my opinion already , and I should not do as you do . but , very well , very well . since you be bend upon it , very well ! ' so , and he daughter take off with they to , and on the way never speak one word , good or bad . and go about he daily pursuit . and . get behind she eyebrow and meditate in the gloom of that retreat , all the evening . - never wonder let we strike the key - note again , before pursue the tune . when she be half a dozen year younger , have be overhear to begin a conversation with she brother one day , by say ' , I wonder ' - upon which Gradgrind , who be the person overhear , step forth into the light and say , ' Louisa , never wonder ! ' herein lay the spring of the mechanical art and mystery of educate the reason without stoop to the cultivation of the sentiment and affection . never wonder . by means of addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division , settle everything somehow , and never wonder . bring to I , say , yonder baby just able to walk , and I will engage that it shall never wonder . now , besides very many baby just able to walk , there happen to be in a considerable population of baby who have be walk against time towards the infinite world , twenty , thirty , forty , fifty year and more . these portentous infant be alarm creature to stalk about in any human society , the eighteen denomination incessantly scratch one another 's face and pull one another 's hair by way of agree on the step to be take for they improvement - which they never do ; a surprising circumstance , when the happy adaptation of the means to the end be consider . still , although they differ in every other particular , conceivable and inconceivable ( especially inconceivable ) , they be pretty well unit on the point that these unlucky infant be never to wonder . Body number one , say they must take everything on trust . Body number two , say they must take everything on political economy . Body number three , write leaden little book for they , show how the good grown - up baby invariably get to the savings - bank , and the bad grown - up baby invariably get transport . Body number four , under dreary pretence of be droll ( when it be very melancholy indeed ) , make the shallowest pretence of concealing pitfall of knowledge , into which it be the duty of these baby to be smuggle and inveigle . but , all the body agree that they be never to wonder . there be a library in , to which general access be easy . greatly torment he mind about what the people read in this library : a point whereon little rivers of tabular statement periodically flow into the howling ocean of tabular statement , which no diver ever get to any depth in and come up sane . it be a disheartening circumstance , but a melancholy fact , that even these reader persist in wondering . they wonder about human nature , human passion , human hope and fear , the struggle , triumph and defeat , the car and joy and sorrow , the life and death of common man and woman ! they sometimes , after fifteen hour ' work , sit down to read mere fable about man and woman , more or less like themselves , and about child , more or less like they own . they take foe to they bosom , instead of , and seem to be on the whole more comfort by than by . be for ever work , in print and out of print , at this eccentric sum , and he never could make out how it yield this unaccountable product . 'I be sick of my life , . I , hate it altogether , and I hate everybody except you , ' say the unnatural young in the hair - cut chamber at twilight . ' you do not hate , ? ' 'I hate to be oblige to call she . and she hate I , ' say , moodily . ' no , she do not , , I be sure ! ' ' she must , ' say . ' she must just hate and detest the whole set - out of we . they will bother she head off , I think , before they have do
do with she . already she be get as pale as wax , and as heavy as - I be . ' yong express these sentiment sit astride of a chair before the fire , with he arm on the back , and he sulky face on he arm . he sister sit in the darker corner by the fireside , now look at he , now look at the bright spark as they drop upon the hearth . ' as to I , ' say , tumbl he hair all manner of way with he sulky hand , 'I be a , that be what I be . I be as obstinate as one , I be more stupid than one , I get as much pleasure as one , and I should like to kick like one . ' ' not I , I hope , ? ' ' no , Loo ; I would not hurt you . I make a exception of you at first . I do not know what this - jolly old - ,' have pause to find a sufficiently complimentary and expressive name for the parental roof , and seem to relieve he mind for a moment by the strong alliteration of this one , ' would be without you . ' ' indeed , ? do you really and truly say so ? ' ' why , of course I do . what be the use of talk about it ! ' return , chaf he face on he coat - sleeve , as if to mortify he flesh , and have it in unison with he spirit . ' because , , ' say he sister , after silently watch the spark awhile , 'as I get older , and nearer grow up , I often sit wonder here , and think how unfortunate it be for I that I can not reconcile you to home better than I be able to do . I do not know what other girl know . I can not play to you , or s to you . I can not talk to you so as to lighten you mind , for I never see any amusing sight or read any amuse book that it would be a pleasure or a relief to you to talk about , when you be tired . ' ' well , no more do I . I be as bad as you in that respect ; and I be a too , which you be not . if father be determined to make I either a Prig or a Mule , and I be not a Prig , why , it stand to reason , I must be a Mule . and so I be , ' say , desperately . ' it be a great pity , ' say , after another pause , and speak thoughtfully out of she dark corner : ' it be a great pity , . it be very unfortunate for both of we . ' 'Oh ! you , ' say ; ' you be a girl , , and a girl come out of it better than a boy do . I do not miss anything in you . you be the only pleasure I have - you can brighten even this place - and you can always lead I as you like . ' ' you be a dear brother , ; and while you think I can do such thing , I do not so much mind know better . though I do know better , , and be very sorry for it . ' she come and kiss he , and go back into she corner again . 'I wish I could collect all the fact we hear so much about , ' say , spitefully set he tooth , ' and all the figure , and all the people who find they out : and I wish I could put a thousand barrel of gunpowder under they , and blow they all up together ! however , when I go to live with old , I will have my revenge . ' ' you revenge , ? ' 'I mean , I will enjoy myself a little , and go about and see something , and hear something . I will recompense myself for the way in which I have be bring up . ' ' but do not disappoind yourself beforehand , . think as father think , and be a great deal rougher , and not half so kind . ' 'Oh ! ' say , laugh ; 'I do not mind that . I shall very well know how to manage and smooth old ! ' they shadow be define upon the wall , but those of the high press in the room be all blend together on the wall and on the ceiling , as if the brother and sister be overhing by a dark cavern . or , a fanciful imagination - if such treason could have be there - might have make it out to be the shadow of they subject , and of its lowering association with they future . ' what be you great mode of smoothing and manage , ? be it a secret ? ' 'Oh ! ' say , ' if it be a secret , it be not far off . it be you . you be he little pet , you be he favourite ; he will do anything for you . when he say to I what I do not like , I shall say to he , " my sister Loo will be hurt and disappoint , . she always use to tell I she be sure you would be easier with I than this . " that will bring he about , or nothing will . ' after wait for
for some answer remark , and get none , wearily relapse into the present time , and twin himself yawn round and about the rail of he chair , and rumple he head more and more , until he suddenly look up , and ask : ' have you go to sleep , ? ' 'no , . I be look at the fire . ' ' you seem to find more to look at in it than ever I could find , ' say . 'Another of the advantages , I suppose , of be a girl . ' ' , ' enquire he sister , slowly , and in a curiious tone , as if she be read what she ask in the fire , and it be not quite plainly write there , 'do you look forward with any satisfaction to this change to 's ? ' ' why , there be one thing to be say of it , ' return , push he chair from he , and stand up ; ' it will be get away from home . ' ' there be one thing to be say of it , ' repeat in she former curiious tone ; ' it will be get away from home . yes . ' ' not but what I shall be very unwilling , both to leave you , , and to leave you here . but I must go , you know , whether I like it or not ; and I have better go where I can take with I some advantage of you influence , than where I should lose it altogether . do not you see ? ' ' yes , . ' the answer be so long in come , though there be no indecision in it , that go and lean on the back of she chair , to contemplate the fire which so engross she , from she point of view , and see what he could make of it . ' except that it be a fire , ' say , ' it look to I as stupid and blank as everything else look . what do you see in it ? not a circus ? ' 'I do not see anything in it , , particularly . but since I have be look at it , I have be wonder about you and I , grow up . ' ' wonder again ! ' say . 'I have such unmanageable thought , ' return he sister , 'that they will wonder . ' ' then I beg of you , , ' say Gradgrind , who have open the door without be hear , 'to do nothing of that description , for goodness ' sake , you inconsiderate girl , or I shall never hear the last of it from you father . and , , it be really shameful , with my poor head continually wear I out , that a boy bring up as you have be , and whose education have cost what yours have , should be find encourage he sister to wonder , when he know he father have expressly say that she be not to do it . ' deny 's participation in the offence ; but she mother stop she with the conclusive answer , ' , do not tell I , in my state of health ; for unless you have be encourage , it be morally and physically impossible that you could have do it . ' be encourage by nothing , mother , but by look at the red spark drop out of the fire , and whiten and die . it make I think , after all , how short my life would be , and how little I could hope to do in it . ' ' Nonsense ! ' say , render almost energetic . ' Nonsense ! do not stand there and tell I such stuff , , to my face , when you know very well that if it be ever to reach you father 's ears I should never hear the last of it . after all the trouble that have be take with you ! after the lecture you have attend , and the experiment you have see ! after I have hear you myself , when the whole of my right side have be benumb , go on with you master about combustion , and calcination , and calorification , and I may say every kind of ation that could drive a poor invalid distract , to hear you talk in this absurd way about spark and ash ! I wish , ' whimper , take a chair , and discharge she strongest point before succumb under these mere shadow of fact , ' yes , I really do wish that I have never have a family , and then you would have know what it be to do without I ! ' - 's have not a easy time of it , between and , and be not without strong impulse , in the first month of she probation , to run away . it hail fact all day long so very hard , and life in general be open to she as such a closely rule ciphering - book , that assuredly she would have run away , but for only one restraint . it be lamentable to think of ; but this restraint be the result of no arithmetical process , be self - impos in defiance of all calculation , and go dead against any table of probability that any would have draw up from the premise . the girl believe that she father have not desert she ; she live in the hope that he would come back , and in the faith that he would be make the happier by she remain where she be
be . the wretch ignorance with which cling to this consolation , reject the superior comfort of know , on a sound arithmetical basis , that she father be a unnatural vagabond , fill with pity . yet , what be to be do ? report that she have a very dense head for figure ; that , once possessed with a general idea of the globe , she take the smallest conceivable interest in its exact measurement ; that she be extremely slow in the acquisition of date , unless some pitiful incident happen to be connect therewith ; that she would burst into tear on be require ( by the mental process ) immediately to name the cost of two hundred and forty - seven muslin cap at fourteen - pence halfpenny ; that she be as low down , in the school , as low could be ; that after eight week of induction into the element of political Economy , she have only yesterday be set right by a prattler three foot high , for return to the question , ' what be the first principle of this science ? ' the absurd answer , ' to do unto other as I would that they should do unto I . ' observ , shak he head , that all this be very bad ; that it show the necessity of infinite grinding at the mill of knowledge , as per system , schedule , blue book , report , and tabular statement a to ; and that 's must be keep to it . ' so be keep to it , and become low - spirited , but no wiser . ' it would be a fine thing to be you , ! ' she say , one night , when have endeavoure to make she perplexity for next day something clearer to she . ' do you think so ? ' 'I should know so much , . all that be difficult to I now , would be so easy then . ' ' you might not be the better for it , . ' submit , after a little hesitation , 'I should not be the worse , . ' to which answer , 'I do not know that . ' there have be so little communication between these two - both because life at go monotonously round like a piece of machinery which discourage human interference , and because of the prohibition relative to 's past career - that they be still almost stranger . Sissy , with she dark eye wonderingly direct to 's face , be uncertain whether to say more or to remain silent . ' you be more useful to my mother , and more pleasant with she than I can ever be , ' resume . ' you be pleasanter to yourself , than I be to myself . ' ' but , if you please , , ' plead , am - of so stupid ! ' Louisa , with a brighter laugh than usual , tell she she would be wiser by - and - by . ' you do not know , ' say , half cry , ' what a stupid girl I be . all through school hour I make mistake . and Choakumchild call I up , over and over again , regularly to make mistake . I can not help they . they seem to come natural to I . ' ' and Choakumchild never make any mistake themselves , I suppose , ? ' 'o no ! ' she eagerly return . ' they know everything . ' ' tell I some of you mistake . ' 'I be almost asham , ' say , with reluctance . ' but to - day , for instance , be explain to we about Natural prosperity . ' ' , I think it must have be , ' observe . ' yes , it be . - but be not it the same ? ' she timidly ask . ' you have better say , , as he say so , ' return , with she dry reserve . ' National prosperity . and he say , now , this schoolroom be a Nation . and in this nation , there be fifty million of money . be not this a prosperous nation ? number twenty , be not this a prosperous nation , and a ' not you in a thrive state ? ' ' what do you say ? ' ask . ' , I say I do not know . I think I could not know whether it be a prosperous nation or not , and whether I be in a thrive state or not , unless I know who have get the money , and whether any of it be mine . but that have nothing to do with it . it be not in the figure at all , ' say , wip she eye . ' that be a great mistake of yours , ' observ . ' yes , , I know it be , now . then say he would try I again . and he say , this schoolroom be a immense town , and in it there be a million of inhabitant , and only five - and - twenty be starve to death in the street , in the course of a year . what be you remark on that proportion ? and my remark be - for I could not think of a better one - that I think it must be just as hard upon those who be starve , whether the other be a million , or a million million . and that be wrong , too . ' ' of course it be . ' ' then say he would try I once more . and he say
say , here be the stutterings - ' ' , ' say . ' yes , - they always remind I of stutterings , and that be another of my mistake - of accident upon the sea . and I find ( say ) that in a give time a hundred thousand person go to sea on long voyage , and only five hundred of they be drown or burn to death . what be the percentage ? and I say , ;' here fairly sob as confess with extreme contrition to she greatest error ; 'I say it be nothing . ' ' nothing , ? ' ' nothing , - to the relation and friend of the people who be kill . I shall never learn , ' say . ' and the worst of all be , that although my poor father wish I so much to learn , and although I be so anxious to learn , because he wish I to , I be afraid I do not like it . ' stand look at the pretty modest head , as it droop abash before she , until it be raise again to glance at she face . then she ask : ' do you father know so much himself , that he wish you to be well teach too , ? ' hesitat before replie , and so plainly show she sense that they be enter on forbidden ground , that add , ' no one hear we ; and if any one do , I be sure no harm could be find in such a innocent question . ' 'no , , ' answer , upon this encouragement , shak she head ; ' father know very little indeed . it be as much as he can do to write ; and it be more than people in general can do to read he writing . though it be plain to I . ' ' you mother ! ' ' say she be quite a scholar . she die when I be bear . she be ;' make the terrible communication nervously ; ' she be a dancer . ' ' do you father love she ? ' ask these question with a strong , wild , wander interest peculiar to she ; a interest go astray like a banished creature , and hide in solitary place . 'o yes ! as dearly as he love I . love I , first , for she sake . he carry I about with he when I be quite a baby . we have never be asunder from that time . ' ' yet he leave you now , ? ' ' only for my good . nobody understand he as I do ; nobody know he as I do . when he leave I for my good - he never would have leave I for he own - I know he be almost broken - hear with the trial . he will not be happy for a single minute , till he come back . ' ' tell I more about he , ' say , 'I will never ask you again . where do you live ? ' ' we travel about the country , and have no fixed place to live in . 's a ;' whisper the awful word , 'a clown . ' 'To make the people laugh ? ' say , with a nod of intelligence . ' yes . but they would not laugh sometimes , and then father cry . lately , they very often would not laugh , and he use to come home despairing . be not like most . those who do not know he as well as I do , and do not love he as dearly as I do , might believe he be not quite right . sometimes they play trick upon he ; but they never know how he feel they , and shrink up , when he be alone with I . he be far , far timider than they think ! ' ' and you be he comfort through everything ? ' she nod , with the tear roll down she face . 'i hope so , and father say I be . it be because he grow so scared and trembl , and because he feel himself to be a poor , weak , ignorant , helpless man ( those use to be he word ) , that he want I so much to know a great deal , and be different from he . I use to read to he to cheer he courage , and he be very fond of that . they be wrong book - I be never to speak of they here - but we do not know there be any harm in they . ' ' and he like they ? ' say , with a search gaze on all this time . 'o very much ! they keep he , many time , from what do he real harm . and often and often of a night , he use to forget all he trouble in wonder whether the would let the lady go on with the story , or would have she head cut off before it be finished . ' ' and you father be always kind ? to the last ? ' ask contraven the great principle , and wonder very much . 'Always , always ! ' return , clasp she hand . 'Kinder and kinder than I can tell . he be angry only one night , and that be not to I , but . Merrylegs ;' she whisper the awful fact ; 'is he perform dog . ' ' why be he angry with the dog ? ' demand . ' , soon after they come home from performing , tell to jump up
up on the back of the two chair and stand across they - which be one of he tricks . he look at father , and do not do it at once . everything of father 's have go wrong that night , and he have not pleas the public at all . he cry out that the very dog knew he be fail , and have no compassion on he . then he beat the dog , and I be frightene , and say , " Father , father ! pray do not hurt the creature who be so fond of you ! of forgive you , father , stop ! " and he stop , and the dog be bloody , and father lay down crying on the floor with the dog in he arm , and the dog lick he face . ' see that she be sobb ; and go to she , kiss she , take she hand , and sit down beside she . ' finish by tell I how you father leave you , . now that I have ask you so much , tell I the end . the blame , if there be any blame , be mine , not yours . ' ' dear , ' say , cover she eye , and sobb yet ; 'I come home from the school that afternoon , and find poor father just come home too , from the booth . and he sit rock himself over the fire , as if he be in pain . and I say , " have you hurt yourself , father ? " ( as he do sometimes , like they all do ) , and he say , " a little , my darling . " and when I come to stoop down and look up at he face , I see that he be cry . the more I speak to he , the more he hide he face ; and at first he shook all over , and say nothing but " my darling ; " and " my love ! " ' here come lounge in , and star at the two with a coolness not particularly savour of interest in anything but himself , and not much of that at present . 'I be ask a few question , , ' observe he sister . ' you have no occasion to go away ; but do not interrupt we for a moment , dear . ' 'Oh ! very well ! ' return . ' only father have bring old home , and I want you to come into the drawing - room . because if you come , there be a good chance of old 's ask I to dinner ; and if you do not , there be none . ' 'I will come directly . ' 'I will wait for you , ' say , 'to make sure . ' resume in a lower voice . ' at last poor father say that he have give no satisfaction again , and never do give any satisfaction now , and that he be a shame and disgrace , and I should have do better without he all along . I say all the affectionate thing to he that come into my heart , and presently he be quiet and I sit down by he , and tell he all about the school and everything that have be say and do there . when I have no more left to tell , he put he arm round my neck , and kiss I a great many time . then he ask I to fetch some of the stuff he use , for the little hurt he have have , and to get it at the best place , which be at the other end of town from there ; and then , after kiss I again , he let I go . when I have go down - stair , I turn back that I might be a little bit more company to he yet , and look in at the door , and say , " Father dear , shall I take ? " shook he head and say , " no , , no ; take nothing that be know to be mine , my darling ; " and I leave he sit by the fire . then the thought must have come upon he , poor , poor father ! of go away to try something for my sake ; for when I come back , he be gone . ' 'I say ! look sharp for old , ! ' remonstrate . ' there be no more to tell , . I keep the nine oil ready for he , and I know he will come back . every letter that I see in 's hand take my breath away and blind my eye , for I think it come from father , or from about father . promise to write as soon as ever father should be hear of , and I trust to he to keep he word . ' ' do look sharp for old , ! ' say , with a impatient whistle . ' he will be off if you do not look sharp ! ' after this , whenever drop a curtsey to in the presence of he family , and say in a falter way , 'I beg you pardon , sir , for be troublesome - but - have you have any letter yet about I ? ' would suspend the occupation of the moment , whatever it be , and look for the reply as earnestly as . and when regularly answer , ' no , , nothing of the sort , ' the trembling of 's lip would be repeat in 's face , and she eye
eye would follow with compassion to the door . usually improve these occasion by remark , when she be gone , that if have be properly train from a early age she would have remonstrate to herself on sound principle the baselessness of these fantastic hope . yet it do seem ( though not to he , for he see nothing of it ) as if fantastic hope could take as strong a hold as fact . this observation must be limit exclusively to he daughter . as to , he be become that not unprecedented triumph of calculation which be usually at work on number one . as to , if she say anything on the subject , she would come a little way out of she wrapper , like a feminine dormouse , and say : ' good gracious bless I , how my poor head be vexed and worried by that girl 's so perseveringly ask , over and over again , about she tiresome letter ! upon my word and honour I seem to be fate , and destin , and ordain , to live in the midst of thing that I be never to hear the last of . it really be a most extraordinary circumstance that it appear as if I never be to hear the last of anything ! ' at about this point , 's eye would fall upon she ; and under the influence of that wintry piece of fact , she would become torpid again . - I Entertain a weak idea that the english people be as hard - work as any people upon whom the sun shine . I acknowledge to this ridiculous idiosyncrasy , as a reason why I would give they a little more play . in the hardest work part of ; in the innermost fortification of that ugly citadel , where be as strongly brick out as kill air and gas be brick in ; at the heart of the labyrinth of narrow court upon court , and close street upon street , which have come into existence piecemeal , every piece in a violent hurry for some one man 's purpose , and the whole a unnatural family , shouldere , and trampl , and press one another to death ; in the last close nook of this great exhaust receiver , where the chimney , for want of air to make a dratch , be build in a immense variety of stunt and crooke shape , as though every house put out a sign of the kind of people who might be expect to be bear in it ; among the multitude of , generically call ' the hand , ' - a race who would have find more favour with some people , if have see fit to make they only hand , or , like the lower creature of the seashore , only hand and stomach - liv a certain , forty year of age . look older , but he have have a hard life . it be say that every life have its rose and thorn ; there seem , however , to have be a misadventure or mistake in 's case , whereby somebody else have become possessed of he rose , and he have become possessed of the same somebody else 's thorn in addition to he own . he have know , to use he word , a peck of trouble . he be usually call , in a kind of rough homage to the fact . a rather stoop man , with a knit brow , a ponder expression of face , and a hard - look head sufficiently capacious , on which he iron - grey hair lay long and thin , might have pass for a particularly intelligent man in he condition . yet he be not . he take no place among those remarkable ' hand , ' who , piece together they break interval of leisure through many year , have mastere difficult sciences , and acquire a knowledge of most unlikely thing . he hold no station among the hand who could make speeches and carry on debate . thousand of he compeer could talk much better than he , at any time . he be a good power - loom weaver , and a man of perfect integrity . what more he be , or what else he have in he , if anything , let he show for himself . the light in the great factory , which look , when they be illuminate , like Fairy palace - or the traveller by express - train say so - be all extinguished ; and the bell have rung for knock off for the night , and have cease again ; and the hand , man and woman , boy and girl , be clatter home . be stand in the street , with the old sensation upon he which the stoppage of the machinery always produce - the sensation of it be have work and stop in he own head . ' yet I do not see , still ! ' say he . it be a wet night , and many group of young woman pass he , with they shawl draw over they bare head and hold close under they chin to keep the rain out . he know well , for a glance at any one of these group be sufficient to show he that she be not there . at last , there be no more to come ; and then he turn away , say in a tone of disappointment , ' why , then , ha ' miss she ! ' but , he have not go the length of three street , when he see another of the shawled figure in advance of he , at which he look so keenly
keenly that perhaps its mere shadow indistinctly reflect on the wet pavement - if he could have see it without the figure itself move along from lamp to lamp , brighten and fad as it go - would have be enough to tell he who be there . make he pace at once much quicker and much softer , he dart on until he be very near this figure , then fall into he former walk , and call ' ! ' she turn , be then in the brightness of a lamp ; and raise she hood a little , show a quiet oval face , dark and rather delicate , irradiate by a pair of very gentle eye , and further set off by the perfect order of she shining black hair . it be not a face in its first bloom ; she be a woman five and thirty year of age . 'Ah , lad ! ' Tis thou ? ' when she have say this , with a smile which would have be quite express , though nothing of she have be see but she pleasant eye , she replace she hood again , and they go on together . 'I think thou wast ahind I , ? ' ' no . ' ' early t' night , lass ? ' ''Times I be a little early , ! ' time a little late . I be never to be count on , go home . ' ' nor go t'other way , neither , ot seem to I , ? ' 'no , . ' he look at she with some disappointment in he face , but with a respectful and patient conviction that she must be right in whatever she do . the expression be not lose upon she ; she lay she hand lightly on he arm a moment as if to thank he for it . ' we be such true friend , lad , and such old friend , and get to be such old folk , now . ' 'no , , thou 'rt as young as ever thou wast . ' ' one of we would be puzzl how to get old , , without 't other get so too , both be alive , ' she answer , laugh ; ' but , anyways , we be such old friend , and t ' hide a word of honest truth fro' one another would be a sin and a pity . ' tTis better not to walk too much together . ' , yes ! 'Twould be hard , indeed , if ' tbe not to be at all , ' she say , with a cheerfulness she seek to communicate to he . ''Tis hard , anyways , . ' ' try to think not ; and ' twill seem better . ' 'I have try a long time , and 'nt get better . but thou 'rt right ; ot might mak fok talk , even of thee . thou hast be that to I , , through so many year : thou hast do I so much good , and hearten of I in that cheer way , that thy word be a law to I . ah , lass , and a bright good law ! better than some real one . ' ' never fret about they , , ' she answer quickly , and not without a anxious glance at he face . ' let the law be . ' ' yes ,' he say , with a slow nod or two . ' let th'ey be . let everything be . let all sort alone . ' tTis a muddle , and that be aw . ' ' always a muddle ? ' say , with another gentle touch upon he arm , as if to recall he out of the thoughtfulness , in which he be bite the long end of he loose neckerchief as he walk along . the touch have its instantaneous effect . he let they fall , turn a smiling face upon she , and say , as he break into a good - humoure laugh , , , lass , awlus a muddle . that be where I stick . I come to the muddle many time and agen , and I never get beyond it . ' they have walk some distance , and be near they own home . the woman 's be the first reach . it be in one of the many small streets for which the favourite undertaker ( who turn a handsome sum out of the one poor ghastly pomp of the neighbourhood ) keep a black ladder , in order that those who have do they dailly grope up and down the narrow stair might slide out of this work world by the window . she stop at the corner , and put she hand in he , wish he good night . ' good night , dear lass ; good night ! ' she go , with she neat figure and she sober womanly step , down the dark street , and he stand look after she until she turn into one of the small house . there be not a flutter of she coarse shawl , perhaps , but have its interest in this man 's eye ; not a tone of she voice but have it be echo in he innermost heart . when she be lose to he view , he pursue he homeward way , glance up sometimes at the sky , where the cloud be sai fast and wildly . but , they be break now , and the rain have cease , and the moon shone , - look down the high chimney of on the deep furnace below , and cast shadow of the steam - engine at rest ,
, upon the wall where they be lod . the man seem to have brighten with the night , as he go on . he home , in such another street as the first , save that it be narrower , be over a little shop . how it come to pass that any people find it worth they while to sell or buy the wretch little toy , mix up in its window with cheap newspaper and pork ( there be a leg to be raffle for to - morrow - night ) , matter not here . he take he end of candle from a shelf , light it at another end of candle on the counter , without disturb the mistress of the shop who be asleep in she little room , and go upstairs into he lodging . it be a room , not unacquainted with the black ladder under various tenant ; but as neat , at present , as such a room could be . a few book and writings be on a old bureau in a corner , the furniture be decent and sufficient , and , though the atmosphere be taint , the room be clean . go to the hearth to set the candle down upon a round three - leg table stand there , he stumble against something . as he recoil , look down at it , it raise itself up into the form of a woman in a sitting attitude . ' 's mercy , woman ! ' he cry , fall farther off from the figure . ' Hast thou come back again ! ' such a woman ! a disable , drunken creature , barely able to preserve she sit posture by steady herself with one begrim hand on the floor , while the other be so purposeless in try to push away she tangle hair from she face , that it only blind she the more with the dirt upon it . a creature so foul to look at , in she tatter , stains and splash , but so much fouler than that in she moral infamy , that it be a shameful thing even to see she . after a impatient oath or two , and some stupid clawing of herself with the hand not necessary to she support , she get she hair away from she eye sufficiently to obtain a sight of he . then she sit sway she body to and fro , and make gesture with she unnerved arm , which seem intend as the accompaniment to a fit of laughter , though she face be stolid and drowsy . ' Eigh , lad ? what , yo 'r there ? ' some hoarse sound mean for this , come mockingly out of she at last ; and she head drop forward on she breast . ' back agen ? ' she screech , after some minute , as if he have that moment say it . ' yes ! and back agen . back agen ever and ever so often . back ? yes , back . why not ? ' Rouse by the unmeaning violence with which she cry it out , she scramble up , and stood support herself with she shoulders against the wall ; dangling in one hand by the string , a dunghill - fragment of a bonnet , and try to look scornfully at he . 'I will sell thee off again , and I will sell thee off again , and I will sell thee off a score of time ! ' she cry , with something between a furious menace and a effort at a defiant dance . ' come awa ' from th ' bed ! ' he be sit on the side of it , with he face hide in he hand . ' come awa ! from 't . ' tTis mine , and I have a right to t '! ' as she stagger to it , he avoid she with a shudder , and pass - he face still hide - to the opposite end of the room . she throw herself upon the bed heavily , and soon be snor hard . he sunk into a chair , and move but once all that night . it be to throw a covering over she ; as if he hand be not enough to hide she , even in the darkness . - no Way out the Fairy palace burst into illumination , before pale morning show the monstrous serpent of smoke trailing themselves over . a clattering of clog upon the pavement ; a rapid ringing of bell ; and all the melancholy mad elephant , polish and oil up for the day 's monotony , be at they heavy exercise again . bend over he loom , quiet , watchful , and steady . a special contrast , as every man be in the forest of loom where work , to the crashing , smashe , tear piece of mechanism at which he laboure . never fear , good people of a anxious turn of mind , that will consign to . set anywhere , side by side , the work of and the work of man ; and the former , even though it be a troop of hand of very small account , will gain in dignity from the comparison . so many hundr hand in this ; so many hundr horse . it be know , to the force of a single pound weight , what the engine will do ; but , not all the calculator of the can tell I the capacity for good or evil , for love or hatre , for patriotism or discontent , for the decomposition of virtue into vice , or the reverse , at any single moment in the soul of one of
of these its quiet servants , with the compose face and the regulated action . there be no mystery in it ; there be a unfathomable mystery in the meanest of they , for ever . - Suppose we be to reverse we arithmetic for material object , and to govern these awful unknown quantity by other means ! the day grow strong , and show itself outside , even against the flaming light within . the light be turn out , and the work go on . the rain fall , and the smoke - serpent , submissive to the curse of all that tribe , traile themselves upon the earth . in the waste - yard outside , the steam from the escape pipe , the litter of barrels and old iron , the shining heap of coal , the ash everywhere , be shroude in a veil of mist and rain . the work go on , until the noon - bell rang . more clattering upon the pavement . the loom , and wheel , and hand all out of gear for a hour . come out of the hot mill into the damp wind and cold wet street , haggard and worn . he turn from he own class and he own quarter , take nothing but a little bread as he walk along , towards the hill on which he principal employer liv , in a red house with black outside shutter , green inside blinds , a black street door , up two white step , ( in letter very like himself ) upon a brazen plate , and a round brazen door - handle underneath it , like a brazen full - stop . be at he lunch . so have expect . would he servant say that one of the hand beg leave to speak to he ? message in return , require name of such . . there be nothing troublesome against ; yes , he might come in . in the parlour . ( whom he just know by sight ) , at lunch on chop and sherry . Sparsit nett at the fireside , in a side - saddle attitude , with one foot in a cotton stirrup . it be a part , at once of 's dignity and service , not to lunch . she supervise the meal officially , but imply that in she own stately person she consider lunch a weakness . ' now , , ' say , ' what be the matter with you ? ' make a bow . not a servile one - these hand will never do that ! bless you , sir , you will never catch they at that , if they have be with you twenty year ! - and , as a complimentary toilet for , tuck he neckerchief end into he waistcoat . ' now , you know , ' say , take some sherry , 'we have never have any difficulty with you , and you have never be one of the unreasonable one . you do not expect to be set up in a coach and six , and to be feed on turtle soup and venison , with a gold spoon , as a good many of th'ey do ! ' always represent this to be the sole , immediate , and direct object of any who be not entirely satisfied ; ' and therefore I know already that you have not come here to make a complaint . now , you know , I be certain of that , beforehand . ' ' no , sir , sure I ha ' not coom for nowt of ' th ' kind . ' seem agreeably surprised , notwithstand he previous strong conviction . ' very well , ' he return . ' you be a steady , and I be not mistaken . now , let I hear what it be all about . as it be not that , let I hear what it be . what have you get to say ? out with it , lad ! ' happen to glance towards . 'I can go , , if you wish it , ' say that self - sacrifice lady , make a feint of take she foot out of the stirrup . stay she , by hold a mouthful of chop in suspension before swallow it , and put out he left hand . then , withdraw he hand and swallow he mouthful of chop , he say to : ' now you know , this good lady be a born lady , a high lady . you be not to suppose because she keep my house for I , that she have not be very high up the tree - ah , up at the top of the tree ! now , if you have get anything to say that can not be say before a bear lady , this lady will leave the room . if what you have get to say can be say before a bear lady , this lady will stay where she be . ' ' Sir , I hope I never have nowt to say , not fite for a born lady to year , sin' I be bear mysen ' , ' be the reply , accompany with a slight flush . ' very well , ' say , push away he plate , and lean back . ' fire away ! ' 'I ha ' coom ,' begin , raise he eye from the floor , after a moment 's consideration , 'to ask yo yor advice . I need ot overmuch . I be marry on nineteen year sin , long and dree . she be a young lass - pretty enow - wi' good account of herseln . well ! she go bad - soon . not
not along of I . Gonnow I be not a unkind husband to she . ' 'I have hear all this before , ' say . ' she take to drink , leave off work , sell the furniture , pawn the clothes , and play old . ' 'I be patient wi' she . ' ( ' the more fool you , I think , ' say , in confidence to he wine - glass . ) 'I be very patient wi' she . I try to wean she fra ot ower and ower agen . I try this , I try that , I try t'other . I ha ' go home , many be the time , and find all vanished as I have in the world , and she without a sense leave to bless herseln lie on bare ground . I ha ' dun 't not once , not twice - twenty time ! ' every line in he face deepen as he say it , and put in it be affect evidence of the suffering he have undergone . ' from bad to worse , from worse to worsen . she leave I . she disgrace herseln everyways , bitter and bad . she coom back , she coom back , she coom back . what could I do t ' hinder she ? I ha ' walk the street night long , ere ever I would go home . I ha ' go t ' th ' brigg , minded to fl myseln ower , and ha ' no more o not . I ha ' bear that much , that I be owd when I be young . ' , easily ambl along with she netting - needle , raise the Coriolanian eyebrow and shake she head , as much as to say , ' the great know trouble as well as the small . please to turn you humble eye in my direction . ' 'I ha ' pay she to keep awa ' fra' I . these five year I ha ' pay she . I ha ' get decent fewtril about I agen . I ha ' live hard and sad , but not asham and fearfo ' a ' the minnit of ' my life . last night , I go home . there she lay upon my har - stone ! there she be ! ' in the strength of he misfortune , and the energy of he distress , he fire for the moment like a proud man . in another moment , he stand as he have stood all the time - he usual stoop upon he ; he pondering face address to , with a curiious expression on it , half shrewd , half perplex , as if he mind be set upon unravelling something very difficult ; he hat hold tight in he left hand , which rest on he hip ; he right arm , with a rug propriety and force of action , very earnestly emphasize what he say : not least so when it always pause , a little bent , but not withdrawn , as he pause . 'I be acquaint with all this , you know , ' say , ' except the last clause , long ago . it be a bad job ; that be what it be . you have better have be satisfie as you be , and not have get married . however , it be too late to say that . ' ' be it a unequal marriage , sir , in point of year ? ' ask . ' you hear what this lady ask . be it a unequal marriage in point of year , this unlucky job of yours ? ' say . ' not e'en so . I be one - and - twenty myseln ; she be twenty nighbutt . ' ' indeed , sir ? ' say to she , with great placidity . 'I infer , from it be be so miserable a marriage , that it be probably a unequal one in point of year . ' look very hard at the good lady in a side - long way that have a odd sheepishness about it . he fortify himself with a little more sherry . ' well ? why do not you go on ? ' he then ask , turn rather irritably on . 'I ha ' coom to ask yo , sir , how I be to be ridde of ' this woman . ' infuse a yet deeper gravity into the mixed expression of he attentive face . utter a gentle ejaculation , as have receive a moral shock . ' what do you mean ? ' say , get up to lean he back against the chimney - piece . ' what be you talk about ? you take she for better for worse . ' 'i mun ' be ridden of ' she . I can not bear ot nommore . I ha ' live under 't so long , for that I ha ' have and the pity and comforting word of ' th' best lass living or dead . Haply , but for she , I should ha ' go batter mad . ' ' he wish to be free , to marry the female of whom he speak , I fear , sir , ' observe in a undertone , and much deject by the immorality of the people . 'I do . the lady say what be right . I do . I be a come to 't . I ha ' read I ' th ' papers that great folk ( fair faw th'ey a ' ! I wish th'ey no hurt ! ) be not bond together for better for worst so fast , but that they can be set free frog
frog they misfortnet marriage , a ' marry ower agen . when they dun not agree , for that they tempers be ill - sort , they have room o' one kind and ' another in they house , above a bit , and they can live asunder . we fok ha ' only one room , and we can not . when that will not do , they ha ' gow a ' other cash , a ' they can say " this for yo ' a ' that for I , " an' they can go they separate way . we can not . spite of ' all that , they can be set free for smaller wrongs than mine . so , I mun be ridden of ' this woman , and I want t ' know how ? ' ' no how , ' return . ' if I do she any hurt , sir , there be a law to punish I ? ' ' of course there be . ' 'if I flee from she , there be a law to punish I ? ' ' of course there be . ' ' if I marry t'oother dear lass , there be a law to punish I ? ' ' of course there be . ' ' if I be to live wi' she a ' not marry she - say such a thing could be , which it never could or would , a ' she so good - there be a law to punish I , in every innocent child belong to I ? ' ' of course there be . ' ' now , a ' 's name , ' say , ' show I the law to help I ! ' ' hey ! there be a sanctity in this relation of life , ' say , ' and - and - it must be keep up . ' ' no no , dun not say that , sir . ' not kep ' up that way . not that way . ' Tis kep ' down that way . I be a weaver , I be in a fact 'ry when a chilt , but I ha ' get een to see wig and eern to year wi' . I read in 's papers every ' , every session - and you read too - I know it ! - with dismay - how th's suppose unpossibility of ' ever get unchained from one another , at any price , on any term , bring blood upon this land , and bring many common married fok to battle , murder , and sudden death . let we ha ' this , right understand . mine be a grievous case , an' I want - if yo will be so good - t ' know the law that help I . ' ' now , I tell you what ! ' say , put he hand in he pocket . ' there be such a law . ' Stephen , subside into he quiet manner , and never wander in he attention , give a nod . ' but it be not for you at all . it cost money . it cost a mint of money . ' ' how much might that be ? ' Stephen calmly ask . ' why , you would have to go to doctors 's Commons with a suit , and you would have to go to a court of common Law with a suit , and you would have to go to the house of Lords with a suit , and you would have to get a act of parliament to enable you to marry again , and it would cost you ( if it be a case of very plain sailing ) , I suppose from a thousand to fifteen hundred pound , ' say . ' perhaps twice the money . ' ' there be no other law ? ' ' certainly not . ' ' why then , sir , ' say , turn white , and motion with that right hand of he , as if he give everything to the four wind , ''tis a muddle . ' Tis just a muddle a'toogether , a ' the sooner I be dead , the better . ' ( again deject by the impiety of the people . ) ' Pooh , pooh ! do not you talk nonsense , my good fellow , ' say , ' about thing you do not understand ; and do not you call the institution of you country a muddle , or you will get yourself into a real muddle one of these fine morning . the institution of you country be not you piece - work , and the only thing you have get to do , be , to mind you piece -work . you do not take you wife for fast and for loose ; but for better for worse . if she have turn out worse - why , all we have get to say be , she might have turn out better . ' t''Tis a muddle , ' say , shak he head as he move to the door . t''Tis a ' a muddle ! ' ' now , I will tell you what ! ' resume , as a valedictory address . ' with what I shall call you unhallowed opinion , you have be quite shock this lady : who , as I have already tell you , be a born lady , and who , as I have not already tell you , have have she own marriage misfortunes to the tune of ten of thousand of pound - ten of thousand of pound ! ' ( he repeat it with great relish ) . ' now , you have always be a
a steady hitherto ; but my opinion be , and so I tell you plainly , that you be turn into the wrong road . you have be listen to some mischievous stranger or other - they be always about - and the best thing you can do be , to come out of that . now you know ;' here he countenance express marvellous acuteness ; 'I can see as far into a grindstone as another man ; farther than a good many , perhaps , because I have my nose well keep to it when I be young . I see trace of the turtle soup , and venison , and gold spoon in this . yes , I do ! ' cry , shak he head with obstinate cunning . ' by the , I do ! ' with a very different shake of the head and deep sigh , say , ' thank you , sir , I wish you good day . ' so he leave swell at he own portrait on the wall , as if he be go to explode himself into it ; and . Sparsit still ambl on with she foot in she stirrup , look quite cast down by the popular vex . - the descend the two white step , shutt the black door with the brazen door - plate , by the aid of the brazen full - stop , to which he give a parting polish with the sleeve of he coat , observe that he hot hand cloude it . he cross the street with he eye bend upon the ground , and thus be walk sorrowfully away , when he feel a touch upon he arm . it be not the touch he need most at such a moment - the touch that could calm the wild water of he soul , as the uplifted hand of the sublimest love and patience could abate the raging of the sea - yet it be a woman 's hand too . it be a old woman , tall and shapely still , though wither by time , on whom he eye fall when he stop and turn . she be very cleanly and plainly dress , have country mud upon she shoe , and be newly come from a journey . the flutter of she manner , in the unwonted noise of the street ; the spare shawl , carry unfolded on she arm ; the heavy umbrella , and little basket ; the loose long - finger glove , to which she hand be unused ; all bespeak a old woman from the country , in she plain holiday clothes , come into Coketown on a expedition of rare occurrence . Remark this at a glance , with the quick observation of he class , bend he attentive face - he face , which , like the face of many of he order , by dint of long work with eye and hand in the midst of a prodigious noise , have acquire the concentrated look with which we be familiar in the countenance of the deaf - the better to hear what she ask he . ' pray , sir , ' say the old woman , ' do not I see you come out of that gentleman 's house ? ' point back to 's . 'I believe it be you , unless I have have the bad luck to mistake the person in follow ? ' ' yes , missus , ' return , ' it be I . ' ' have you - you will excuse a old woman 's curiosity - have you see the gentleman ? ' ' yes , missus . ' ' and how do he look , sir ? be he portly , bold , outspoken , and hearty ? ' as she straighten she own figure , and hold up she head in adapt she action to she word , the idea cross Stephen that he have see this old woman before , and have not quite like she . 'o yes , ' he return , observe she more attentively , ' he be all that . ' ' and healthy , ' say the old woman , 'as the fresh wind ? ' ' yes , ' return . ' he be ett'n and drink - as large and as loud as a . ' ' thank you ! ' say the old woman , with infinite content . ' thank you ! ' he certainly never have see this old woman before . yet there be a vague remembrance in he mind , as if he have more than once dream of some old woman like she . she walk along at he side , and , gently accommodate himself to she humour , he say be a busy place , be it not ? to which she answer ' Eigh sure ! Dreadful busy ! ' then he say , she come from the country , he see ? to which she answer in the affirmative . ' by , this morning . I come forty mile by this morning , and I be go back the same forty mile this afternoon . I walk nine mile to the station this morning , and if I find nobody on the road to give I a lift , I shall walk the nine mile back to - night . that be pretty well , sir , at my age ! ' say the chatty old woman , she eye brighten with exultation . '' deed ' tis . do not would o't too often , missus . ' ' no , no . once a year , ' she answer , shak she head . 'I spend my savings so , once every year . I come regular , to tramp about the street
street , and see the gentleman . ' ' only to see th'ey ? ' return . ' that be enough for I , ' she reply , with great earnestness and interest of manner . 'I ask no more ! I have be stand about , on this side of the way , to see that gentleman , ' turn she head back towards 's again , ' come out . but , he be late this year , and I have not see he . you come out instead . now , if I be oblige to go back without a glimpse of he - I only want a glimpse - well ! I have see you , and you have see he , and I must make that do . ' say this , she look at as if to fix he feature in she mind , and she eye be not so bright as it have be . with a large allowance for difference of taste , and with all submission to the patrician of , this seem so extraordinary a source of interest to take so much trouble about , that it perplex he . but they be pass the church now , and as he eye catch the clock , he quicken he pace . he be go to he work ? the old woman say , quicken hers , too , quite easily . yes , time be nearly out . on he tell she where he work , the old woman become a more singular old woman than before . not you happy ? ' she ask he . ' why - there be awmost nobbody but have they trouble , missus . ' he answer evasively , because the old woman appear to take it for grant that he would be very happy indeed , and he have not the heart to disappoint she . he know that there be trouble enough in the world ; and if the old woman have live so long , and could count upon he have so little , why so much the better for she , and no the worse for he . 'Ay , ay ! you have you trouble at home , you mean ? ' she say . ' . just now and then ,' he answer , slightly . ' but , work under such a gentleman , they do not follow you to the factory ? ' no , no ; they do not follow he there , say Stephen . all correct there . everything accordant there . ( he do not go so far as to say , for she pleasure , that there be a sort of divine right there ; but , I have hear claim almost as magnificent of late year . ) they be now in the black by - road near the place , and the hand be crowd in . the bell be ring , and the be a serpent of many coil , and the be get ready . the strange old woman be delighted with the very bell . it be the beautifullest bell she have ever hear , she say , and sound grand ! she ask he , when he stop good - naturedly to shake hand with she before go in , how long he have work there ? 'a dozen year ,' he tell she . ' I must kiss the hand , ' say she , ' that have work in this fine factory for a dozen year ! ' and she lift it , though he would have prevent she , and put it to she lip . what harmony , besides she age and she simplicity , surround she , he do not know , but even in this fantastic action there be a something neither out of time nor place : a something which it see as if nobody else could have make as serious , or do with such a natural and touch air . he have be at he loom full half a hour , think about this old woman , when , have occasion to move round the loom for its adjustment , he glance through a window which be in he corner , and see she still look up at the pile of building , lose in admiration . heedless of the smoke and mud and wet , and of she two long journey , she be gaze at it , as if the heavy thrum that issue from it be many story be proud music to she . she be go by and by , and the day go after she , and the light spring up again , and the whir in full sight of the over the arch near : little feel amid the jarring of the machinery , and scarcely hear above its crash and rattle . long before then he thought have go back to the dreary room above the little shop , and to the shameful figure heavy on the bed , but heavier on he heart . Machinery slacken ; throbb feebly like a faint pulse ; stop . the bell again ; the glare of light and heat dispell ; the factory , loom heavy in the black wet night - they tall chimney rise up into the air like compete Tower of . he have speak to only last night , it be true , and have walk with she a little way ; but he have he new misfortune on he , in which no one else could give he a moment 's relief , and , for the sake of it , and because he know himself to want that softening of he anger which no voice but hers could effect , he feel he might so far disregard what she have say as to wait for
for she again . he wait , but she have elude he . she be gone . on no other night in the year could he so ill have spa she patient face . o ! better to have no home in which to lay he head , than to have a home and dread to go to it , through such a cause . he eat and drank , for he be exhaust - but he little know or car what ; and he wander about in the chill rain , think and think , and brood and brood . no word of a new marriage have ever pass between they ; but have take great pity on he year ago , and to she alone he have open he close heart all this time , on the subject of he misery ; and he know very well that if he be free to ask she , she would take he . he think of the home he might at that moment have be seek with pleasure and pride ; of the different man he might have be that night ; of the lightness then in he now heavy - laden breast ; of the then restore honour , self - respect , and tranquillity all tear to piece . he think of the waste of the best part of he life , of the change it make in he character for the worse every day , of the dreadful nature of he existence , bound hand and foot , to a dead woman , and torment by a demon in she shape . he thought of , how young when they be first bring together in these circumstance , how mature now , how soon to grow old . he think of the number of girl and woman she have see marry , how many home with child in they she have see grow up around she , how she have contentedly pursue she own lone quiet path - for he - and how he have sometimes see a shade of melancholy on she bless face , that smote he with remorse and despair . he set the picture of she up , beside the infamous image of last night ; and think , could it be , that the whole earthly course of one so gentle , good , and self - denying , be subjugate to such a wretch as that ! fill with these thought - so fill that he have a unwholesome sense of growing larger , of be place in some new and disease relation towards the object among which he pass , of see the iris round every misty light turn red - he go home for shelter . - faintly burn in the window , to which the black ladder have often be raise for the sliding away of all that be most precious in this world to a striving wife and a brood of hungry baby ; and add to he other thought the stern reflection , that of all the casualty of this existence upon earth , not one be deal out with so unequal a hand as . the inequality of birth be nothing to it . for , say that the child of a and the child of a Weaver be bear to - night in the same moment , what be that disparity , to the death of any human creature who be serviceable to , or belove by , another , while this abandon woman live on ! from the outside of he home he gloomily pass to the inside , with suspend breath and with a slow footstep . he go up to he door , open it , and so into the room . quiet and peace be there . be there , sit by the bed . she turn she head , and the light of she face shone in upon the midnight of he mind . she sit by the bed , watch and ten he wife . that be to say , he see that some one lay there , and he know too well it must be she ; but 's hand have put a curtain up , so that she be screen from he eyes . she disgraceful garment be remove , and some of 's be in the room . everything be in it be place and order as he have always keep it , the little fire be newly trim , and the hearth be freshly sweep . it appear to he that he see all this in 's face , and look at nothing besides . while look at it , it be shut out from he view by the softened tear that fill he eye ; but not before he have see how earnestly she look at he , and how she own eye be fill too . she turn again towards the bed , and satisfye herself that all be quiet there , speak in a low , calm , cheerful voice . 'I be glad you have come at last , . you be very late . ' 'i ha ' be walk up a ' down . ' 'I think so . but ' ti too bad a night for that . the rain fall very heavy , and the wind have risen . ' the wind ? true . it be blow hard . Hark to the thundering in the chimney , and the surging noise ! to have be out in such a wind , and not to have know it be blow ! 'I have be here once before , to - day , . come round for I at dinner - time . there be some one here that need look to , she say . and ' deed she be right . all wander and lose ,
, . wound too , and bruise . ' he slowly move to a chair and sit down , droop he head before she . 'I come to do what little I could , Stephen ; first , for that she work with I when we be girl both , and for that you court she and marry she when I be she friend - ' he lay he furrow forehead on he hand , with a low groan . ' and next , for that I know you heart , and be right sure and certain that ' ti far too merciful to let she die , or even so much as suffer , for want of aid . thou knowest who say , " let he who be without sin among you cast the first stone at she ! " there have been plenty to do that . thou be not the man to cast the last stone , , when she be bring so low . ' 'O , ! ' ' thou hast be a cruel sufferer , reward thee ! ' she say , in compassionate accent . 'I be thy poor friend , with all my heart and mind . ' the wound of which she have speak , seem to be about the neck of the self - make outcast . she dress they now , still without show she . she steep a piece of linen in a basin , into which she pour some liquid from a bottle , and lay it with a gentle hand upon the sore . the three - legged table have be draw close to the bedside , and on it there be two bottle . this be one . it be not so far off , but that , follow she hand with he eye , could read what be print on it in large letter . he turn of a deadly hue , and a sudden horror seem to fall upon he . 'I will stay here , , ' say , quietly resume she seat , ' till the bell go . ' Tis to be do again at three , and then she may be leave till morning . ' ' but thy rest agen to - morrow 's work , my dear . ' 'I sleep sound last night . I can wake many night , when I be put to it . ' Tis thou who be in need of rest - so white and tired . try to sleep in the chair there , while I watch . thou hadst no sleep last night , I can well believe . to -morrow 's work be far harder for thee than for I . ' he hear the thundering and surge out of door , and it seem to he as if he late angry mood be go about try to get at he . she have cast it out ; she would keep it out ; he trust to she to defend he from himself . ' she do not know I , ; she just drowsily mutter and stare . I have speak to she time and again , but she do not notice ! ' Tis as well so . when she come to she right mind once more , I shall have do what I can , and she never the wiser . ' ' how long , , be ot look for , that she will be so ? ' ' Doctor say she would haply come to she mind to - morrow . ' he eye fall again on the bottle , and a tremble pass over he , cause he to shiver in every limb . she think he be chill with the wet . ' no ,' he say , ' it be not that . he have have a fright . ' 'a fright ? ' 'Ay , ay ! come in . when I be walk . when I be think . when I - ' it seize he again ; and he stand up , hold by the mantel - shelf , as he press he dank cold hair down with a hand that shook as if it be palsy . ' ! ' she be come to he , but he stretch out he arm to stop she . ' no ! do not , please ; do not . let I see thee sete by the bed . let I see thee , a ' so good , and so forgive . let I see thee as I see thee when I coom in . I can never see thee better than so . never , never , never ! ' he have a violent fit of trembling , and then sunk into he chair . after a time he controlle himself , and , rest with a elbow on one knee , and he head upon that hand , could look towards . see across the dim candle with he moistened eye , she look as if she have a glory shining round she head . he could have believe she have . he do believe it , as the noise without shook the window , rattle at the door below , and go about the house clamouring and lamenting . ' when she get better , , ' ti to be hope she will leave thee to thyself again , and do thee no more hurt . anyways we will hope so now . and now I shall keep silence , for I want thee to sleep . ' he close he eye , more to please she than to rest he weary head ; but , by slow degree as he listen to the great noise of the wind , he cease to hear it , or it change into the working of he loom
loom , or even into the voice of the day ( he own include ) say what have be really say . even this imperfect consciousness fade away at last , and he dream a long , trouble dream . he think that he , and some one on whom he heart have long be set - but she be not , and that surprise he , even in the midst of he imaginary happiness - stand in the church be marry . while the ceremony be perform , and while he recognize among the witness some whom he know to be live , and many whom he know to be dead , darkness come on , succeed by the shining of a tremendous light . it break from one line in the table of commandment at the altar , and illuminate the building with the word . they be sound through the church , too , as if there be voice in the fiery letter . upon this , the whole appearance before he and around he change , and nothing be left as it have be , but himself and the clergyman . they stand in the daylight before a crowd so vast , that if all the people in the world could have be bring together into one space , they could not have look , he think , more numerous ; and they all abhor he , and there be not one pitying or friendly eye among the million that be fasten on he face . he stand on a raise stage , under he own loom ; and , look up at the shape the loom take , and hear the burial service distinctly read , he know that he be there to suffer death . in a instant what he stand on fell below he , and he be go . - out of what mystery he come back to he usual life , and to place that he know , he be unable to consider ; but he be back in those place by some mean , and with this condemnation upon he , that he be never , in this world or the next , through all the unimaginable ag of eternity , to look on 's face or hear she voice . wandere to and fro , unceasingly , without hope , and in search of he know not what ( he only know that he be doom to seek it ) , he be the subject of a nameless , horrible dread , a mortal fear of one particular shape which everything take . whatsoever he look at , grow into that form sooner or later . the object of he miserable existence be to prevent its recognition by any one among the various people he encounter . hopeless labour ! if he lead they out of room where it be , if he shut up drawer and closet where it stand , if he draw the curiious from place where he know it to be secret , and get they out into the street , the very chimney of the mills assume that shape , and round they be the printed word . the wind be blow again , the rain be beat on the house - top , and the larger spaces through which he have stray contract to the four wall of he room . save that the fire have die out , it be as he eye have close upon it . seem to have fall into a doze , in the chair by the bed . she sit wrap in she shawl , perfectly still . the table stand in the same place , close by the bedside , and on it , in its real proportion and appearance , be the shape so often repeat . he think he see the curtain move . he look again , and he be sure it move . he see a hand come forth and grope about a little . then the curtain move more perceptibly , and the woman in the bed put it back , and sit up . with she woful eye , so haggard and wild , so heavy and large , she look all round the room , and pass the corner where he sleep in he chair . she eye return to that corner , and she put she hand over them as a shade , while she look into it . again they go all round the room , scarcely heed if at all , and return to that corner . he think , as she once more shade they - not so much look at he , as look for he with a brutish instinct that he be there - that no single trace be leave in those debauch feature , or in the mind that go along with they , of the woman he have marry eighteen year before . but that he have see she come to this by inch , he never could have believe she to be the same . all this time , as if a spell be on he , he be motionless and powerless , except to watch she . Stupidly do , or commun with she incapable self about nothing , she sit for a little while with she hand at she ear , and she head rest on they . presently , she resume she star round the room . and now , for the first time , she eye stop at the table with the bottle on it . Straightway she turn she eye back to he corner , with the defiance of last night , and move very cautiously and softly , stretch out she greedy hand . she draw a mug into the bed , and sit for a while consider which of the two bottle she should
should choose . finally , she lay she insensate grasp upon the bottle that have swift and certain death in it , and , before he eye , pull out the cork with she tooth . dream or reality , he have no voice , nor have he power to stir . if this be real , and she allot time be not yet come , wake , , wake ! she think of that , too . she look at , and very slowly , very cautiously , pour out the contents . the dratch be at she lip . a moment and she would be past all help , let the whole world wake and come about she with its utmost power . but in that moment start up with a suppress cry . the creature struggle , strike she , seize she by the hair ; but have the cup . break out of he chair . ' , be I wakin ' or dreamin ' this dreadfo ' night ? ' ''Tis all well , . I have be asleep , myself . ' Tis near three . Hush ! I hear the bell . ' the wind bring the sound of the church clock to the window . they listen , and it strike three . look at she , see how pale she be , note the disorder of she hair , and the red mark of finger on she forehead , and feel assure that he sense of sight and hearing have be awake . she hold the cup in she hand even now . 'I think it must be near three , ' she say , calmly pour from the cup into the basin , and steep the linen as before . 'I be thankful I stay ! ' Tis do now , when I have put this on . there ! and now she be quiet again . the few drop in the basin I will pour away , for ' ttis bad stuff to leave about , though ever so little of it . ' as she speak , she drain the basin into the ash of the fire , and break the bottle on the hearth . she have nothing to do , then , but to cover herself with she shawl before go out into the wind and rain . ' thou 'lt let I walk wi's thee at this hour , ? ' 'no , . ' Tis but a minute , and I be home . ' ' thou 'rt not fearfo ' ;' he say it in a low voice , as they go out at the door ; 'too leave I alone wi' she ! ' as she look at he , say , ' ? ' he go down on he knee before she , on the poor mean stair , and put a end of she shawl to he lip . ' thou be a angel . thee , bless thee ! ' am , as I have tell thee , , thy poor friend . angel be not like I . between they , and a work woman fu ' of fault , there be a deep gulf set . my little sister be among they , but she be change . ' she raise she eye for a moment as she say the word ; and then they fall again , in all they gentleness and mildness , on he face . ' thou changest I from bad to good . thou mak 'st I humbly wishfo ' to be more like thee , and fearfo ' to lose thee when this life be ower , and a ' the muddle clear awa ' . thou 'rt a angel ; it may be , thou hast save my soul alive ! ' she look at he , on he knee at she foot , with she shawl still in he hand , and the reproof on she lip di away when she see the working of he face . 'I coom home desp'rate . I coom home wi'out a hope , and mad wi's think that when I say a word of ' complaint I be reckon a unreasonable . I tell thee I have have a fright . it be the poison - bottle on table . I never hurt a livin ' creetur ; but happenin ' so suddenly upon 't , I thowt , " how can I say what I might ha ' do to myseln , or she , or both ! "' she put she two hand on he mouth , with a face of terror , to stop he from say more . he catch they in he unoccupied hand , and hold they , and still clasp the border of she shawl , say hurriedly : ' but I see thee , , sete by the bed . I ha ' see thee , aw this night . in my troublous sleep I ha ' know thee still to be there . Evermore I will see thee there . I nevermore will see she or think of ' she , but thou shal be beside she . I nevermore will see or think of ' anything that anger I , but thou , so much better than I , shalt be by thg side o not . and so I will try t ' look t ' th ' time , and so I will try t ' trust t ' th ' time , when thou and I at last shall walk together far awa's , beyond the deep gulf , in thg country where thy little sister be . ' he kiss the border of she shawl again , and let she go . she bade he good night in a broken voice , and go out into the street .
. the wind blow from the quarter where the day would soon appear , and still blow strongly . it have clear the sky before it , and the rain have spend itself or travel elsewhere , and the star be bright . he stand bare - head in the road , watch she quick disappearance . as the shining star be to the heavy candle in the window , so be , in the rug fancy of this man , to the common experience of he life . - the great time go on in like its own machinery : so much material wrotch up , so much fuel consum , so many power wear out , so much money make . but , less inexorable than iron , steal , and brass , it bring it be varie season even into that wilderness of smoke and brick , and make the only stand that ever be make in the place against its direful uniformity . ' be become , ' say Gradgrind , ' almost a young woman . ' time , with he innumerable horse - power , work away , not mind what anybody say , and presently turn out young a foot taller than when he father have last take particular notice of he . ' be become , ' say , ' almost a young man . ' pass on in the mill , while he father be think about it , and there he stand in a long - tail coat and a stiff shirt -collar . ' really , ' say , ' the period have arrive when ought to go to . ' time , sticke to he , pass he on into 's , make he a inmate of 's house , necessitate the purchase of he first razor , and exercise he diligently in he calculation relative to number one . the same great manufacturer , always with a immense variety of work on hand , in every stage of development , pass onward in he mill , and work she up into a very pretty article indeed . 'i fear , , ' say , ' that you continuance at the school any longer would be useless . ' 'I be afraid it would , sir , ' answer with a curtsey . 'I can not disguise from you , , ' say Gradgrind , knitt he brow , ' that the result of you probation there have disappoint I ; have greatly disappoint I . you have not acquire , under and , anything like that amount of exact knowledge which I look for . you be extremely deficient in you facts . you acquaintance with figure be very limited . you be altogether backward , and below the mark . ' 'I be sorry , sir , ' she return ; ' but I know it be quite true . yet I have try hard , sir . ' ' yes , ' say , ' yes , I believe you have try hard ; I have observe you , and I can find no fault in that respect . ' ' thank you , sir . I have think sometimes ;' Sissy very timid here ; ' that perhaps I try to learn too much , and that if I have ask to be allow to try a little less , I might have - ' ' no , , no , ' say , shak he head in he profoundest and most eminently practical way . ' no . the course you pursue , you pursue accord to the system - the system - and there be no more to be say about it . I can only suppose that the circumstance of you early life be too unfavourable to the development of you reason power , and that we begin too late . still , as I have say already , I be disappointed . ' 'I wish I could have make a better acknowledgment , sir , of you kindness to a poor forlorn girl who have no claim upon you , and of you protection of she . ' ' do not shed tear , ' say . ' do not shed tear . I do not complain of you . you be a affectionate , earnest , good young woman - and - and we must make that do . ' ' thank you , sir , very much , ' say , with a grateful curtsey . ' you be useful to , and ( in a generally pervading way ) you be serviceable in the family also ; so I understand from , and , indeed , so I have observe myself . I therefore hope , ' say , ' that you can make yourself happy in those relation . ' 'I should have nothing to wish , sir , if - ' 'I understand you , ' say ; ' you still refer to you father . I have hear from that you still preserve that bottle . well ! if you training in the science of arrive at exact result have be more successful , you would have be wiser on these point . I will say no more . ' he really like too well to have a contempt for she ; otherwise he hold she calculate power in such very slight estimation that he must have fall upon that conclusion . somehow or other , he have become possess by a idea that there be something in this girl which could hardly be set forth in a tabular form . she capacity of definition might be easily state at a very low figure , she mathematical knowledge at nothing ; yet he be not sure that if he have be require , for example , to tick she off into column in a parliamentary
parliamentary return , he would have quite know how to divide she . in some stage of he manufacture of the human fabric , the processis of time be very rapid . yong and be both at such a stage of they work up , these change be effect in a year or two ; while himself seem stationary in he course , and underwent no alteration . except one , which be apart from he necessary progress through the mill . hustle he into a little noisy and rather dirty machinery , in a by - comer , and make he of for : one of the respecte member for ounce weight and measure , one of the representative of the multiplication table , one of the deaf honourable gentleman , dumb honourable gentleman , blind honourable gentleman , lame honourable gentleman , dead honourable gentleman , to every other consideration . else wherefore live we in a land , eighteen hundred and odd year after we master ? all this while , have be pass on , so quiet and reserve , and so much give to watch the bright ash at twilight as they fall into the grate , and become extinct , that from the period when she father have say she be almost a young woman - which seem but yesterday - she have scarcely attract he notice again , when he find she quite a young woman . ' quite a young woman , ' say , musing . ' dear I ! ' after this discovery , he become more thoughtful than usual for several day , and see much engross by one subject . on a certain night , when he be go out , and come to bid he good - bye before he departure - as he be not to be home until late and she would not see he again until the morning - he hold she in he arm , look at she in he kindest manner , and say : ' my dear Louisa , you be a woman ! ' she answer with the old , quick , search look of the night when she be find at the ; then cast down she eye . ' yes , father . ' ' my dear , ' say , ' I must speak with you alone and seriously . come to I in my room after breakfast to - morrow , will you ? ' ' yes , father . ' ' you hand be rather cold , . be you not well ? ' ' quite well , father . ' ' and cheerful ? ' she look at he again , and smile in she peculiar manner . 'I be as cheerful , father , as I usually be , or usually have be . ' ' that be well , ' say . so , he kiss she and go away ; and return to the serene apartment of the haircutting character , and lean she elbow on she hand , look again at the short - lived spark that so soon subsid into ash . ' be you there , ? ' say she brother , look in at the door . he be quite a young gentleman of pleasure now , and not quite a prepossessing one . ' dear ,' she answer , rise and embrace he , ' how long it be since you have be to see I ! ' ' why , I have be otherwise engage , Loo , in the evening ; and in the daytime old have be keep I at it rather . but I touch he up with you when he come it too strong , and so we preserve a understanding . I say ! have father say anything particular to you to - day or yesterday , ? ' 'no , . but he tell I to - night that he wish to do so in the morning . ' 'Ah ! that be what I mean , ' say . ' do you know where he be to - night ? ' - with a very deep expression . ' no . ' ' then I will tell you . he be with old . they be have a regular confab together up at the . why at the , do you think ? well , I will tell you again . to keep . Sparsit 's ears as far off as possible , I expect . ' with she hand upon she brother 's shoulder , still stand look at the fire . she brother glance at she face with greater interest than usual , and , encircle she waist with he arm , draw she coaxingly to he . ' you be very fond of I , a not you , ? ' ' indeed I be , , though you do let such long interval go by without come to see I . ' ' well , sister of mine , ' say , ' when you say that , you be near my thought . we might be so much oftener together - might not we ? always together , almost - might not we ? it would do I a great deal of good if you be to make up you mind to I know what , . it would be a splendid thing for I . it would be uncommonly jolly ! ' she thoughtfulness baffle he cunning scrutiny . he could make nothing of she face . he press she in he arm , and kiss she cheek . she return the kiss , but still look at the fire . 'I say , Loo ! I think I would come , and just hind to you what be go on : though I suppose you would most likely guess , even if
if you do not know . I can not stay , because I be engage to some fellows to - night . you will not forget how fond you be of I ? ' 'no , dear , I will not forget . ' ' that be a capital girl , ' say . ' good - bye , . ' she give he a affectionate good - night , and go out with he to the door , whence the fire of could be see , make the distance lurid . she stand there , look steadfastly towards they , and listen to he departing step . they retreate quickly , as glad to get away from ; and she stand there yet , when he be gone and all be quiet . it seem as if , first in she own fire within the house , and then in the fiery haze without , she try to discover what kind of woon , that greatest and longest - establish Spinner of all , would weave from the thread he have already spun into a woman . but he factory be a secret place , he work be noiseless , and he hand be mute . - and do not take after , he room be quite a blue chamber in its abundance of blue book . whatever they could prove ( which be usually anything you like ) , they prove there , in a army constantly strengthen by the arrival of new recruit . in that charme apartment , the most complicated social question be cast up , get into exact total , and finally settle - if those concerned could only have be bring to know it . as if a astronomical observatory should be make without any window , and the astronomer withing should arrange the starry universe solly by pen , ink , and paper , so , in he Observatory ( and there be many like it ) , have no need to cast a eye upon the teeming myriad of human being around he , but could settle all they destiny on a slate , and wipe out all they tear with one dirty little bit of sponge . to this Observatory , then : a stern room , with a deadly statistical clock in it , which measure every second with a beat like a rap upon a coffin - lid ; repair on the appointed morning . a window look towards ; and when she sit down near she father 's table , she see the high chimney and the long tract of smoke loom in the heavy distance gloomily . ' my dear , ' say she father , ' I prepare you last night to give I you serious attention in the conversation we be now go to have together . you have be so well train , and you do , I be happy to say , so much justice to the education you have receive , that I have perfect confidence in you good sense . you be not impulsive , you be not romantic , you be accustom to view everything from the strong dispassionate ground of reason and calculation . from that ground alone , I know you will view and consider what I be go to communicate . ' he wait , as if he would have be glad that she say something . but she say never a word . ' , my dear , you be the subject of a proposal of marriage that have be make to I . ' again he wait , and again she answer not one word . this so far surprise he , as to induce he gently to repeat , 'a proposal of marriage , my dear . ' to which she return , without any visible emotion whatever : 'I hear you , father . I be attend , I assure you . ' ' well ! ' say , break into a smile , after be for the moment at a loss , ' you be even more dispassionate than I expect , . or , perhaps , you be not unprepared for the announcement I have it in charge to make ? ' 'I can not say that , father , until I hear it . prepared or unprepared , I wish to hear it all from you . I wish to hear you state it to I , father . ' strange to relate , be not so collect at this moment as he daughter be . he take a paper - knife in he hand , turn it over , laid it down , take it up again , and even then have to look along the blade of it , consider how to go on . ' what you say , my dear , be perfectly reasonable . I have undertake then to let you know that - in short , that have inform I that he have long watch you progress with particular interest and pleasure , and have long hope that the time might ultimately arrive when he should offer you he hand in marriage . that time , to which he have so long , and certainly with great constancy , look forward , be now come . have make he proposal of marriage to I , and have entreate I to make it know to you , and to express he hope that you will take it into you favourable consideration . ' Silence between they . the deadly statistical clock very hollow . the distant smoke very black and heavy . ' , ' say , 'do you think I love ? ' be extremely discomfit by this unexpected question . ' well , my child , ' he return , - really - can not take upon myself to say . ' '
' Father , ' pursue in exactly the same voice as before , 'do you ask I to love ? ' 'my dear , no . no . I ask nothing . ' ' Father , ' she still pursue , ' do ask I to love he ? ' ' really , my dear , ' say , ' it be difficult to answer you question - ' ' to answer it , yes or no , father ? ' certainly , my dear . because ;' here be something to demonstrate , and it set he up again ; ' because the reply depend so materially , , on the sense in which we use the expression . now , do not do you the injustice , and do not do himself the injustice , of pretending to anything fanciful , fantastic , or ( I be use synonymous term ) sentimental . would have see you grow up under he eye , to very little purpose , if he could so far forget what be due to you good sense , not to say to he , as to address you from any such ground . therefore , perhaps the expression itself - I merely suggest this to you , my dear - may be a little misplaced . ' ' what would you advise I to use in its stead , father ? ' ' why , my dear , ' say , completely recover by this time , ' I would advise you ( since you ask I ) to consider this question , as you have be accustom to consider every other question , simply as one of tangible fact . the ignorant and the giddy may embarrass such subject with irrelevant fancie , and other absurdity that have no existence , properly view - really no existence - but it be no compliment to you to say , that you know better . now , what be the fact of this case ? you be , we will say in round number , twenty year of age ; be , we will say in round number , fifty . there be some disparity in you respective year , but in you means and position there be none ; on the contrary , there be a great suitability . then the question arise , be this one disparity sufficient to operate as a bar to such a marriage ? in consider this question , it be not unimportant to take into account the statistic of marriage , so far as they have yet be obtain , in and . I find , on reference to the figure , that a large proportion of these marriage be contract between party of very unequal age , and that the elder of these contracting party be , in rather more than three - fourt of these instance , the bridegroom . it be remarkable as show the wide prevalence of this law , that among the native of the british possession in , also in a considerable part of , and among the Calmuck of , the best means of computation yet furnish we by traveller , yield similar result . the disparity I have mention , therefore , almost cease to be disparity , and ( virtually ) all but disappear . ' ' what do you recommend , father , ' ask , she reserve composure not in the least affect by these gratify result , ' that I should substitute for the term I use just now ? for the misplaced expression ? ' ' , ' return she father , ' it appear to I that nothing can be plainer . Confin yourself rigidly to , the question of you state to yourself be : do ask I to marry he ? yes , he do . the sole remain question then be : shall I marry he ? I think nothing can be plainer than that ? ' ' shall I marry he ? ' repeat , with great deliberation . ' precisely . and it be satisfactory to I , as you father , my dear , to know that you do not come to the consideration of that question with the previous habits of mind , and habits of life , that belong to many young woman . ' ' no , father , ' she return , 'I do not . ' 'I now leave you to judge for yourself , ' say . 'I have state the case , as such case be usually state among practical mind ; I have state it , as the case of you mother and myself be state in its time . the rest , my dear , be for you to decide . ' from the begin , she have sit look at he fixedly . as he now lean back in he chair , and bend he deep - set eye upon she in he turn , perhaps he might have see one wave moment in she , when she be impell to throw herself upon he breast , and give he the pent - up confidence of she heart . but , to see it , he must have overleape at a bound the artificial barriers he have for many year be erect , between himself and all those subtle essences of humanity which will elude the utmost cunning of algebra until the last trumpet ever to be sound shall blow even algebra to wreck . the barrier be too many and too high for such a leap . with he unbending , utilitarian , matter - of - fact face , he harden she again ; and the moment shot away into the plumbless depth of the past , to mingle with all the lost opportunity that be drown there . remove she eye from he , she sit
sit so long look silently towards the town , that he say , at length : ' be you consult the chimney of the , ? ' ' there seem to be nothing there but languid and monotonous smoke . yet when the night come , burst out , father ! ' she answer , turn quickly . ' of course I know that , . I do not see the application of the remark . ' to do he justice he do not , at all . she pass it away with a slight motion of she hand , and concentrate she attention upon he again , say , ' Father , I have often think that life be very short . ' - this be so distinctly one of he subject that he interpose . ' it be short , no doubt , my dear . still , the average duration of human life be prove to have increase of late year . the calculation of various life assurance and annuity office , among other figure which can not go wrong , have establish the fact . ' 'i speak of my own life , father . ' 'o indeed ? still , ' say , 'I need not point out to you , , that it be govern by the law which govern live in the aggregate . ' ' while it last , I would wish to do the little I can , and the little I be fit for . what do it matter ? ' seem rather at a loss to understand the last four word ; reply , ' how , matter ? what matter , my dear ? ' ' , ' she go on in a steady , straight way , without regard this , ' ask I to marry he . the question I have to ask myself be , shall I marry he ? that be so , father , be it not ? you have tell I so , father . have you not ? ' ' certainly , my dear . ' ' let it be so . since like to take I thus , I be satisfied to accept he proposal . tell he , father , as soon as you please , that this be my answer . repeat it , word for word , if you can , because I should wish he to know what I say . ' ' it be quite right , my dear , ' retort she father approvingly , 'too be exact . I will observe you very proper request . have you any wish in reference to the period of you marriage , my child ? ' ' none , father . what do it matter ! ' have draw he chair a little nearer to she , and take she hand . but , she repetition of these word seem to strike with some little discord on he ear . he pause to look at she , and , still hold she hand , say : ' Louisa , I have not consider it essential to ask you one question , because the possibility imply in it appear to I to be too remote . but perhaps I ought to do so . you have never entertain in secret any other proposal ? ' ' Father , ' she return , almost scornfully , ' what other proposal can have be make to I ? whom have I see ? where have I be ? what be my heart 's experience ? ' 'My dear , ' return , reassured and satisfied . ' you correct I justly . I merely wish to discharge my duty . ' ' what do I know , father , ' say in she quiet manner , 'or taste and fancie ; of aspiration and affection ; of all that part of my nature in which such light thing might have be nourished ? what escape have I have from problem that could be demonstrate , and reality that could be grasp ? ' as she say it , she unconsciously close she hand , as if upon a solid object , and slowly open it as though she be release dust or ash . ' my dear , ' assent she eminently practical parent , ' quite true , quite true . ' ' why , father , ' she pursue , ' what a strange question to ask I ! the baby - preference that even I have hear of as common among child , have never have its innocent resting - place in my breast . you have be so careful of I , that I never have a child 's heart . you have train I so well , that I never dream a child 's dream . you have deal so wisely with I , father , from my cradle to this hour , that I never have a child 's belief or a child 's fear . ' be quite move by he success , and by this testimony to it . ' my dear , ' say he , ' you abundantly repay my care . kiss I , my dear girl . ' so , he daughter kiss he . Detain she in he embrace , he say , ' I may assure you now , my favourite child , that I be make happy by the sound decision at which you have arrive . be a very remarkable man ; and what little disparity can be say to exist between you - if any - be more than counterbalance by the tone you mind have acquire . it have always be my object so to educate you , as that you might , while still in you early youth , be ( if I may so express myself ) almost any age
age . kiss I once more , . now , let we go and find you mother . ' accordingly , they go down to the drawing - room , where the esteem lady with no nonsense about she , be recumbent as usual , while work beside she . she give some feeble sign of return animation when they enter , and presently the faint transparency be present in a sitting attitude . ' . , ' say she husband , who have wait for the achievement of this feat with some impatience , ' allow I to present to you . ' 'Oh ! ' say , 'so you have settle it ! well , I be sure I hope you health may be good , ; for if you head begin to split as soon as you be marry , which be the case with mine , I can not consider that you be to be envy , though I have no doubt you think you be , as all girl do . however , I give you joy , my dear - and I hope you may now turn all you ological study to good account , I be sure I do ! I must give you a kiss of congratulation , ; but do not touch my right shoulder , for there 's something run down it all day long . and now you see , ' whimper , adjust she shawl after the affectionate ceremony , 'I shall be worry myself , morning , noon , and night , to know what I be to call he ! ' ' . Gradgrind , ' say she husband , solemnly , ' what do you mean ? ' ' whatever I be to call he , , when he be marry to ! I must call he something . it be impossible , ' say Gradgrind , with a mingled sense of politeness and injury , 'to be constantly address he and never give he a name . I can not call he , for the name be insupportable to I . you yourself would not hear of , you very well know . be I to call my own son - in - law , ! not , I believe , unless the time have arrive when , as a invalid , I be to be trample upon by my relation . then , what be I to call he ! ' nobody present have any suggestion to offer in the remarkable emergency , . depart this life for the time be , after deliver the follow codicil to she remark already execute : ' as to the wedding , all I ask , , be , - and I ask it with a fluttering in my chest , which actually extend to the soles of my foot , - that it may take place soon . otherwise , I know it be one of those subject I shall never hear the last of . ' when have present , have suddenly turn she head , and look , in , in pity , in sorrow , in doubt , in a multitude of emotion , towards . have know it , and see it , without look at she . from that moment she be impassive , proud and cold - hold at a distance - change to she altogether . - and 's first disquietude on hearing of he happiness , be occasion by the necessity of impart it to . he could not make up he mind how to do that , or what the consequence of the step might be . whether she would instantly depart , bag and baggage , to Lady Scadgers , or would positively refuse to budge from the premise ; whether she would be plaintive or abusive , tearful or tear ; whether she would break she heart , or break the look - glass ; could not all foresee . however , as it must be do , he have no choice but to do it ; so , after attempt several letter , and fail in they all , he resolve to do it by word of mouth . on he way home , on the evening he set aside for this momentous purpose , he take the precaution of step into a chemist 's shop and buy a bottle of the very strongest smell - salt . ' by ! ' say , ' if she take it in the fainting way , I will have the skin off she nose , at all event ! ' but , in spite of be thus forearm , he enter he own house with anything but a courageous air ; and appear before the object of he misgiving , like a dog who be conscious of come direct from the pantry . ' good evening , ! ' ' good evening , ma 'am , good evening . ' he draw up he chair , and . draw back hers , as who should say , ' you fireside , sir . I freely admit it . it be for you to occupy it all , if you think proper . ' ' do not go to the , ma 'am ! ' say . ' thank you , sir , ' say , and return , though short of she former position . sit look at she , as , with the point of a stiff , sharp pair of scissors , she pick out hole for some inscrutable ornamental purpose , in a piece of cambric . a operation which , take in connexion with the bushy eyebrow and the nose , suggest with some liveliness the idea of a hawk engage upon the eyes of a tough little bird . she be so steadfastly occupy , that many minute elapse before she
she look up from she work ; when she do so bespeak she attention with a hitch of he head . ' , , ' say , put he hand in he pocket , and assure himself with he right hand that the cork of the little bottle be ready for use , 'I have no occasion to say to you , that you be not only a lady born and breed , but a devilish sensible woman . ' ' ,' return the lady , ' this be indeed not the first time that you have honoure I with similar expression of you good opinion . ' ' Mr . Sparsit , ma 'am , ' say , 'I be go to astonish you . ' ' yes , sir ? ' return , interrogatively , and in the most tranquil manner possible . she generally wear mitten , and she now lay down she work , and smoothe those mitten . 'I be go , ma 'am , ' say , 'to marry 's daughter . ' ' yes , sir , ' return . 'I hope you may be happy , . oh , indeed I hope you may be happy , sir ! ' and she say it with such great condescension as well as with such great compassion for he , that , - far more disconcerted than if she have throw she workbox at the mirror , or swoon on the hearthrug , - corke up the smelling - salt tight in he pocket , and think , ' now confound this woman , who could have even guesse that she would take it in this way ! ' 'I wish with all my heart , sir , ' say . , in a highly superior manner ; somehow she seem , in a moment , to have establish a right to pity he ever afterwards ; ' that you may be in all respects very happy . ' ' well , ma 'am , ' return , with some resentment in he tone : which be clearly lowered , though in spite of himself , 'I be oblige to you . I hope I shall be . ' ' do you , sir ! ' say , with great affability . ' but naturally you do ; of course you do . ' a very awkward pause on 's part , succeed . sedately resume she work and occasionally give a small cough , which sound like the cough of conscious strength and forbearance . ' well , ma 'am , ' resume , ' under these circumstance , I imagine it would not be agreeable to a character like yours to remain here , though you would be very welcome here . ' 'Oh , dear no , sir , I could on no account think of that ! ' shook she head , still in she highly superior manner , and a little change the small cough - coughing now , as if the spirit of prophecy rose within she , but have better be coughe down . ' however , ma 'am , ' say , ' there be apartment at the , where a born and breed lady , as keeper of the place , would be rather a catch than otherwise ; and if the same term - ' 'I beg you pardon , sir . you be so good as to promise that you would always substitute the phrase , annual compliment . ' ' well , ma 'am , annual compliment . if the same annual compliment would be acceptable there , why , I see nothing to part we , unless you do . ' ' , ' return . ' the proposal be like yourself , and if the position I shall assume at the be one that I could occupy without descende lower in the social scale - ' ' why , of course it be , ' say . ' if it be not , ma 'am , you do not suppose that I should offer it to a lady who have move in the society you have move in . not that I care for such society , you know ! but you do . ' ' , you be very considerate . ' ' you will have you own private apartment , and you will have you coal and you candle , and all the rest of it , and you will have you maid to attend upon you , and you will have you light porter to protect you , and you will be what I take the liberty of consider precious comfortable , ' say . ' , ' rejoin , ' say no more . in yielding up my trust here , I shall not be free from the necessity of eat the bread of dependence :' she might have say the sweetbread , for that delicate article in a savoury brown sauce be she favourite supper : ' and I would rather receive it from you hand , than from any other . therefore , sir , I accept you offer gratefully , and with many sincere acknowledgment for past favour . and I hope , sir , ' say Sparsit , conclude in a impressively compassionate manner , ' I fondly hope that may be all you desire , and deserve ! ' nothing move from that position any more . it be in vain for to bluster or to assert himself in any of he explosive way ; be resolve to have compassion on he , as a victim . she be polite , oblige , cheerful , hopeful ; but , the more polite , the more obliging , the more cheerful , the more hopeful , the more exemplary altogether , she ; the and , he . she have that tenderness for
for he melancholy fate , that he great red countenance use to break out into cold perspiration when she look at he . meanwhile the marriage be appoint to be solemnize in eight week ' time , and go every evening to as a accept wooer . love be make on these occasion in the form of bracelet ; and , on all occasion during the period of betrothal , take a manufacturing aspect . dress be make , jewellery be make , cake and gloves be make , settlement be make , and a extensive assortment of fact do appropriate honou to the contract . the business be all fact , from first to last . the do not go through any of those rosy performance , which foolish poet have ascribe to they at such time ; neither do the clock go any faster , or any slower , than at other season . the deadly statistical recorder in the observatory knock every second on the head as it be bear , and bury it with he accustom regularity . so the day come , as all other day come to people who will only stick to reason ; and when it come , there be marry in the church of the florid wooden leg - that popular order of architecture - of , to eldest daughter of of , for that borough . and when they be unit in holy matrimony , they go home to breakfast at aforesay . there be a improve party assembl on the auspicious occasion , who know what everything they have to eat and drink be make of , and how it be import or export , and in what quantity , and in what bottom , whether native or foreign , and all about it . the bridesmaid , down to little , be , in a intellectual point of view , fit helpmate for the calculating boy ; and there be no nonsense about any of the company . after breakfast , the bridegroom address they in the follow term : ' Lady and gentleman , I be of . since you have do my wife and myself the honour of drink we healt and happiness , I suppose I must acknowledge the same ; though , as you all know I , and know what I be , and what my extraction be , you will not expect a speech from a man who , when he see a post , say " that be a post , " and when he see a Pump , say " that be a Pump , " and be not to be get to call a Post of Pump , or a Pump a post , or either of they a Toothpick . if you want a speech this morning , my friend and father - in - law , , be a member of parliament , and you know where to get it . I be not you man . however , if I feel a little independent when I look around this table to - day , and reflect how little I think of marry 's daughter when I be a rag street - boy , who never wash he face unless it be at a pump , and that not oftener than once a fortnight , I hope I may be excuse . so , I hope you like my feel independent ; if you do not , I can not help it . I do feel independent . now I have mention , and you have mention , that I be this day marry to 's daughter . I be very glad to be so . it have long be my wish to be so . I have watch she bring - up , and I believe she be worthy of I . at the same time - not to deceive you - I believe I be worthy of she . so , I thank you , on both we part , for the good - will you have show towards we ; and the best wish I can give the unmarried part of the present company , be this : I hope every bachelor may find as good a wife as I have find . and I hope every spinster may find as good a husband as my wife have find . ' shortly after wich oration , as they be go on a nuptial trip to , in order that might take the opportunity of see how the hand get on in those part , and whether they , too , require to be feed with gold spoon ; the happy pair depart for the railroad . the bride , in pass down - stair , dress for she journey , find Tom wait for she - flush , either with he feeling , or the vinous part of the breakfast . ' what a game girl you be , to be such a first - rate sister , ! ' whisper . she cling to he as she should have clung to some far better nature that day , and be a little shaken in she reserve composure for the first time . ' 's quite ready , ' say . ' time 's up . good - bye ! I shall be on the look - out for you , when you come back . I say , my dear Loo ! a N't it uncommonly jolly now ! ' end of the the - I - effect in the Bank a sunny midsummer day . there be such a thing sometimes , even in . see from a distance in such weather , lay shroude in a haze of its own , which appear impervious to the sun 's ray . you only know the town be there , because you know there
there could have be no such sulky blotch upon the prospect without a town . a blur of soot and smoke , now confusedly tend this way , now that way , now aspire to the vault of , now murkily creepe along the earth , as the wind rose and fell , or change its quarter : a dense formless jumble , with sheet of cross light in it , that show nothing but mass of darkness :- Coketow in the distance be suggestive of itself , though not a brick of it could be see . the wonder be , it be there at all . it have be ruin so often , that it be amazing how it have borne so many shocks . surely there never be such fragile china - ware as that of which the miller of be make . handle they never so lightly , and they fall to piece with such ease that you might suspect they of have be flaw before . they be ruin , when they be require to send labour child to school ; they be ruin when inspector be appoint to look into they work ; they be ruin , when such inspector consider it doubtful whether they be quite justified in chopp people up with they machinery ; they be utterly undone , when it be hint that perhaps they need not always make quite so much smoke . besides 's gold spoon which be generally receive in , another prevalent fiction be very popular there . it take the form of a threat . whenever a felt he be ill - use - that be to say , whenever he be not leave entirely alone , and it be propose to hold he accountable for the consequence of any of he act - he be sure to come out with the awful menace , that he would ' sooner pitch he property into the . ' this have terrify the within a inch of he life , on several occasion . however , the Coketowner be so patriotic after all , that they never have pitch they property into the yet , but , on the contrary , have be kind enough to take mighty good care of it . so there it be , in the haze yonder ; and it increase and multiply . the street be hot and dusty on the summer day , and the sun be so bright that it even shine through the heavy vapour droop over , and could not be look at steadily . Stoker emerge from low underground doorway into factory yard , and sit on step , and post , and paling , wip they swarthy visage , and contemplate coal . the whole town seem to be fry in oil . there be a stifling smell of hot oil everywhere . the steam - engine shone with it , the dress of the hand be soile with it , the mill throughout they many story ooze and trickle it . the atmosphere of those Fairy palace be like the breath of the simoom : and they inhabitant , waste with heat , toil languidly in the desert . but no temperature make the melancholy mad elephant more mad or more sane . they wearisome head go up and down at the same rate , in hot weather and cold , wet weather and dry , fair weather and foul . the measure motion of they shadows on the wall , be the substitute have to show for the shadows of rustling wood ; while , for the summer hum of insect , it could offer , all the year round , from the dawn of to the night of , the whirr of shaft and wheel . Drowsily they whir all through this sunny day , make the passenger more sleepy and more hot as he pass the humming wall of the mill . sun -blind , and sprinkling of water , a little cool the main street and the shop ; but the mill , and the court and alley , bake at a fierce heat . down upon the river that be black and thick with dye , some Coketown boy who be at large - a rare sight there - row a crazy boat , which make a spumous track upon the water as it jog along , while every dip of a oar stir up vile smell . but the sun itself , however beneficent , generally , be less kind to Coketow than hard frost , and rarely look intently into any of its closer region without engender more death than life . so do the eye of heaven itself become a evil eye , when incapable or sordid hand be interpose between it and the thing it look upon to bless . sit in she afternoon apartment at the , on the shadier side of the fry street . -hour be over : and at that period of the day , in warm weather , she usually embellish with she genteel presence , a managerial board - room over the public office . she own private sitting - room be a story higher , at the window of which post of observation she be ready , every morning , to greet , as he come across the road , with the sympathizing recognition appropriate to a victim . he have be marry now a year ; and . Sparsit have never release he from she determined pity a moment . the offer no violence to the wholesome monotony of the town . it be another red brick house , with black outside shutter , green inside blinds , a black street - door up two white step , a brazen door - plate , and a brazen door - handle full stop . it be a size larger than
than 's house , as other house be from a size to half - a - dozen size smaller ; in all other particular , it be strictly accord to pattern . be conscious that by come in the evening - tide among the desk and write implement , she she a feminine , not to say also aristocratic , grase upon the office . seat , with she needlework or netting apparatus , at the window , she have a self - laudatory sense of correcting , by she ladylike deportment , the rude business aspect of the place . with this impression of she interesting character upon she , Sparsit consider herself , in some sort , the . the townspeople who , in they passing and repasse , see she there , regard she as the keep watch over the treasure of the mine . what those treasure be , . Sparsit know as little as they do . gold and silver coin , precious paper , secret that if divulge would bring vague destruction upon vague person ( generally , however , people whom she dislike ) , be the chief item in she ideal catalogue thereof . for the rest , she know that after office - hour , she reign supreme over all the office furniture , and over a lock - up iron room with three lock , against the door of which strong chamber the light porter lay he head every night , on a truckle bed , that disappear at cockcrow . further , she be lady paramount over certain vault in the basement , sharply spike off from communication with the predatory world ; and over the relic of the current day 's work , consist of blot of ink , wear - out pens , fragment of wafer , and scrap of paper torn so small , that nothing interest could ever be decipher on they when try . Lastly , she be guardian over a little armoury of cutlass and carbine , array in vengeful order above one of the official chimney - piece ; and over that respectable tradition never to be separate from a place of business claim to be wealthy - a row of fire - bucket - vessel calculate to be of no physical utility on any occasion , but observe to exercise a fine moral influence , almost equal to bullion , on most beholder . a deaf serve - woman and the light porter complete 's empire . the deaf serve - woman be rumoure to be wealthy ; and a say had for year go about among the lower order of , that she would be murder some night when the be shut , for the sake of she money . it be generally consider , indeed , that she have be due some time , and ought to have fall long ago ; but she have keep she life , and she situation , with a ill - condition tenacity that occasion much offence and disappointment . 's tea be just set for she on a pert little table , with its tripod of leg in a attitude , which she insinuate after office -hour , into the company of the stern , leathern - topped , long board - table that bestrode the middle of the room . the light porter place the tea - tray on it , knuckl he forehead as a form of homage . ' thank you , , ' say . ' thank you , ma 'am , ' return the light porter . he be a very light porter indeed ; as light as in the day when he blinkingly define a horse , for girl number twenty . ' all be shut up , ? ' say . ' all be shut up , ma'am . ' ' and what , ' say , pour out she tea , 'i the news of the day ? anything ? ' ' well , ma 'am , I can not say that I have hear anything particular . we people be a bad lot , ma 'am ; but that be no news , unfortunately . ' ' what be the restless wretch do now ? ' ask . ' merely go on in the old way , ma 'am . , and leagu , and engage to stand by one another . ' ' it be much to be regret , ' say Sparsit , make she nose more and she eyebrow more Coriolanian in the strength of she severity , ' that the united master allow of any such class - combination . ' ' yes , ma'am , ' say . ' be unit themselves , they ought one and all to set they face against employ any man who be united with any other man , ' say . ' they have do that , ma 'am , ' return ; ' but it rather fell through , ma'am . ' 'I do not pretend to understand these thing , ' say , with dignity , 'my lot have be signally cast in a widly different sphere ; and , as a Powler , be also quite out of the pale of any such dissension . I only know that these people must be conquer , and that it be high time it be do , once for all . ' ' yes , ma'am , ' return , with a demonstration of great respect for 's oracular authority . ' you could not put it clearer , I be sure , ma'am . ' as this be he usual hour for have a little confidential chat with , and as he have already catch she eye and see that she be go to ask he something , he make a pretence of arrange the rulers , inkstand , and so
so forth , while that lady go on with she tea , glance through the open window , down into the street . ' have it be a busy day , ? ' ask . ' not a very busy day , my lady . about a average day . ' he now and then slide into my lady , instead of ma 'am , as a involuntary acknowledgment of 's personal dignity and claim to reverence . ' the clerk , ' say . Sparsit , carefully brush a imperceptible crumb of bread and butter from she left - hand mitten , ' be trustworthy , punctual , and industrious , of course ? ' ' yes , ma 'am , pretty fair , ma 'am . with the usual exception . ' he hold the respectable office of general spy and informer in the establishment , for which volunteer service he receive a present at , over and above he weekly wage . he have grow into a extremely clear - head , cautious , prudent young man , who be safe to rise in the world . he mind be so exactely regulate , that he have no affections or passion . all he proceedings be the result of the nicest and coldest calculation ; and it be not without cause that . Sparsit habitually observe of he , that he be a young man of the steadiest principle she have ever kny . have satisfie himself , on he father 's death , that he mother have a right of settlement in , this excellent young economist have assert that right for she with such a steadfast adherence to the principle of the case , that she have be shut up in the workhouse ever since . it must be admit that he allow she half a pound of tea a year , which be weak in he : first , because all gift have a inevitable tendency to pauperise the recipient , and secondly , because he only reasonable transaction in that commodity would have be to buy it for as little as he could possibly give , and sell it for as much as he could possibly get ; it have be clearly ascertain by philosopher that in this be comprise the whole duty of man - not a part of man 's duty , but the whole . ' pretty fair , ma 'am . with the usual exception , ma 'am , ' repeat . 'Ah - h ! ' say , shak she head over she tea - cup , and take a long gulp . ' , ma'am , I doubt very much , ma 'am , I do not like he way at all . ' ' Bitzer , ' say , in a very impressive manner , 'do you recollect my have say anything to you respect name ? ' 'I beg you pardon , ma 'am . it be quite true that you do object to name be use , and they be always best avoid . ' ' please to remember that I have a charge here , ' say , with she air of state . 'I hold a trust here , , under . however improbable both and myself might have deem it year ago , that he would ever become my patron , make I a annual compliment , I can not but regard he in that light . from I have receive every acknowledgment of my social station , and every recognition of my family descent , that I could possibly expect . more , far more . therefore , to my patron I will be scrupulously true . and I do not consider , I will not consider , I can not consider , ' say Sparsit , with a most extensive stock on hand of honour and morality , ' that I should be scrupulously true , if I allow names to be mention under this roof , that be unfortunately - most unfortunately - no doubt of that - connect with he . ' knuckle he forehead again , and again beg pardon . 'no , , ' continue , ' say a individual , and I will hear you ; say , and you must excuse I . ' ' with the usual exception , ma'am , ' say , try back , 'on a individual . ' 'Ah - h ! ' repeat the ejaculation , the shake of the head over she tea - cup , and the long gulp , as take up the conversation again at the point where it have be interrupt . 'An individual , ma 'am , ' say , ' have never be what he ink to have be , since he first come into the place . he be a dissipated , extravagant idler . he be not worth he salt , ma 'am . he would not get it either , if he have not a friend and relation at court , ma'am ! ' 'Ah - h ! ' say , with another melancholy shake of she head . 'I only hope , ma 'am , ' pursue , ' that he friend and relation may not supply he with the means of carry on . otherwise , ma 'am , we know out of whose pocket that money come . ' 'Ah - h ! ' sigh again , with another melancholy shake of she head . ' he be to be pitie , ma 'am . the last party I have allude to , be to be pitie , ma'am , ' say . ' yes , , ' say . 'I have always pitie the delusion , always . ' ' as to a individual , ma'am , ' say , drop he voice and draw nearer , ' he be as improvident as any
any of the people in this town . and you know what they improvidence be , ma 'am . no one could wish to know it better than a lady of you eminence do . ' ' they would do well , ' return , 'to take example by you , . ' ' thank you , ma 'am . but , since you do refer to I , now look at I , ma 'am . I have put by a little , ma 'am , already . that gratuity which I receive at , ma'am : I never touch it . I do not even go the length of my wage , though they be not high , ma 'am . why can not they do as I have do , ma'am ? what one person can do , another can do . ' this , again , be among the fictions of . any capitalist there , who have make sixty thousand pound out of sixpence , always profess to wonder why the sixty thousand nearest Hand do not each make sixty thousand pound out of sixpence , and more or less reproach they every one for not accomplish the little feat . what I do you can do . why do not you go and do it ? ' as to they want recreation , ma'am , ' say , ' it be stuff and nonsense . I do not want recreation . I never do , and I never shall ; I do not like th'ey . as to they combine together ; there be many of they , I have no doubt , that by watch and inform upon one another could earn a trifle now and then , whether in money or good will , and improve they livelihood . then , why do not they improve it , ma 'am ! it be the first consideration of a rational creature , and it be what they pretend to want . ' ' pretend indeed ! ' say . 'I be sure we be constantly hearing , ma 'am , till it become quite nauseous , concern they wife and family , ' say . ' why look at I , ma 'am ! I do not want a wife and family . why wshould they ? ' ' because they be improvident , ' say . ' yes , ma'am , ' return , ' that be where it be . if they be more provident and less perverse , ma'am , what would they do ? they would say , " while my hat cover my family , " or " while my bonnet cover my family , " - as the case might be , ma 'am - " I have only one to feed , and that be the person I most like to feed . " ' 'To be sure , ' assent , eat muffin . ' thank you , ma 'am , ' say , knuckl he forehead again , in return for the favour of 's improve conversation . ' would you wish a little more hot water , ma 'am , or be there anything else that I could fetch you ? ' ' nothing just now , . ' ' thank you , ma 'am . I should not wish to disturb you at you meal , ma 'am , particularly tea , know you partiality for it , ' say , cran a little to look over into the street from where he stand ; ' but there be a gentleman be look up here for a minute or so , ma 'am , and he have come across as if he be go to knock . that be he knock , ma 'am , no doubt . ' he step to the window ; and look out , and draw in he head again , confirm himself with , ' yes , ma 'am . would you wish the gentleman to be show in , ma'am ? ' 'I do not know who it can be , ' say Sparsit , wip she mouth and arrange she mitten . 'A stranger , ma'am , evidently . ' ' what a stranger can want at the at this time of the evening , unless he come upon some business for which he be too late , I do not know , ' say Sparsit , ' but I hold a charge in this establishment from , and I will never shrink from it . if to see he be any part of the duty I have accept , I will see he . use you own discretion , . ' here the visitor , all unconscious of 's magnanimous word , repeat he knock so loudly that the light porter hasten down to open the door ; while Mrs . Sparsit take the precaution of conceal she little table , with all its appliance upon it , in a cupboard , and then decamp up - stair , that she might appear , if needful , with the greater dignity . ' if you please , ma 'am , the gentleman would wish to see you , ' say , with he light eye at 's keyhole . so , , who have improve the interval by touch up she cap , take she classical feature down - stair again , and enter the board - room in the manner of a matron go outside the city wall to treat with a invading general . the visitor have stroll to the window , and be then engage in look carelessly out , be as unmoved by this impressive entry as man could possibly be . he stand whistling to himself with all imaginable coolness , with he hat still on , and a certain air of exhaustion upon he , in part arise
arise from excessive summer , and in part from excessive gentility . for it be to be see with half a eye that he be a thorough gentleman , make to the model of the time ; weary of everything , and put no more faith in anything than . 'I believe , sir , ' quoth Mrs . Sparsit , ' you wish to see I . ' 'I beg you pardon ,' he say , turn and remove he hat ; ' pray excuse I . ' 'Humph ! ' think , as she make a stately bend . ' five and thirty , good - look , good figure , good tooth , good voice , good breeding , well - dress , dark hair , bold eye . ' all which . observ in she womanly way - like the who put he head in the pail of water - merely in dipping down and come up again . ' please to be seat , sir , ' say . ' thank you . allow I . ' he place a chair for she , but remain himself carelessly lounge against the table . 'I leave my servant at the railway look after the luggage - very heavy train and vast quantity of it in the van - and stroll on , look about I . Exceedingly odd place . will you allow I to ask you if it be always as black as this ? ' 'In general much blacker , ' return , in she uncompromising way . ' be it possible ! excuse I : you be not a native , I think ? ' 'no , sir , ' return . ' it be once my good or ill fortune , as it may be - before I become a widow - to move in a very different sphere . my husband be a Powler . ' ' beg you pardon , really ! ' say the stranger . ' Was - ? ' repeat , . ' ' , ' say the stranger , after reflect a few moment . signify assent . the stranger seem a little more fatigued than before . ' you must be very much bo here ? ' be the inference he draw from the communication . 'I be the servant of circumstance , sir , ' say , ' and I have long adapt myself to the govern power of my life . ' ' very philosophical , ' return the stranger , ' and very exemplary and laudable , and - ' it seem to be scarcely worth he while to finish the sentence , so he play with he watch - chain wearily . ' may I be permit to ask , sir , ' say Sparsit , 'to what I be indebt for the favour of - ' ' Assuredly , ' say the stranger . ' Much oblige to you for remind I . I be the bearer of a letter of introduction to , the banker . walk through this extraordinarily black town , while they be get dinner ready at the hotel , I ask a fellow whom I meet ; one of the work people ; who appear to have be take a shower - bath of something fluffy , which I assume to be the raw material - ' Sparsit inclin she head . ' - material - where , the banker , might reside . upon which , misl no doubt by the word Banker , he direct I to the . fact being , I presume , that the do not reside in the edifice in which I have the honour of offer this explanation ? ' 'no , sir , ' return , ' he do not . ' ' thank you . I have no intention of deliver my letter at the present moment , nor have I . but stroll on to the to kill time , and have the good fortune to observe at the window , ' towards which he languidly wave he hand , then slightly bow , 'a lady of a very superior and agreeable appearance , I consider that I could not do better than take the liberty of ask that lady where the do live . which I accordingly venture , with all suitable apology , to do . ' the inattention and indolence of he manner be sufficientely relieved , to 's think , by a certain gallantry at ease , which offer she homage too . here he be , for instance , at this moment , all but sit on the table , and yet lazily bend over she , as if he acknowledge a attraction in she that make she charming - in she way . ' bannks , I know , be always suspicious , and officially must be , ' say the stranger , whose lightness and smoothness of speech be pleasant likewise ; suggest matter far more sensible and humorous than it ever contain - which be perhaps a shrewd device of the founder of this numerous sect , whosoever may have be that great man : ' therefore I may observe that my letter - here it be - be from the member for this place - Gradgrind - whom I have have the pleasure of know in . ' recognize the hand , intimate that such confirmation be quite unnecessary , and give 's address , with all needful clue and direction in aid . ' thousand thanks , ' say the stranger . ' of course you know the well ? ' ' yes , sir , ' rejoin . ' in my dependent relation towards he , I have know he ten year . ' ' quite a eternity ! I think he marry 's daughter ? ' ' yes , ' say , suddenly compresse
compresse she mouth , ' he have that - honour . ' ' the lady be quite a philosopher , I be tell ? ' ' indeed , sir , ' say . ' be she ? ' ' excuse my impertinent curiosity , ' pursue the stranger , flutter over 's eyebrow , with a propitiatory air , ' but you know the family , and know the world . I be about to know the family , and may have much to do with they . be the lady so very alarming ? she father give she such a portentously hard - head reputation , that I have a burn desire to know . be she absolutely unapproachable ? Repellently and stunningly clever ? I see , by you meaning smile , you think not . you have pour balm into my anxious soul . as to age , now . Forty ? five and thirty ? ' laugh outright . 'A chit , ' say she . ' not twenty when she be marry . ' 'I give you my honour , , ' return the stranger , detach himself from the table , ' that I never be so astonished in my life ! ' it really do seem to impress he , to the utmost extent of he capacity of be impress . he look at he informant for full a quarter of a minute , and appear to have the surprise in he mind all the time . 'I assure you , ,' he then say , much exhausted , ' that the father 's manner prepare I for a grim and stony maturity . I be oblige to you , of all thing , for correcte so absurd a mistake . pray excuse my intrusion . many thanks . good day ! ' he bow himself out ; and , hide in the window curtain , see he languish down the street on the shady side of the way , observe of all the town . ' what do you think of the gentleman , ? ' she ask the light porter , when he come to take away . ' spend a deal of money on he dress , ma'am . ' ' it must be admit , ' say . Sparsit , ' that it be very tasteful . ' ' yes , ma'am , ' return , ' if that be worth the money . ' ' besides which , ma 'am , ' resume , while he be polish the table , 'he look to I as if he game . ' ' it be immoral to game , ' say . ' it be ridiculous , ma'am , ' say , ' because the chance be against the player . ' whether it be that the heat prevent Mrs . Sparsit from work , or whether it be that she hand be out , she do no work that night . she sit at the window , when the sun begin to sink behind the smoke ; she sit there , when the smoke be burn red , when the colour fad from it , when darkness seem to rise slowly out of the ground , and creep upward , upward , up to the house - top , up the church steeple , up to the summit of the factory chimney , up to the sky . without a candle in the room , . sit at the window , with she hand before she , not think much of the sound of evening ; the whooping of boy , the barking of dog , the rumbling of wheel , the step and voice of passengers , the shrill street cry , the clog upon the pavement when it be they hour for go by , the shutting - up of shop - shutter . not until the light porter announce that she nocturnal sweetbread be ready , do . Sparsit arause herself from she reverie , and convey she dense black eyebrow - by that time crease with meditation , as if they need iron out - up - stair . 'o , you ! ' say , when she be alone at she supper . whom she mean , she do not say ; but she could scarcely have mean the sweetbread . chapter ii - the party want assistance in cut the throat of the Grace . they go about recruiting ; and where could they enlist recruit more hopefully , than among the fine gentleman who , have find out everything to be worth nothing , be equally ready for anything ? moreover , the healthy spirit who have mount to this sublime height be attractive to many of the Gradgrind school . they like fine gentleman ; they pretend that they do not , but they do . they become exhausted in imitation of they ; and they yee - yaw in they speech like they ; and they serve out , with a enervate air , the little mouldy ration of political economy , on which they regal they disciple . there never before be see on earth such a wonderful hybrid race as be thus produce . among the fine gentleman not regularly belong to the school , there be one of a good family and a better appearance , with a happy turn of humour which have tell immensely with the house of Commons on the occasion of he entertaine it with he ( and the board of director ) view of a railway accident , in which the most careful officer ever know , employ by the most liberal manager ever hear of , assiste by the finest mechanical contrivance ever devise , the whole in action on the best line ever construct , have kill five people and wounded thirty - two , by a casualty without which
which the excellence of the whole system would have be positively incomplete . among the slain be a cow , and among the scattered article unown , a widow 's cap . and the honourable member have so tick the ( which have a delicate sense of humour ) by put the cap on the cow , that it become impatient of any serious reference to the 's , and bring the railway off with Cheers and laughter . now , this gentleman have a younger brother of still better appearance than himself , who have try life as a Cornet of Dragoons , and find it a bore ; and have afterwards try it in the train of a english minister abroad , and find it a bore ; and have then stroll to , and get bore there ; and have then gone yachting about the world , and get bored everywhere . to whom this honourable and jocular , member fraternally say one day , ' , there be a good opening among the hard fact fellow , and they want man . I wonder you do not go in for statistic . ' , rather take by the novelty of the idea , and very hard up for a change , be as ready to ' go in ' for statistic as for anything else . so , he go in . he coach himself up with a blue - book or two ; and he brother put it about among the hard fact fellow , and say , ' if you want to bring in , for any place , a handsome dog who can make you a devilish good speech , look after my brother , for he be you man . ' after a few dash in the public meeting way , and a council of political sage approve of , and it be resolve to send he down to , to become know there and in the neighbourhood . hence the letter Jem have last night show to , which now hold in he hand ; superscribe , ' , , , . Specially to introduce , . . ' within a hour of the receipt of this dispatch and 's card , put on he hat and go down to the hotel . there he find look out of window , in a state of mind so disconsolate , that he be already half - dispose to ' go in ' for something else . ' my name , sir , ' say he visitor , t'is , of . ' be very happy indeed ( though he scarcely look so ) to have a pleasure he have long expect . ' Coketown , sir , ' say , obstinately take a chair , 'is not the kind of place you have be accustom to . therefore , if you will allow I - or whether you will or not , for I be a plain man - I will tell you something about it before we go any further . ' would be charme . ' do not be too sure of that , ' say . 'I do not promise it . first of all , you see we smoke . that be meat and drink to we . it be the healthiest thing in the world in all respects , and particularly for the lung . if you be one of those who want we to consume it , I differ from you . we be not go to wear the bottom of we boiler out any faster than we wear th'ey out now , for all the humbugging sentiment in and . ' by way of ' go in ' to the fullest extent , rejoin , ' . , I assure you I be entirely and completely of you way of thinking . on conviction . ' 'I be glad to hear it , ' say . ' now , you have hear a lot of talk about the work in we mill , no doubt . you have ? very good . I will state the fact of it to you . it be the pleasantest work there be , and it be the lightest work there be , and it be the best - pay work there be . more than that , we could not improve the mill themselves , unless we lay down carpet on the floor . which we be not a - go to do . ' ' , perfectly right . ' ' Lastly , ' say , 'as to we hand . there be not a hand in this town , sir , man , woman , or child , but have one ultimate object in life . that object be , to be feed on turtle soup and venison with a gold spoon . now , they be not a -going - none of 'em - ever to be feed on turtle soup and venison with a gold spoon . and now you know the place . ' profess himself in the highest degree instruct and refresh , by this condense epitome of the whole question . ' why , you see , ' reply , ' it suit my disposition to have a full understanding with a man , particularly with a public man , when I make he acquaintance . I have only one thing more to say to you , , before assure you of the pleasure with which I shall respond , to the utmost of my poor ability , to my friend 's letter of introduction . you be a man of family . do not you deceive yourself by suppose for a moment that I be a man of family . I be a bit of dirty riff - raff , and a genuine scrap of tag , rag , and bobtail
bobtail . ' if anything could have exalt 's interest in , it would have be this very circumstance . or , so he tell he . ' so now , ' say , 'we may shake hand on equal term . I say , equal term , because although I know what I be , and the exact depth of the gutter I have lift myself out of , better than any man do , I be as proud as you be . I be just as proud as you be . have now assert my independence in a proper manner , I may come to how do you find yourself , and I hope you be pretty well . ' the better , give he to understand as they shook hand , for the salubrious air of . receive the answer with favour . ' perhaps you know , ' say he , 'or perhaps you do not know , I marry 's daughter . if you have nothing better to do than to walk up town with I , I shall be glad to introduce you to 's daughter . ' ' , ' say , ' you anticipate my dearest wish . ' they go out without further discourse ; and pilote the new acquaintance who so strongly contrast with he , to the private red brick dwelling , with the black outside shutter , the green inside blinds , and the black street door up the two white step . in the drawing - room of which mansion , there presently enter to they the most remarkable girl have ever see . she be so constrained , and yet so careless ; so reserv , and yet so watchful ; so cold and proud , and yet so sensitively asham of she husband 's braggart humility - from which she shrink as if every example of it be a cut or a blow ; that it be quite a new sensation to observe she . in face she be no less remarkable than in manner . she feature be handsome ; but they natural play be so lock up , that it seem impossible to guess at they genuine expression . utterly indifferent , perfectly self - reliant , never at a loss , and yet never at she ease , with she figure in company with they there , and she mind apparently quite alone - it be of no use ' go in ' yet awhile to comprehend this girl , for she baffle all penetration . from the mistress of the house , the visitor glance to the house itself . there be no mute sign of a woman in the room . no graceful little adornment , no fanciful little device , however trivial , anywhere express she influence . cheerless and comfortless , boastfully and doggedly rich , there the room star at its present occupant , unsoftened and unrelieved by the least trace of any womanly occupation . as stand in the midst of he household gods , so those unrelenting divinity occupy they place around , and they be worthy of one another , and well match . ' this , sir , ' say , ' be my wife , Bounderby : 's eldest daughter . , . have join you father 's muster -roll . if he be not 's colleague before long , I believe we shall at least hear of he in connexion with one of we neighbouring town . you observe , , that my wife be my junior . I do not know what she see in I to marry I , but she see something in I , I suppose , or she would not have marry I . she have lot of expensive knowledge , sir , political and otherwise . if you want to crbe for anything , I should be trouble to recommend you to a better adviser than . ' to a more agreeable adviser , or one from whom he would be more likely to learn , could never be recommend . ' come ! ' say he host . ' if you be in the complimentary line , you will get on here , for you will meet with no competition . I have never be in the way of learn compliment myself , and I do not profess to understand the art of pay th'ey . in fact , despise th'ey . but , you bring - up be different from mine ; mine be a real thing , by ! you be a gentleman , and I do not pretend to be one . I be of , and that be enough for I . however , though I be not influence by manners and station , may be . she have not my advantage - disadvantage you would call th'ey , but I call th'ey advantage - so you will not waste you power , I dare say . ' ' , ' say , turn with a smile to , 'is a noble animal in a comparatively natural state , quite free from the harness in which a conventional hack like myself work . ' ' you respect very much , ' she quietly return . ' it be natural that you should . ' he be disgracefully throw out , for a gentleman who have see so much of the world , and think , ' now , how be I to take this ? ' ' you be go to devote yourself , as I gather from what have say , to the service of you country . you have make up you mind , ' say , still stand before he where she have first stop - in all the singular contrariety of she self - possession , and she be obviously very ill at ease - 'to show
show the nation the way out of all its difficulty . ' ' ,' he return , laugh , ' upon my honour , no . I will make no such pretence to you . I have see a little , here and there , up and down ; I have find it all to be very worthless , as everybody have , and as some confess they have , and some do not ; and I be go in for you respected father 's opinion - really because I have no choice of opinion , and may as well back they as anything else . ' ' have you none of you own ? ' ask . 'I have not so much as the slightest predilection leave . I assure you I attach not the least importance to any opinion . the result of the varietie of boredom I have undergone , be a conviction ( unless conviction be too industrious a word for the lazy sentiment I entertain on the subject ) , that any set of idea will do just as much good as any other set , and just as much harm as any other set . there be a english family with a charming italian motto . what will be , will be . it be the only truth go ! ' this vicious assumption of honesty in dishonesty - a vice so dangerous , so deadly , and so common - seem , he observe , a little to impress she in he favour . he follow up the advantage , by say in he pleasantest manner : a manner to which she might attach as much or as little meaning as she please : ' the side that can prove anything in a line of unit , ten , hundred , and thousand , , seem to I to afford the most fun , and to give a man the best chance . I be quite as much attach to it as if I believe it . I be quite ready to go in for it , to the same extent as if I believe it . and what more could I possibly do , if I do believe it ! ' ' you be a singular politician , ' say . ' pardon I ; I have not even that merit . we be the largest party in the state , I assure you , , if we all fall out of we adopt rank and be review together . ' , who have be in danger of bursting in silence , interpose here with a project for postpone the family dinner till half - past six , and take in the meantime on a round of visit to the voting and interesting notability of and its vicinity . the round of visit be make ; and , with a discreet use of he blue coaching , come off triumphantly , though with a considerable accession of boredom . in the evening , he find the dinner - table laid for four , but they sit down only three . it be a appropriate occasion for to discuss the flavour of the hap'orth of stew eel he have purchase in the street at eight year old ; and also of the inferior water , specially use for lay the dust , with which he have wash down that repast . he likewise entertain he guest over the soup and fish , with the calculation that he ( ) have eat in he youth at least three horse under the guise of polony and saveloy . these recital , , in a languid manner , receive with ' charming ! ' every now and then ; and they probably would have decide he to ' go in ' for again to - morrow morning , have he be less curious respect . ' be there nothing ,' he think , glance at she as she sit at the head of the table , where she youthful figure , small and slight , but very graceful , look as pretty as it look misplaced ; 'is there nothing that will move that face ? ' yes ! by , there be something , and here it be , in a unexpected shape . appear . she change as the door open , and break into a beame smile . a beautiful smile . might not have think so much of it , but that he have wonder so long at she impassive face . she put out she hand - a pretty little soft hand ; and she finger close upon she brother 's , as if she would have carry they to she lip . 'Ay , ay ? ' think the visitor . ' this whelp be the only creature she care for . so , so ! ' the whelp be present , and take he chair . the appellation be not flatter , but not unmerited . ' when I be you age , young , ' say , be punctual , or I get no dinner ! ' ' when you be my age , ' resume , ' you have not a wrong balance to get right , and have not to dress afterwards . ' ' never mind that now , ' say . ' well , then , ' grumble . ' do not begin with I . ' ' . , ' say , perfectly hear this under - strain as it go on ; 'you brother 's face be quite familiar to I . can I have see he abroad ? or at some public school , perhaps ? ' ' no , ' she resume , quite interested , ' he have never be abroad yet , and be educate here , at home . , love , I be tell Harthause that he
he never see you abroad . ' ' no such luck , sir , ' say . there be little enough in he to brighten she face , for he be a sullen young fellow , and ungracious in he manner even to she . so much the greater must have be the solitude of she heart , and she need of some one on whom to bestow it . ' so much the more be this whelp the only creature she have ever care for , ' think , turn it over and over . ' so much the more . so much the more . ' both in he sister 's presence , and after she have leave the room , the whelp take no pain to hide he contempt for , whenever he could indulge it without the observation of that independent man , by make wry face , or shutt one eye . without respond to these telegraphic communication , encourage he much in the course of the evening , and show a unusual liking for he . at last , when he rise to return to he hotel , and be a little doubtful whether he know the way by night , the whelp immediately proffer he service as guide , and turn out with he to escort he thither . chapter iii - the Whelp it be very remarkable that a young gentleman who have be bring up under one continuous system of unnatural restraint , should be a hypocrite ; but it be certainly the case with . it be very strange that a young gentleman who have never be leave to he own guidance for five consecutive minute , should be incapable at last of govern himself ; but so it be with . it be altogether unaccountable that a young gentleman whose imagination have be strangle in he cradle , should be still inconvenience by it be ghost in the form of grovell sensuality ; but such a monster , beyond all doubt , be . ' do you smoke ? ' ask , when they come to the hotel . 'I believe you ! ' say . he could do no less than ask up ; and could do no less than go up . what with a cooling drink adapt to the weather , but not so weak as cool ; and what with a rarer tobacco than be to be buy in those part ; be soon in a highly free and easy state at he end of the sofa , and more than ever dispose to admire he new friend at the other end . blow he smoke aside , after he have be smoke a little while , and take a observation of he friend . ' he do not seem to care about he dress , ' think , ' and yet how capitally he do it . what a easy swell he be ! ' , happen to catch 's eye , remark that he drank nothing , and fill he glass with he own negligent hand . ' thank 'ee , ' say . ' thank 'ee . well , , I hope you have have about a dose of old to -night . ' say this with one eye shut up again , and look over he glass knowingly , at he entertainer . 'a very good fellow indeed ! ' return . ' you think so , do not you ? ' say . and shut up he eye again . smile ; and rise from he end of the sofa , and lounge with he back against the chimney - piece , so that he stand before the empty fire - grate as he smoke , in front of and look down at he , observe : ' what a comical brother - in - law you be ! ' ' what a comical brother - in - law old be , I think you mean , ' say . ' you be a piece of caustic , , ' retort . there be something so very agreeable in be so intimate with such a waistcoat ; in be call , in such a intimate way , by such a voice ; in be on such off - hand term so soon , with such a pair of whisker ; that be uncommonly pleased with himself . 'Oh ! I do not care for old , ' say he , ' if you mean that . I have always call old by the same name when I have talk about he , and I have always think of he in the same way . I be not go to begin to be polite now , about old . it would be rather late in the day . ' ' do not mind I , ' return ; ' but take care when he wife be by , you know . ' ' he wife ? ' say . 'My sister ? o yes ! ' and he laugh , and take a little more of the cooling drink . continue to lounge in the same place and attitude , smoke he cigar in he own easy way , and look pleasantly at the whelp , as if he know himself to be a kind of agreeable demon who have only to hover over he , and he must give up he whole soul if require . it certainly do seem that the whelp yield to this influence . he look at he companion sneakingly , he look at he admiringly , he look at he boldly , and put up one leg on the sofa . ' my sister ? ' say . ' she never care for old . ' ' that be the past tense , , ' return , strike the ash from he cigar with he little
little finger . ' we be in the present tense , now . ' ' Verb neuter , not to care . Indicative mood , present tense . first person singular , I do not care ; second person singular , thou dost not care ; third person singular , she do not care , ' return . ' good ! very quaint ! ' say he friend . ' though you do not mean it . ' ' but I do mean it , ' cry . ' upon my honour ! why , you will not tell I , , that you really suppose my sister do care for old . ' ' my dear fellow , ' return the other , ' what be I bound to suppose , when I find two married people live in harmony and happiness ? ' have by this time get both he leg on the sofa . if he second leg have not be already there when he be call a dear fellow , he would have put it up at that great stage of the conversation . feel it necessary to do something then , he stretch himself out at greater length , and , recline with the back of he head on the end of the sofa , and smoke with a infinite assumption of negligence , turn he common face , and not too sober eye , towards the face look down upon he so carelessly yet so potently . ' you know we governor , , ' say , ' and therefore , you need not be surprised that Loo marry old . she never have a lover , and the governor propose old , and she take he . ' ' very dutiful in you interesting sister , ' say . ' yes , but she would not have be as dutiful , and it would not have come off as easily , ' return the whelp , ' if it have not be for I . ' the tempter merely lifte he eyebrow ; but the whelp be obliged to go on . 'I persuade she ,' he say , with a edify air of superiority . 'I be stuck into old 's bank ( where I never want to be ) , and I know I should get into scrape there , if she put old 's pipe out ; so I tell she my wish , and she come into they . she would do anything for I . it be very game of she , be not it ? ' ' it be charme , ! ' ' not that it be altogether so important to she as it be to I , ' continue coolly , ' because my liberty and comfort , and perhaps my get on , depend on it ; and she have no other lover , and stay at home be like staying in jail - especially when I be gone . it be not as if she give up another lover for old ; but still it be a good thing in she . ' ' perfectly delightful . and she get on so placidly . ' 'Oh , ' return , with contemptuous patronage , ' she be a regular girl . a girl can get on anywhere . she have settle down to the life , and she do not mind . it do just as well as another . besides , though be a girl , she be not a common sort of girl . she can shut herself up within herself , and think - as I have often know she sit and watch the fire - for a hour at a stretch . ' 'Ay , ay ? have resource of she own , ' say , smoke quietly . ' not so much of that as you may suppose , ' return ; ' for we governor have she cramm with all sort of dry bone and sawdust . it be he system . ' ' form he daughter on he own model ? ' suggest . ' he daughter ? ah ! and everybody else . why , he form I that way ! ' say . ' impossible ! ' 'o do , though , ' say , shak he head . 'I mean to say , , that when I first leave home and go to old 's , I be as flat as a warming - pan , and know no more about life , than any oyster do . ' ' come , ! I can hardly believe that . a joke be a joke . ' ' upon my soul ! ' say the whelp . 'I be serious ; I be indeed ! ' he smoke with great gravity and dignity for a little while , and then add , in a highly complacent tone , 'Oh ! I have pick up a little . I do not deny that . but I have do it myself ; no thanks to the governor . ' ' and you intelligent sister ? ' 'my intelligent sister be about where she be . she use to complain to I that she have nothing to fall back upon , that girl usually fall back upon ; and I do not see how she be to have get over that since . but she do not mind ,' he sagaciously add , puffe at he cigar again . ' girl can always get on , somehow . ' ' call at the yesterday evening , for 's address , I find a ancient lady there , who seem to entertain great admiration for you sister , ' observe , throw away the last small remnant of the cigar he have now smoke out . ' mother Sparsit ! ' say . ' what ! you have see
see she already , have you ? ' he friend nod . take he cigar out of he mouth , to shut up he eye ( which have grow rather unmanageable ) with the greater expression , and to tap he nose several time with he finger . ' mother Sparsit 's feeling for be more than admiration , I should think , ' say . ' say affection and devotion . mother Sparsit never set she cap at when he be a bachelor . oh no ! ' these be the last word speak by the whelp , before a giddy drowsiness come upon he , follow by complete oblivion . he be rouse from the latter state by a uneasy dream of be stir up with a boot , and also of a voice say : ' come , it be late . be off ! ' ' well ! ' he say , scrambl from the sofa . ' I must take my leave of you though . I say . yours be very good tobacco . but it be too mild . ' ' yes , it be too mild , ' return he entertainer . ' it be - it be ridiculously mild , ' say . ' where be the door ! good night ! ' ' he have another odd dream of be take by a waiter through a mist , which , after give he some trouble and difficulty , resolve itself into the main street , in which he stand alone . he then walk home pretty easily , though not yet free from a impression of the presence and influence of he new friend - as if he be lounge somewhere in the air , in the same negligent attitude , regard he with the same look . the whelp go home , and go to bed . if he have have any sense of what he have do that night , and have be less of a whelp and more of a brother , he might have turn short on the road , might have go down to the ill - smelling river that be dye black , might have go to bed in it for good and all , and have curtain he head for ever with its filthy water . chapter iv - man and brother ' oh , my friend , the down - trodden operative of ! oh , my friend and fellow - countryman , the slave of a iron - hand and a grinding despotism ! oh , my friend and fellow- sufferer , and fellow - workman , and fellow- man ! I tell you that the hour be come , when we must rally round one another as one united power , and crumble into dust the oppressor that too long have batten upon the plunder of we family , upon the sweat of we brows , upon the labour of we hand , upon the strength of we sinews , upon the - create glorious rights of humanity , and upon the holy and eternal privileges of ! ' ' good ! ' 'Hear , hear , hear ! ' ' ! ' and other cry , arise in many voice from various part of the densely crowded and suffocatingly close , in which the orator , perch on a stage , deliver himself of this and what other froth and fume he have in he . he have declaim himself into a violent heat , and be as hoarse as he be hot . by dint of roaring at the top of he voice under a flaring gaslight , clench he fists , knitt he brows , set he tooth , and pound with he arm , he have take so much out of himself by this time , that he be bring to a stop , and call for a glass of water . as he stand there , try to quench he fiery face with he drink of water , the comparison between the orator and the crowd of attentive face turn towards he , be extremely to he disadvantage . judge he by 's evidence , he be above the mass in very little but the stage on which he stand . in many great respects he be essentially below they . he be not so honest , he be not so manly , he be not so good - humour ; he substitute cunning for they simplicity , and passion for they safe solid sense . a ill - make , high - shouldered man , with lower brows , and he feature crush into a habitually sour expression , he contrast most unfavourably , even in he mongrel dress , with the great body of he hearer in they plain work clothes . as it always be to consider any assembly in the act of submissively resign itself to the dreariness of some complacent person , lord or commoner , whom three - fourt of it could , by no human means , raise out of the slough of inanity to they own intellectual level , it be particularly strange , and it be even particularly affect , to see this crowd of earnest face , whose honesty in the main no competent observer free from bia could doubt , so agitate by such a leader . good ! hear , hear ! Hurrah ! the eagerness both of attention and intention , exhibit in all the countenance , make they a most impressive sight . there be no carelessness , no languor , no idle curiosity ; none of the many shade of indifference to be see in all other assemblie , visible for one moment there . that every man feel he condition to be , somehow or other , worse than it might be ; that every man consider it incumbent on
on he to join the rest , towards the making of it better ; that every man feel he only hope to be in he ally himself to the comrade by whom he be surround ; and that in this belief , right or wrong ( unhappily wrong then ) , the whole of that crowd be gravely , deeply , faithfully in earnest ; must have be as plain to any one who choose to see what be there , as the bare beam of the roof and the whitened brick wall . nor could any such spectator fail to know in he own breast , that these man , through they very delusion , show great quality , susceptible of be turn to the happiest and best account ; and that to pretend ( on the strength of sweeping axiom , howsoever cut and dry ) that they go astray wholly without cause , and of they own irrational will , be to pretend that there could be smoke without fire , death without birth , harvest without see , anything or everything produce from nothing . the orator have refresh himself , wip he corrugate forehead from leave to right several time with he handkerchief fold into a pad , and concentrate all he revive force , in a sneer of great disdain and bitterness . ' but oh , my friend and brother ! oh , men and , the down - trodden operative of ! what shall we say of that man - that work - man , that I should find it necessary so to libel the glorious name - who , be practically and well acquaint with the grievance and wrong of you , the injured pith and marrow of this land , and have hear you , with a noble and majestic unanimity that will make tyrants tremble , resolve for to subscribe to the fund of the , and to abide by the injunction issue by that body for you benefit , whatever they may be - what , I ask you , will you say of that work - man , since such I must acknowledge he to be , who , at such a time , desert he post , and sell he flag ; who , at such a time , turnd a traitor and a craven and a recreant , who , at such a time , be not asham to make to you the dastardly and humiliate avowal that he will hold himself aloon , and will not be one of those associate in the gallant stand for and for ? ' the assembly be divide at this point . there be some groan and hiss , but the general sense of honou be much too strong for the condemnation of a man unheard . ' be sure you be right , ! ' ' put he up ! ' ' let 's hear he ! ' such thing be say on many side . finally , one strong voice call out , ' be the man heer ? if the man 's heer , Slackbridge , let 's hear the man himseln , ' stead of ' yo . ' which be receive with a round of applause . , the orator , look about he with a withering smile ; and , hold out he right hand at arm 's length ( as the manner of all Slackbridge be ) , to still the thundering sea , wait until there be a profound silence . ' oh , my friend and fellow- man ! ' say then , shak he head with violent scorn , 'I do not wonder that you , the prostrate son of labour , be incredulous of the existence of such a man . but he who sell he birthright for a mess of pottage exist , and exist , and exist , and this man exist ! ' here , a brief press and confusion near the stage , end in the man himself stand at the orator 's side before the concourse . he be pale and a little move in the face - he lip especially show it ; but he stand quiet , with he leave hand at he ching , wait to be hear . there be a chairman to regulate the proceedings , and this functionary now take the case into he own hand . ' my friend , ' say he , ' by virtue of ' my office as you president , I aske of ' we friend , who may be a little over hetter in this business , to take he seat , while this man be heern . you all know this man . you know he awlng of ' he misfort'n , and he good name . ' with that , the chairman shook he frankly by the hand , and sit down again . likewise sit down , wip he hot forehead - always from left to right , and never the reverse way . 'My friend , ' begin , in the midst of a dead calm ; 'i ha ' he what be be spok 'n of ' I , and ' ttis lickly that I not mmend it . but I would liefer you would hearn the truth concernin myseln , for my lip than for onny other man 's , though I never cud and speak afore so monny , wi'out bein moydert and muddle . ' shook he head as if he would shake it off , in he bitterness . 'I be th's one single in 's mill , of ' a ' the man theer , as do not coom in wi' th ' propose reg'lation . I can to coom in wig 'em . my friend , I doubt they doin ' yo onny good . they will do yo
yo hurt . ' laugh , fold he arm , and frown sarcastically . ' but 't a n't sommuch for that as I stand out . if that be aw , I would coom in wi' th ' rest . but I ha ' my reason - mine , yo see - for be hinder ; not on 'y now , but awlus - awlus - life long ! ' jump up and stand beside he , gnash and tear . ' oh , my friend , what but this do I tell you ? oh , my fellow - countryman , what warn but this do I give you ? and how show this recreant conduct in a man on whom unequal law be know to have fall heavy ? oh , you , I ask you how do this subornation show in one of yourselves , who be thus consent to he own undoing and to yours , and to you child 's and you child 's child 's ? ' there be some applause , and some crying of shame upon the man ; but the greater part of the audience be quiet . they look at 's worn face , render more pathetic by the homely emotion it evince ; and , in the kindness of they nature , they be more sorry than indignant . this 's trade for t 's speak , ' say , ' a ' he be pay for 't , a ' he know he work . let he keep to 't . let he give no heed to what I ha have 'n to bear . that be not for he . that be not for nobbody but I . ' there be a propriety , not to say a dignity in these word , that make the hearer yet more quiet and attentive . the same strong voice call out , ' Slackbridge , let the man be heern , and how thee tongue ! ' then the place be wonderfully still . ' my brother , ' say , whose low voice be distinctly hear , ' and my fellow- workman - for that yo be to I , though not , as I know on , to this delegate here - I ha but a word to sen , and I could sen nommore if I be to speak till of ' day . I know weel , aw what be afore I . I know weel that yo aw resolve to ha nommore ado wi' a man who be not wi' yo in this matther . I know weel that if I be a lyin parisht I ' th ' road , yo would feel it right to pass I by , as a forrenner and stranger . what I ha gern , I mun mak th ' best on . ' ' , ' say the chairman , rise , ' think on 't agen . think on ot once agan , lad , afore thou 'rt shunn by aw owd friend . ' there be a universal murmur to the same effect , though no man articulat a word . every eye be fix on 's face . to repent of he determination , would be to take a load from all they mind . he look around he , and know that it be so . not a grain of anger with they be in he heart ; he know they , far below they surface weakness and misconception , as no one but they fellow - labourer could . 'i ha thowt on 't , above a bit , sir . I simply can to coom in . I mun go th ' way as lay afore I . I mun tak my leave of ' aw heer . ' he make a sort of reverence to they by hold up he arm , and stand for the moment in that attitude ; not speak until they slowly drop at he side . ' be the pleasant word as soom heer have spok and wi' I ; monny 's the face I see heer , as I first see when I be yoong and lighter heart and than now . I ha ' never have no fratch afore , sin ever I be bear , wi' any of ' my like ; Gonnow I ha ' none now that be o's my makin ' . yo will can ' I traitor and that - yo I mean t ' say , ' address , ' but ' ti easier to ' than mak ' out . so let be . ' he have move away a pace or two to come down from the platform , when he remember something he have not say , and return again . ' Haply , ' he say , turn he furrow face slowly about , that he might as it be individually address the whole audience , those both near and distant ; 'haply , when this question have be tak'n up and discoose , there will be a threat to turn out if I be let to work among . I hope I shall die ere ever such a time coom , and I shall work solitary among unless it coom - truly , I mun do ot , my friend ; not to brave yo , but to live . I ha nobbut work to live by ; and wheerever can I go , I who ha work sin I be no heighth at aw , in Coketown heer ? I mak ' no complaint of ' bein turn to the wag , of ' bein outcasten and overlooken for this time forrard , but hope I shall be let to work . if there be any right for I at aw , my friend , I think ' ti that
that . ' not a word be speak . not a sound be audible in the building , but the slight rustle of man move a little apart , all along the centre of the room , to open a means of pass out , to the man with whom they have all bound themselves to renounce companionship . look at no one , and go he way with a lowly steadiness upon he that assert nothing and seek nothing , , with all he trouble on he head , leave the scene . then , who have keep he oratorical arm extend during the go out , as if he be repress with infinite solicitude and by a wonderful moral power the vehement passion of the multitude , apply himself to raise they spirits . have not the , oh , my british countryman , condemne he son to death ; and have not the spartan mother , oh my soon to be victorious friend , drive they fly child on the point of they enemy 's sword ? then be it not the sacred duty of the man of , with forefather before they , a admiring world in company with they , and a posterity to come after they , to hurl out traitor from the tent they have pitch in a sacred and a - like cause ? the wind of heaven answer yes ; and bear yes , east , west , north , and south . and consequently three cheer for the ! act as fugleman , and give the time . the multitude of doubtful face ( a little conscience - stricken ) brighten at the sound , and take it up . private feeling must yield to the common cause . Hurrah ! the roof yet vibrate with the cheering , when the assembly disperse . thus easily do fall into the loneliest of life , the life of solitude among a familiar crowd . the stranger in the land who look into ten thousand face for some answer look and never find it , be in cheering society as compare with he who pass ten averted face dailly , that be once the countenance of friend . such experience be to be 's now , in every wake moment of he life ; at he work , on he way to it and from it , at he door , at he window , everywhere . by general consent , they even avoid that side of the street on which he habitually walk ; and leave it , of all the work man , to he only . he have be for many year , a quiet silent man , associate but little with other man , and use to companionship with he own thought . he have never know before the strength of the want in he heart for the frequent recognition of a nod , a look , a word ; or the immense amount of relief that have be pour into it by drop through such small means . it be even harder than he could have believe possible , to separate in he own conscience he abandonment by all he fellow from a baseless sense of shame and disgrace . the first four day of he endurance be day so long and heavy , that he begin to be appal by the prospect before he . not only do he see no Rachael all the time , but he avoid every chance of see she ; for , although he know that the prohibition do not yet formally extend to the woman work in the factory , he find that some of they with whom he be acquainted be change to he , and he fear to try other , and dread that might be even singl out from the rest if she be see in he company . so , he have be quite alone during the four day , and have speak to no one , when , as he be leave he work at night , a young man of a very light complexion accost he in the street . ' you name 's , be not it ? ' say the young man . coloured to find himself with he hat in he hand , in he gratitude for be speak to , or in the suddenness of it , or both . he make a feint of adjust the lining , and say , ' yes . ' ' you be the they have send to , I mean ? ' say , the very light young man in question . answer ' yes , ' again . 'I suppose so , from they all appear to keep away from you . want to speak to you . you know he house , do not you ? ' say ' yes , ' again . ' then go straight up there , will you ? ' say . ' you be expect , and have only to tell the servant it be you . I belong to the ; so , if you go straight up without I ( I be send to fetch you ) , you will save I a walk . ' , whose way have be in the contrary direction , turn about , and betake himself as in duty bound , to the red brick castle of the . - and ' , , ' say , in he windy manner , ' what be this I hear ? what have these pest of the earth be do to you ? come in , and speak up . ' it be into the drawing - room that he be thus bidden . a tea - table be set out ; and 's young wife , and she brother , and a great gentleman from , be present .
. to whom make he obeisance , close the door and stand near it , with he hat in he hand . ' this be the man I be tell you about , , ' say . the gentleman he address , who be talk to on the sofa , get up , say in a indolent way , ' oh really ? ' and dawdle to the hearthrug where stood . ' now , ' say , ' speak up ! ' after the four day he have pass , this address fall rudely and discordantly on 's ear . besides be a rough handling of he wounded mind , it seem to assume that he really be the self - interested deserter he have be call . ' what be it , sir , ' say , 'as be pleased to want wi' I ? ' ' why , I have tell you , ' return . ' speak up like a man , since you be a man , and tell we about yourself and this combination . ' ' Wi ' yor pardon , sir , ' say , ha ' nowt to sen about it . ' , who be always more or less like a wind , find something in he way here , begin to blow at it directly . ' now , look here , , ' say he , ' here be a specimen of th'ey . when this man be here once before , I warn this man against the mischievous stranger who be always about - and who ought to be hang wherever they be find - and I tell this man that he be go in the wrong direction . now , would you believe it , that although they have put this mark upon he , he be such a slave to they still , that he be afraid to open he lip about they ? ' 'I se as I have nowt to sen , sir ; not as I be fearfo ' of ' openin ' my lip . ' ' you say ! ah ! I know what you say ; more than that , I know what you mean , you see . not always the same thing , by the ! quite different thing . you have better tell we at once , that that fellow Slackbridge be not in the town , stirr up the people to mutiny ; and that he be not a regular qualified leader of the people : that be , a most confounded scoundrel . you have better tell we so at once ; you can not deceive I . you want to tell we so . why do not you ? ' 'I be as sooary as yo , sir , when the people 's leader be bad , ' say , shak he head . ' they tak such as offers . Haply ' ttis na ' the sma'est of ' they misfortun when they can get no better . ' the wind begin to get boisterous . ' now , you will think this pretty well , , ' say . ' you will think this tolerably strong . you will say , upon my soul this be a tidy specimen of what my friend have to deal with ; but this be nothing , sir ! you shall hear I ask this man a question . , ' - wind spring up very fast - ' may I take the liberty of ask you how it happen that you refuse to be in this combination ? ' ' how ot happen ? ' 'Ah ! ' say , with he thumb in the arm of he coat , and jerk he head and shutt he eye in confidence with the opposite wall : ' how it happen . ' 'I would leefer not coom to 't , sir ; but sin you put th ' question - a ' not want 'n t ' be ill - manner 'n - I will answer . I ha pass a promess . ' ' not to I , you know , ' say . ( Gusty weather with deceitful calms . one now prevail . ) 'o no , sir . not to . ' 'as for I , any consideration for I have have just nothing at all to do with it , ' say , still in confidence with the wall . ' if only of have be in question , you would have join and make no bone about it ? ' ' why yes , sir . ' tTis true . ' ' though he know , ' say , now blow a gale , ' that there be a set of rascal and rebel whom transportation be too good for ! now , , you have be knock about in the world some time . do you ever meet with anything like that man out of this bless country ? ' and point he out for inspection , with a angry finger . ' Nay , ma 'am , ' say , staunchly protest against the word that have be use , and instinctively address himself to , after glance at she face . ' not rebel , nor yet rascal . Nowt of ' th ' kind , ma 'am , nowt of ' th ' kind . they have not doon I a kindness , ma 'am , as I know and feel . but there be not a dozen man amoong 'em , ma 'am - a dozen ? not six - but what believe as he have doon he duty by the rest and by himseln . forbid as I , that ha ' know , and have 'n experience o' these man aw my life - I , that ha ' ett'n a ' droonken
droonken wig 'em , a ' seet and wig 'em , and toil and wig 'em , and lov'n 'em , should fail yofu to stan by th'ey wi' the truth , let th'ey ha ' doon to I what they may ! ' he speak with the rug earnestness of he place and character - deepen perhaps by a proud consciousness that he be faithful to he class under all they mistrust ; but he fully remember where he be , and do not even raise he voice . 'no , ma 'am , no . they be true to one another , faithfo ' to one another , ' fectionate to one another , e'en to death . be poor amoong th'ey , be sick amoong th'ey , grieve amoong 'em for onny of ' th ' monny cause that carry grief to the poor man 's door , a ' they will be tender wi' yo , gentle wi' yo , comfortable wi' yo , wi' . be sure of ' that , ma 'am . they would be rive to bits , ere ever they would be different . ' 'In short , ' say , ' it be because they be so full of virtue that they have turn you adrift . go through with it while you be about it . out with it . ' ' how ' tis , ma 'am , ' resume , appear still to find he natural refuge in 's face , ' that what be best in we fok , seem to turn we most to trouble a ' misfort'n a ' mistake , I kdunnow . but ' tis so . I know ' tis , as I know the heaven be over I ahi not the smoke . we be patient too , a ' want in general to do right . An' I can to think the fawt be aw wi' we . ' ' now , my friend , ' say , whom he could not have exasperate more , quite unconscious of it though he be , than by seem to appeal to any one else , ' if you will favour I with you attention for half a minute , I should like to have a word or two with you . you say just now , that you have nothing to tell we about this business . you be quite sure of that before we go any further . ' ' Sir , I be sure on 't . ' ' here be a gentleman from , ' make a backhanded point at with he thumb , 'a parliament gentleman . I should like he to hear a short bit of dialogue between you and I , instead of take the substance of it - for I know precious well , beforehand , what it will be ; nobody know better than I do , take notice ! - instead of receive it on trust from my mouth . ' bend he head to the gentleman from , and show a rather more troubled mind than usual . he turn he eye involuntarily to he former refuge , but at a look from that quarter ( expressive though instantaneous ) he settle they on 's face . ' now , what do you complain of ? ' ask . 'I ha ' not coom here , sir , ' remind he , 'too complain . I coom for that i be send for . ' ' what , ' repeat , fold he arm , 'do you people , in a general way , complain of ? ' look at he with some little irresolution for a moment , and then seem to make up he mind . ' sir , I be never good at showin of 't , though I ha have and my share in feeling of 't . ' deed we be in a muddle , sir . look round town - so rich as ' tis - and see the number of ' people as have be broughten into bein heer , yofu to weave , a ' to card , a ' to piece out a livin ' , ee the same one way , somehow , 'twixt they cradle and they grave . look how we live , a ' wheer we live , a ' in what number , a ' by what chance , and wi' what sameness ; and look how the mill be awlus a goin , and how they never work we no nigher to ony dis'ant object - ceptin awlus , . look how you consider of we , and write of we , and talk of we , and go up wi' yor deputation to o' ' bout we , and how yo be awlus right , and how we be awlus wrong , and never have and no reason in we sin ever we be bear . look how this ha growen a ' growen , sir , bigger a ' bigger , broader a ' broader , harder a ' harder , for year to year , for generation unto generation . who can look on 't , sir , and fairly tell a man ' tis not a muddle ? ' ' of course , ' say . ' now perhaps you will let the gentleman know , how you would set this muddle ( as you be so fond of call it ) to rights . ' 'i donno , sir . I can to be expecten to 't . ' not I as should be loeak to for that , sir . ' Ti they as be put ower I , and ower aw the rest of we . what do they tak upon themseln , sir , if not to would o't ? ' 'I will tell you something towards it
it , at any rate , ' return . ' we will make a example of half a dozen Slackbridge . we will indict the blackguard for felony , and get th'ey ship off to penal settlement . ' gravely shook he head . ' do not tell I we will not , man , ' say , by this time blow a hurricane , ' because we will , I tell you ! ' ' , ' return , with the quiet confidence of absolute certainty , ' if be t ' tak a hundred Slackbridge - aw as there be , and ee the number ten time towd - a ' be t ' sow th'ey up in separate sack , a ' sink 'em in the deepest ocean as be make ere ever dry land coom to be , yo would leave the muddle just wheer ' tis . Mischeevous stranger ! ' say , with a anxious smile ; ' when ha we not heern , I be sure , sin ever we can call to mind , of ' th ' mischeevous stranger ! ' not by they the trouble 's make , sir . ' not wi' they 't commence . I ha no favour for 'em - I ha no reason to favour 'em - but ' ttis hopeless and useless to dream of ' takin they for they trade , ' stead of ' takin they trade for they ! Aw that be now about I in this room be heer afore I coom , a ' will be heer when I be go . put that clock aboard a ship a ' pack it off to , a ' the time will go on just the same . so ' tis wi' Slackbridge every bit . ' Revert for a moment to he former refuge , he observe a cautionary movement of she eye towards the door . step back , he put he hand upon the lock . but he have not speak out of he own will and desire ; and he feel it in he heart a noble return for he late injuriious treatment to be faithful to the last to those who have repudiate he . he stay to finish what be in he mind . ' Sir , I , wi' my little learn a ' my common way , tell the genelman what will better ee this - though some work man of ' this town could , above my power - but I can tell he what I know will never do ot . the strong hand will never do ot . Vict 'ry and triumph will never do ot . agree yofu to mak one side unnat'rally awlus and for ever right , and toother side unnat'rally awlus and for ever wrong , will never , never do ot . nor yet lettin alone will never do ot . let thousand upon thousand alone , aw lead the like life and aw fee 'en into the like muddle , and they will be as one , and yo will be as anoother , wi' a black unpassable world betwixt , just as long or short a time as sich - like misery can last . not drawin nigh to fok , wi's kindness and patience a ' cheery way , that so draw nigh to one another in they monny trouble , and so cherish one another in they distress wi' what they need themseln - like , I humbly believe , as no people the genelman ha see in aw he travel can beat - will never do ot till th' turn t ' ice . most of ' aw , rate th'ey as so much power , and reg'latin th'ey as if they be figure in a soom , or machine : wi'out love and liken , wi'out memory and inclination , wi'out soul to weary and soul to hope - when aw go quiet , draggin on wig 'em as if they would nowt of ' th ' kind , and when aw go onquiet , reproachin th'ey for they want of ' sitch humanly feelin in they dealin wi' yo - this will never do ot , sir , till 's work be onmade . ' stand with the open door in he hand , wait to know if anything more be expect of he . ' just stop a moment , ' say , excessively red in the face . 'I tell you , the last time you be here with a grievance , that you have better turn about and come out of that . and I also tell you , if you remember , that I be up to the gold spoon look - out . ' 'I be not up to 't myseln , sir ; I do assure yo . ' ' now it be clear to I , ' say , ' that you be one of those chap who have always get a grievance . and you go about , sow it and raise crop . that be the business of you life , my friend . ' shook he head , mutely protest that indeed he have other business to do for he life . ' you be such a waspish , raspish , ill - condition chap , you see , ' say , ' that even you own Union , the man who know you best , will have nothing to do with you . I never think those fellow could be right in anything ; but I tell you what ! I so far go along with they for a novelty , that I will have nothing to do with you either . ' raise he eye quickly to he face . ' you can finish off what you be at , ' say , with a mean nod
nod , ' and then go elsewhere . ' ' , yo know weel , ' say expressively , ' that if I can to get work wi' yo , I can to get it elsewheer . ' the reply be , ' what I know , I know ; and what you know , you know . I have no more to say about it . ' glance at again , but she eye be raise to he no more ; therefore , with a sigh , and say , barely above he breath , ' heaven help we aw in this world ! ' he depart . - Fad away it be fall dark when come out of 's house . the shadow of night have gather so fast , that he do not look about he when he close the door , but plod straight along the street . nothing be further from he thought than the curious old woman he have encounter on he previous visit to the same house , when he hear a step behind he that he know , and turn , see she in 's company . he see first , as he have hear she only . 'Ah , , my dear ! , thou wi' she ! ' ' well , and now you be surprised to be sure , and with reason I must say , ' the old woman return . ' here I be again , you see . ' ' but how wi' ? ' say , fal into they step , walk between they , and look from the one to the other . ' why , I come to be with this good lass pretty much as I come to be with you , ' say the old woman , cheerfully , take the reply upon herself . ' my visiting time be later this year than usual , for I have be rather troublead with shortness of breath , and so put it off till the weather be fine and warm . for the same reason I do not make all my journey in one day , but divide it into two day , and get a bed to - night at the 's down by the railroad ( a nice clean house ) , and go back Parliamentary , at six in the morning . well , but what have this to do with this good lass , say you ? I be go to tell you . I have hear of be marry . I read it in the paper , where it look grand - oh , it look fine ! ' the old woman dwelt on it with strange enthusiasm : ' and I want to see he wife . I have never see she yet . now , if you will believe I , she have not come out of that house since noon to - day . so not to give she up too easily , I be wait about , a little last bit more , when I pass close to this good lass two or three time ; and she face be so friendly I speak to she , and she speak to I . there ! ' say the old woman to , ' you can make all the rest out for yourself now , a deal shorter than I can , I dare say ! ' once again , have to conquer a instinctive propensity to dislike this old woman , though she manner be as honest and simple as a manner possibly could be . with a gentleness that be as natural to he as he know it to be to , he pursue the subject that interes she in she old age . ' well , missus , ' say he , ha see the lady , and she be young and hansom . Wi's fine dark thinkin eye , and a still way , , as I ha never see the like on . ' ' young and handsome . yes ! ' cry the old woman , quite delighted . ' as bonny as a rose ! and what a happy wife ! ' ' aye , missus , I suppose she be , ' say Stephen . but with a doubtful glance at . ' suppose she be ? she must be . she be you master 's wife , ' return the old woman . Stephen nod assent . ' though as to master , ' say he , glance again at , ' not master onny more . that be aw enden ' twixt he and I . ' ' have you leave he work , ? ' ask , anxiously and quickly . ' why , , ' he reply , ' whether I ha lef and he work , or whether he work ha lefinitely and I , coom t ' th ' same . he work and I be part . ' Tis as weel so - better , I be thinkin when yo coom up wi' I . it would ha bring 'n trouble upon trouble if I have stay theer . Haply ' ttis a kindness to monny that I go ; haply ' ttis a kindness to myseln ; anyways it mun be done . I mun turn my face for fur th ' time , and seek a fort'n , dear , by beginnin fresh . ' ' where will you go , ? ' 'I do nno t' night , ' say he , lift off he hat , and smoothe he thin hair with the flat of he hand . ' but I be not goin tg night , , nor yet t'morrow . ' not easy overmuch t ' know wheer t ' turn , but a good heart will coom to I . ' herein ,
, too , the sense of even think unselfishly aid he . before he have so much as close 's door , he have reflecte that at least he be oblige to go away be good for she , as it would save she from the chance of be bring into question for not withdraw from he . though it would cost he a hard pang to leave she , and though he could think of no similar place in which he condemnation would not pursue he , perhaps it be almost a relief to be force away from the endurance of the last four day , even to unknown difficulty and distress . so he say , with truth , 'I be more leetsome , , under 't , than I could 'n ha believ . ' it be not she part to make he burden heavier . she answer with she comforting smile , and the three walk on together . , especially when it strive to be self - reliant and cheerful , find much consideration among the poor . the old woman be so decent and content , and make so light of she infirmity , though they have increase upon she since she former interview with , that they both take a interest in she . she be too sprightly to allow of they walking at a slow pace on she account , but she be very grateful to be talk to , and very willing to talk to any extent : so , when they come to they part of the town , she be more brisk and vivacious than ever . ' come to my poor place , missus , ' say , ' and tak a coop of ' tea . will coom then ; and arterwards I will see thee safe t ' thy traveller ' lodgin . ot may be long , , ere ever I ha th' chance of ' thy coompany agen . ' they comply , and the three go on to the house where he lod . when they turn into a narrow street , glance at he window with a dread that always haunt he desolate home ; but it be open , as he have leave it , and no one be there . the evil spirit of he life have flit away again , month ago , and he have hear no more of she since . the only evidence of she last return now , be the scantier moveable in he room , and the grayer hair upon he head . he lighte a candle , set out he little tea - board , get hot water from below , and bring in small portion of tea and sugar , a loaf , and some butter from the nearest shop . the bread be new and crusty , the butter fresh , and the sugar lump , of course - in fulfilment of the standard testimony of the magnate , that these people live like prince , sir . make the tea ( so large a party necessitate the borrowing of a cup ) , and the visitor enjoy it mightily . it be the first glimpse of sociality the host have have for many day . he too , with the world a wide heath before he , enjoy the meal - again in corroboration of the magnate , as exemplify the utter want of calculation on the part of these people , sir . 'i ha never thowt yet , missus , ' say Stephen , 'o ' askin thy name . ' the old lady announce herself as ' . . ' 'A widder , I think ? ' say . 'Oh , many long year ! ' 's husband ( one of the best on record ) be already dead , by 's calculation , when be bear . ''Twere a bad job , too , to lose so good a one , ' say . ' Onny child ? ' 's cup , ratt against she saucer as she hold it , denote some nervousness on she part . ' no , ' she say . ' not now , not now . ' ' dead , ,' softly hint . 'I be sooary I ha spok'n on 't , ' say , ' I ought t ' hadn in my mind as I might touch a sore place . I - I blame myseln . ' while he excuse himself , the old lady 's cup rattle more and more . 'I have a son , ' she say , curiously distress , and not by any of the usual appearance of sorrow ; ' and he do well , wonderfully well . but he be not to be speak of if you please . he be - ' put down she cup , she move she hand as if she would have add , by she action , ' dead ! ' then she say aloud , 'I have lose he . ' Stephen have not yet get the better of he have give the old lady pain , when he landlady come stumbl up the narrow stair , and call he to the door , whisper in he ear . be by no means deaf , for she catch a word as it be utter . ' ! ' she cry , in a suppress voice , start up from the table . ' oh hide I ! do not let I be see for the world . do not let he come up till I have get away . pray , pray ! ' she tremble , and be excessively agitate ; get behind , when try to reassure she ; and not seem to know what she be about . ' but hearken , missus , hearke , ' say , astonished .
. " not ; ' ti he wife . yo 'r not ofearf ' of ' she . yo be hey - go-mad about she , but a hour sin . ' ' but be you sure it be the lady , and not the gentleman ? ' she ask , still trembl . ' acertain sure ! ' ' well then , pray do not speak to I , nor yet take any notice of I , ' say the old woman . ' let I be quite to myself in this corner . ' Stephen nod ; look to for a explanation , which she be quite unable to give he ; take the candle , go downstairs , and in a few moment return , light into the room . she be follow by the whelp . have risen , and stand apart with she shawl and bonnet in she hand , when Stephen , himself profoundly astonished by this visit , put the candle on the table . then he too stand , with he double hand upon the table near it , wait to be address . for the first time in she life have come into one of the dwelling of the hand ; for the first time in she life she be face to face with anything like individuality in connection with they . she know of they existence by hundred and by thousand . she know what result in work a give number of they would produce in a give space of time . she know they in crowd pass to and from they nests , like ant or beetle . but she know from she read infinitely more of the way of toiling insect than of these toiling man and woman . something to be work so much and pay so much , and there end ; something to be infallibly settle by law of supply and demand ; something that blundere against those law , and flounder into difficulty ; something that be a little pinch when wheat be dear , and over -ate itself when wheat be cheap ; something that increase at such a rate of percentage , and yield such another percentage of crime , and such another percentage of pauperism ; something wholesale , of which vast fortune be make ; something that occasionally rise like a sea , and do some harm and waste ( chiefly to itself ) , and fall again ; this she know the Coketown hand to be . but , she have scarcely think more of separa they into unit , than of separa the sea itself into its component drop . she stand for some moment look round the room . from the few chair , the few book , the common print , and the bed , she glance to the two woman , and to . 'I have come to speak to you , in consequence of what pass just now . I should like to be serviceable to you , if you will let I . be this you wife ? ' raise she eye , and they sufficiently answer no , and drop again . 'I remember , ' say , redden at she mistake ; 'i recollect , now , to have hear you domestic misfortune speak of , though I be not attend to the particular at the time . it be not my mean to ask a question that would give pain to any one here . if I should ask any other question that may happen to have that result , give I credit , if you please , for be in ignorance how to speak to you as I ink . ' as have but a little while ago instinctively address himself to she , so she now instinctively address herself to . she manner be short and abrupt , yet falter and timid . ' he have tell you what have pass between himself and my husband ? you would be he first resource , I think . ' 'I have hear the end of it , young lady , ' say . ' do I understand , that , be reject by one employer , he would probably be reject by all ? I think he say as much ? ' ' the chance be very small , young lady - next to nothing - for a man who get 's a bad name among they . ' ' what shall I understand that you mean by a bad name ? ' ' the name of be troublesome . ' ' then , by the prejudice of he own class , and by the prejudice of the other , he be sacrifice alike ? be the two so deeply separate in this town , that there be no place whatever for a honest workman between they ? ' shook she head in silence . ' he fall into suspicion , ' say , ' with he fellow - weaver , because - he have make a promise not to be one of they . I think it must have be to you that he make that promise . might I ask you why he make it ? ' burst into tear . 'I do not seek it of he , poor lad . I pray he to avoid trouble for he own good , little think he would come to it through I . but I know he would die a hundred death , ere ever he would break he word . I know that of he well . ' Stephen have remain quietly attentive , in he usual thoughtful attitude , with he hand at he ching . he now speak in a voice rather less steady than usual . ' no one , except myseln , can ever know what honour , a ' what love ,
, a ' respect , I bear to , or wi' what cause . when I pass that promess , I tow she true , she be th's o' my life . ' Twere a solemn promess . ' Tis go fro' I , for ever . ' turn she head to he , and bend it with a deference that be new in she . she look from he to , and she feature soften . ' what will you do ? ' she ask he . and she voice have soften too . ' Weel , ma 'am , ' say , make the best of it , with a smile ; ' when I ha finish off , I mun quit this part , and try another . Fortnet or misfortnet , a man can but try ; there be nowt to be do wi'out tryin' - cept lay down and die . ' ' how will you travel ? ' ' Afoot , my kind ledy , afoot . ' colou , and a purse appear in she hand . the rustling of a bank - note be audible , as she unfold one and lay it on the table . ' , will you tell he - for you know how , without offence - that this be freely he , to help he on he way ? will you entreat he to take it ? ' 'I canto do that , young lady , ' she answer , turn she head aside . ' bless you for think of ' the poor lad wus ' such tenderness . but ' ti for he to know he heart , and what be right accord to it . ' look , in part incredulous , in part frightene , in part overcome with quick sympathy , when this man of so much self - command , who have be so plain and steady through the late interview , lose he composure in a moment , and now stand with he hand before he face . she stretch out hers , as if she would have touch he ; then check herself , and remain still . ' not e'en , ' say Stephen , when he stand again with he face uncovered , ' could mak sitch a kind offerin , by onny word , kinder . ' show that I be not a man wi'out reason and gratitude , I will tak two pound . I will borrow ot for t ' pay ot back . 'Twill be the sweetest work as ever I ha do , that put it in my power t ' acknowledge once more my lastin thankfulness for this present action . ' she be fain to take up the note again , and to substitute the much smaller sum he have name . he be neither courtly , nor handsome , nor picturesque , in any respect ; and yet he manner of accept it , and of express he thanks without more word , have a grace in it that could not have teach he son in a century . have sit upon the bed , swing one leg and suck he walking - stick with sufficient unconcern , until the visit have attaine this stage . see he sister ready to depart , he get up , rather hurriedly , and put in a word . ' just wait a moment , Loo ! before we go , I should like to speak to he a moment . something come into my head . if you will step out on the stair , Blackpool , I will mention it . never mind a light , man ! ' be remarkably impatient of he move towards the cupboard , to get one . ' it do not want a light . ' follow he out , and close the room door , and hold the lock in he hand . 'I say ! ' he whisper . 'I think I can do you a good turn . do not ask I what it be , because it may not come to anything . but there be no harm in my trying . ' he breath fall like a flame of fire on 's ear , it be so hot . ' that be we light porter at the , ' say , ' who bring you the message to - night . I call he we light porter , because I belong to the too . ' thought , ' what a hurry he be in ! ' he speak so confusedly . ' well ! ' say . ' now look here ! when be you off ? ' 't ' day 's , ' reply , consider . ' why , sir , or , nigh ' bout . ' ' or , ' say . ' now look here ! I be not sure that I can do you the good turn I want to do you - that be my sister , you know , in you room - but I may be able to , and if I should not be able to , there be no harm do . so I tell you what . you will know we light porter again ? ' ' yes , sure , ' say . ' very well , ' return . ' when you leave work of a night , between this and you go away , just hang about the a hour or so , will you ? do not take on , as if you mean anything , if he should see you hang about there ; because I sha not put he up to speak to you , unless I find I can do you the service I want to do you . in that case he will have a note or a
a message for you , but not else . now look here ! you be sure you understand . ' he have worm a finger , in the darkness , through a button - hole of 's coat , and be screw that corner of the garment tight up round and round , in a extraordinary manner . 'I understand , sy , ' say . ' now look here ! ' repeat . ' be sure you do not make any mistake then , and do not forget . I shall tell my sister as we go home , what I have in view , and she will approve , I know . now look here ! you be all right , be you ? you understand all about it ? very well then . come along , ! ' he push the door open as he call to she , but do not return into the room , or wait to be light down the narrow stair . he be at the bottom when she begin to descmend , and be in the street before she could take he arm . remain in she corner until the brother and sister be gone , and until come back with the candle in he hand . she be in a state of inexpressible admiration of , and , like a unaccountable old woman , wept , ' because she be such a pretty dear . ' yet . be so flurried lest the object of she admiration should return by chance , or anybody else should come , that she cheerfulness be end for that night . it be late too , to people who rise early and work hard ; therefore the party break up ; and and escort they mysterious acquaintance to the door of the ' , where they part from she . they walk back together to the corner of the street where liv , and as they draw nearer and nearer to it , silence crept upon they . when they come to the dark corner where they unfrequent meeting always end , they stop , still silent , as if both be afraid to speak . 'I shall strive t ' see thee agen , , afore I go , but if not - ' ' thou will not , , I know . ' Tis better that we make up we minds to be open wi' one another . ' ' thou 'rt awlus right . ' tTis bolder and better . I ha be thinkin then , , that as ' tis but a day or two that remain , ' twere better for thee , my dear , not t ' be see wi' I . ot might bring thee into trouble , fur no good . ' not for that , , that I mind . but thou know 'st we old agreement . ' Tis for that . ' ' well , well , ' say he . " Tis better , onnyways . ' ' thou 'lt write to I , and tell I all that happen , ? ' ' yes . what can I say now , but be wi's thee , Heaven bless thee , heaven thank thee and reward thee ! ' ' may it bless thee , , too , in all thy wandering , and send thee peace and rest at last ! ' 'i towd thee , my dear , ' say - ' that night - that I would never see or think of ' onnything that anger I , but thou , so much better than I , should 'st be beside it . thou 'rt beside it now . thou mak 'st I see it wi' a better eye . bless thee . good night . good - bye ! ' it be but a hurry parting in a common street , yet it be a sacred remembrance to these two common people . Utilitarian economist , skeleton of schoolmaster , commissioner of fact , genteel and use - up infidel , gabbler of many little dog 's - eared creed , the poor you will have always with you . Cultivate in they , while there be yet time , the utmost graces of the fancie and affection , to adorn they life so much in need of ornament ; or , in the day of you triumph , when romance be utterly drive out of they soul , and they and a bare existence stand face to face , reality will take a wolfish turn , and make a end of you . work the next day , and the next , uncheer by a word from any one , and shunn in all he comings and goings as before . at the end of the second day , he see land ; at the end of the third , he loom stood empty . he have overstay he hour in the street outside the , on each of the two first evening ; and nothing have happen there , good or bad . that he might not be remiss in he part of the engagement , he resolve to wait full two hour , on this third and last night . there be the lady who have once keep 's house , sit at the first - floor window as he have see she before ; and there be the light porter , sometimes talk with she there , and sometimes look over the blind below which have upon it , and sometimes come to the door and stand on the step for a breath of air . when he first come out , think he might be look for he , and pass near ; but the light porter only cast he winking eye upon he slightly , and say nothing . two hour be
be a long stretch of lounge about , after a long day 's labour . sit upon the step of a door , lean against a wall under a archway , stroll up and down , listen for the church clock , stop and watch child play in the street . some purpose or other be so natural to every one , that a mere loiterer always look and feel remarkable . when the first hour be out , Stephan even begin to have a uncomfortable sensation upon he of be for the time a disreputable character . then come the lamplighter , and two lengthening line of light all down the long perspective of the street , until they be blend and lose in the distance . close the first - floor window , draw down the blind , and go up - stair . presently , a light go up - stair after she , pass first the fanlight of the door , and afterward the two staircase window , on its way up . by and by , one corner of the second - floor blind be disturb , as if 's eye be there ; also the other corner , as if the light porter 's eye be on that side . still , no communication be make to . much relieve when the two hour be at last accomplished , he go away at a quick pace , as a recompense for so much loitering . he have only to take leave of he landlady , and lie down on he temporary bed upon the floor ; for he bundle be make up for to - morrow , and all be arrange for he departure . he mean to be clear of the town very early ; before the hand be in the street . it be barely daybreak , when , with a parting look round he room , mournfully wonder whether he should ever see it again , he go out . the town be as entirely desert as if the inhabitant have abandon it , rather than hold communication with he . everything look wan at that hour . even the come sun make but a pale waste in the sky , like a sad sea . by the place where live , though it be not in he way ; by the red brick street ; by the great silent factory , not trembl yet ; by the railway , where the danger - light be wane in the strengthening day ; by the railway 's crazy neighbourhood , half pull down and half build up ; by scatter red brick villa , where the besmoked evergreens be sprinkle with a dirty powder , like untidy snuff - taker ; by coal - dust path and many variety of ugliness ; get to the top of the hill , and look back . day be shin radiantly upon the town then , and the bell be go for the morning work . domestic fire be not yet lighte , and the high chimney have the sky to themselves . puffe out they poisonous volume , they would not be long in hide it ; but , for half a hour , some of the many window be golden , which show the people a sun eternally in eclipse , through a medium of smoked glass . so strange to turn from the chimney to the bird . so strange , to have the road - dust on he foot instead of the coal - grit . so strange to have live to he time of life , and yet to be begin like a boy this summer morning ! with these musing in he mind , and he bundle under he arm , take he attentive face along the high road . and the tree arch over he , whisper that he leave a true and loving heart behind . - , ' go in ' for he adopt party , soon begin to score . with the aid of a little more coaching for the political sage , a little more genteel listlessness for the general society , and a tolerable management of the assume honesty in dishonesty , most effective and most patronize of the polite deadly sins , he speedily come to be consider of much promise . the not be troublead with earnestness be a grand point in he favour , enable he to take to the hard fact fellow with as good a grace as if he have be bear one of the tribe , and to throw all other tribe overboard , as conscious hypocrite . ' whom none of we believe , my dear , and who do not believe themselves . the only difference between we and the professor of virtue or benevolence , or philanthropy - never mind the name - be , that we know it be all meaningless , and say so ; while they know it equally and will never say so . ' why should she be shocke or warn by this reiteration ? it be not so unlike she father 's principles , and she early training , that it need startle she . where be the great difference between the two school , when each chain she down to material reality , and inspire she with no faith in anything else ? what be there in she soul for to destroy , which have nurture there in its state of innocence ! it be even the worse for she at this pass , that in she mind - implant there before she eminently practical father begin to form it - a struggling disposition to believe in a wider and nobler humanity than she have ever hear of , constantly strove with doubt and resentment . with doubt , because the aspiration have be so laid waste in
in she youth . with resentment , because of the wrong that have be do she , if it be indeed a whisper of the truth . upon a nature long accustom to self - suppression , thus tear and divide , the philosophy come as a relief and justification . everything be hollow and worthless , she have miss nothing and sacrifice nothing . what do it matter , she have say to she father , when he propose she husband . what do it matter , she say still . with a scornful self - reliance , she ask herself , what do anything matter - and go on . towards what ? step by step , onward and downward , towards some end , yet so gradually , that she believe herself to remain motionless . as to , whither he tend , he neither consider nor car . he have no particular design or plan before he : no energetic wickedness ruffle he lassitude . he be as much amused and interested , at present , as it become so fine a gentleman to be ; perhaps even more than it would have be consistent with he reputation to confess . after he arrival he languidly write to he brother , the honourable and jocular member , that the be ' great fun ;' and further , that the female , instead of be the he have expect , be young , and remarkably pretty . after that , he write no more about they , and devote he leisure chiefly to they house . he be very often in they house , in he flitting and visitings about the district ; and be much encourage by . it be quite in 's gusty way to boast to all he world that he do not care about you highly connect people , but that if he wife 's daughter do , she be welcome to they company . begin to think it would be a new sensation , if the face which change so beautifully for the whelp , would change for he . he be quick enough to observe ; he have a good memory , and do not forget a word of the brother 's revelation . he interwove they with everything he see of the sister , and he begin to understand she . to be sure , the better and profounder part of she character be not within he scope of perception ; for in nature , as in seas , depth answer unto depth ; but he soon begin to read the rest with a student 's eye . have take possession of a house and grounds , about fifteen mile from the town , and accessible within a mile or two , by a railway striding on many arch over a wild country , undermine by desert coal - shaft , and spot at night by fire and black shape of stationary engine at pit 's mouth . this country , gradually soften towards the neighbourhood of 's retreat , there mellow into a rustic landscape , golden with heath , and snowy with hawthorn in the spring of the year , and tremulous with leave and they shadow all the summer time . the bank have foreclose a mortgage effect on the property thus pleasantly situate , by one of the magnate , who , in he determination to make a shorter cut than usual to a enormous fortune , overspeculate himself by about two hundred thousand pound . these accident do sometimes happen in the best regulate family of , but the bankrupt have no connexion whatever with the improvident class . it afford supreme satisfaction to instal himself in this snug little estate , and with demonstrative humility to grow cabbage in the flower - garden . he delighte to live , barrack - fashion , among the elegant furniture , and he bully the very picture with he origin . ' why , sir ,' he would say to a visitor , 'I be tell that , ' the late owner , ' give seven hundred pound for that Seabeach . now , to be plain with you , if I ever , in the whole course of my life , take seven look at it , at a hundred pound a look , it will be as much as I shall do . no , by ! I do not forget that I be of . for year upon year , the only picture in my possession , or that I could have get into my possession , by any means , unless I steal th'ey , be the engraving of a man shave himself in a boot , on the blacking bottle that I be overjoy to use in cleaning boot with , and that I sell when they be empty for a farthing a - piece , and glad to get it ! ' then he would address Harthouse in the same style . ' Harthouse , you have a couple of horse down here . bring half a dozen more if you like , and we will find room for th'ey . there be stabling in this place for a dozen horse ; and unless Nickits be bely , he keep the full number . a round dozen of 'em , sir . when that man be a boy , he go to . go to as a 's , when I be principally live on garbage , and sleep in market basket . why , if I want to keep a dozen horse - which I do not , for one be enough for I - I could not bear to see them in they stall here , and think what my own lodging use to be . I could not look at 'em , sir , and not order th'ey out
out . yet so thing come round . you see this place ; you know what sort of a place it be ; you be aware that there be not a completer place of its size in this kingdom or elsewhere - I do not care where - and here , get into the middle of it , like a maggot into a nut , be . while Nickits ( as a man come into my office , and tell I yesterday ) , , who use to act in , in the play , with the chief - justice and nobility of this country applaud he till they be black in the face , be drivell at this minute - drivelling , sir ! - in a fifth floor , up a narrow dark back street in . ' it be among the leafy shadow of this retirement , in the long sultry summer day , that begin to prove the face which have set he wonder when he first see it , and to try if it would change for he . ' . , I esteem it a most fortunate accident that I find you alone here . I have for some time have a particular wish to speak to you . ' it be not by any wonderful accident that he find she , the time of day be that at which she be always alone , and the place be she favourite resort . it be a opening in a dark wood , where some felled tree lay , and where she would sit watch the fallen leave of last year , as she have watch the fall ash at home . he sit down beside she , with a glance at she face . ' you brother . my young friend - ' she colour brighten , and she turn to he with a look of interest . never in my life , ' he think , ' see anything so remarkable and so captivat as the lighting of those feature ! ' he face betraye he thought - perhaps without betraie he , for it might have be accord to its instruction so to do . ' pardon I . the expression of you sisterly interest be so beautiful - Tom should be so proud of it - I know this be inexcusable , but I be so compelle to admire . ' ' be so impulsive , ' she say composedly . ' . , no : you know I make no pretence with you . you know I be a sordid piece of human nature , ready to sell myself at any time for any reasonable sum , and altogether incapable of any Arcadian proceeding whatever . ' 'I be wait , ' she return , ' for you further reference to my brother . ' ' you be rigid with I , and I deserve it . I be as worthless a dog as you will find , except that I be not false - not false . but you surprise and start I from my subject , which be you brother . I have a interest in he . ' ' have you a interest in anything , ? ' she ask , half incredulously and half gratefully . ' if you have ask I when I first come here , I should have say no . I must say now - even at the hazard of appear to make a pretence , and of justly awaken you incredulity - yes . ' she make a slight movement , as if she be try to speak , but could not find voice ; at length she say , ' . Harthouse , I give you credit for be interested in my brother . ' ' thank you . I claim to deserve it . you know how little I do claim , but I will go that length . you have do so much for he , you be so fond of he ; you whole life , , express such charming self - forgetfulness on he account - pardon I again - I be run wide of the subject . I be interested in he for he own sake . ' she have make the slightest action possible , as if she would have risen in a hurry and go away . he have turn the course of what he say at that instant , and she remaine . ' ,' he resume , in a lighter manner , and yet with a show of effort in assume it , which be even more expressive than the manner he dismiss ; ' it be no irrevocable offence in a young fellow of you brother 's year , if he be heedless , inconsiderate , and expensive - a little dissipate , in the common phrase . be he ? ' ' yes . ' ' allow I to be frank . do you think he game at all ? ' 'I think he make bet . ' wait , as if that be not she whole answer , she add , 'I know he do . ' ' of course he lose ? ' 'yes . ' ' everybody do lose who bet . may I hind at the probability of you sometimes supply he with money for these purpose ? ' she sit , look down ; but , at this question , raise she eye searchingly and a little resentfully . ' Acquit I of impertinent curiosity , my dear . I think may be gradually fal into trouble , and I wish to stretch out a help hand to he from the depth of my wicked experience . - shall I say again , for he sake ? be that necessary ? ' she seem to try to answer , but nothing come of it .
. ' Candidly to confess everything that have occur to I , ' say , again glid with the same appearance of effort into he more airy manner ; 'I will confide to you my doubt whether he have have many advantage . whether - forgive my plainness - whether any great amount of confidence be likely to have be establish between himself and he most worthy father . ' 'I do not , ' say , flush with she own great remembrance in that wise , ' think it likely . ' 'or , between himself , and - I may trust to you perfect understanding of my meaning , I be sure - and he highly esteem brother - in - law . ' she flush deeper and deeper , and be burn red when she reply in a fainter voice , 'I do not think that likely , either . ' ' . , ' say , after a short silence , ' may there be a better confidence between yourself and I ? have borrow a considerable sum of you ? ' ' you will understand , , ' she return , after some indecision : she have be more or less uncertain , and trouble throughout the conversation , and yet have in the main preserve she self - contain manner ; ' you will understand that if I tell you what you press to know , it be not by way of complaint or regret . I would never complain of anything , and what I have do I do not in the least regret . ' spirit , too ! ' think . ' when I marry , I find that my brother be even at that time heavily in debt . heavily for he , I mean . heavily enough to oblige I to sell some trinket . they be no sacrifice . I sell they very willingly . I attach no value to they . they , be quite worthless to I . ' either she see in he face that he know , or she only fear in she conscience that he know , that she speak of some of she husband 's gift . she stop , and redden again . if he have not know it before , he would have know it then , though he have be a much duller man than he be . ' since then , I have give my brother , at various time , what money I could spare : in short , what money I have have . Confid in you at all , on the faith of the interest you profess for he , I will not do so by halve . since you have be in the habit of visit here , he have want in one sum as much as a hundred pound . I have not be able to give it to he . I have feel uneasy for the consequence of he be so involved , but I have keep these secret until now , when I trust they to you honour . I have hold no confidence with any one , because - you anticipat my reason just now . ' she abruptly break off . he be a ready man , and he see , and seize , a opportunity here of present she own image to she , slightly disguise as she brother . ' . , though a graceless person , of the world worldly , I feel the utmost interest , I assure you , in what you tell I . I can not possibly be hard upon you brother . I understand and share the wise consideration with which you regard he error . with all possible respect both for and for , I think I perceive that he have not be fortunate in he training . breed at a disadvantage towards the society in which he have he part to play , he rush into these extreme for himself , from opposite extrem that have long be force - with the very best intention we have no doubt - upon he . 's fine bluff independence , though a most charming characteristic , do not - as we have agree - invite confidence . if I might venture to remark that it be the least in the world deficient in that delicacy to which a youth mistaken , a character misconceive , and ability misdirect , would turn for relief and guidance , I should express what it present to my own view . ' as she sit look straight before she , across the change light upon the grass into the darkness of the wood beyond , he see in she face she application of he very distinctly uttered word . ' all allowance , ' he continue , ' must be make . I have one great fault to find with , however , which I can not forgive , and for which I take he heavily to account . ' turn she eye to he face , and ask he what fault be that ? ' perhaps ,' he return , 'I have say enough . perhaps it would have be better , on the whole , if no allusion to it have escape I . ' ' you alarm I , . pray let I know it . ' 'to relieve you from needless apprehension - and as this confidence regard you brother , which I prize I be sure above all possible thing , have be establish between we - I obey . I can not forgive he for not be more sensible in every word , look , and act of he life , of the affection of he best friend ; of the devotion of he best friend ; of she unselfishness ; of she sacrifice . the return he make she
she , within my observation , be a very poor one . what she have do for he demand he constant love and gratitude , not he ill - humour and caprice . careless fellow as I be , I be not so indifferent , , as to be regardless of this vice in you brother , or inclin to consider it a venial offence . ' the wood float before she , for she eye be suffuse with tear . they rise from a deep well , long conceale , and she heart be fill with acute pain that find no relief in they . ' in a word , it be to correct you brother in this , , that I must aspire . my better knowledge of he circumstance , and my direction and advice in extricat they - rather valuable , I hope , as come from a scapegrace on a much larger scale - will give I some influence over he , and all I gain I shall certainly use towards this end . I have say enough , and more than enough . I seem to be protest that I be a sort of good fellow , when , upon my honour , I have not the least intention to make any protestation to that effect , and openly announce that I be nothing of the sort . , among the tree ,' he add , have lift up he eye and look about ; for he have watch she closely until now ; 'i you brother himself ; no doubt , just come down . as he seem to be loiter in this direction , it may be as well , perhaps , to walk towards he , and throw ourselves in he way . he have be very silent and doleful of late . perhaps , he brotherly conscience be touch - if there be such thing as conscience . though , upon my honour , I hear of they much too often to believe in they . ' he assist she to rise , and she take he arm , and they advance to meet the whelp . he be idly beate the branch as he lounge along : or he stoop viciously to rip the moss from the tree with he stick . he be start when they come upon he while he be engage in this latter pastime , and he colour change . ' ! ' he stammer ; 'I do not know you be here . ' ' whose name , , ' say , put he hand upon he shoulder and turn he , so that they all three walk towards the house together , ' have you be carve on the tree ? ' ' whose name ? ' return . 'Oh ! you mean what girl 's name ? ' ' you have a suspicious appearance of inscrib some fair creature 's on the bark , . ' ' not much of that , , unless some fair creature with a slash fortune at she own disposal would take a fancy to I . or she might be as ugly as she be rich , without any fear of lose I . I would carve she name as often as she like . ' 'I be afraid you be mercenary , . ' ' , ' repeat . ' who be not mercenary ? ask my sister . ' ' have you so prove it to be a failing of mine , ? ' say , show no other sense of he discontent and ill - nature . ' you know whether the cap fit you , , ' return she brother sulkily . ' if it do , you can wear it . ' ' tom be misanthropical to - day , as all bored people be now and then , ' say . ' do not believe he , . he know much better . I shall disclose some of he opinion of you , privately express to I , unless he relent a little . ' ' at all event , , ' say , soften in he admiration of he patron , but shake he head sullenly too , ' you can not tell she that I ever praise she for be mercenary . I may have praise she for be the contrary , and I should do it again , if I have as good reason . however , never mind this now ; it be not very interesting to you , and I be sick of the subject . ' they walk on to the house , where quit she visitor 's arm and go in . he stand look after she , as she ascend the step , and pass into the shadow of the door ; then put he hand upon she brother 's shoulder again , and invite he with a confidential nod to a walk in the garden . ' , my fine fellow , I want to have a word with you . ' they have stop among a disorder of rose - it be part of 's humility to keep 's ros on a reduce scale - and sit down on a terrace - parapet , pluck bud and pick they to piece ; while he powerful familiar stood over he , with a foot upon the parapet , and he figure easily rest on the arm support by that knee . they be just visible from she window . perhaps she see they . ' , what be the matter ? ' 'Oh ! , ' say with a groan , 'I be hard up , and bothere out of my life . ' ' my good fellow , so be I . ' ' you ! ' return . ' you be the picture of independence . , I be in
in a horrible mess . you have no idea what a state I have get myself into - what a state my sister might have get I out of , if she would only have do it . ' he take to bite the rosebud now , and tear they away from he tooth with a hand that tremble like a infirm old man 's . after one exceedingly observant look at he , he companion relapse into he lightest air . ' tom , you be inconsiderate : you expect too much of you sister . you have have money of she , you dog , you know you have . ' 'Well , , I know I have . how else be I to get it ? here be old Bounderby always boast that at my age he live upon twopence a month , or something of that sort . here be my father draw what he call a line , and tie I down to it from a baby , neck and heel . here be my mother who never have anything of she own , except she complaint . what be a fellow to do for money , and where be I to look for it , if not to my sister ? ' he be almost cry , and scatter the bud about by dozen . take he persuasively by the coat . ' but , my dear Tom , if you sister have not get it - ' ' not get it , ? I do not say she have get it . I may have want more than she be likely to have get . but then she ought to get it . she could get it . it be of no use pretend to make a secret of matter now , after what I have tell you already ; you know she do not marry old for she own sake , or for he sake , but for my sake . then why do not she get what I want , out of he , for my sake ? she be not oblige to say what she be go to do with it ; she be sharp enough ; she could manage to coax it out of he , if she choose . then why do not she choose , when I tell she of what consequence it be ? but no . there she sit in he company like a stone , instead of make herself agreeable and get it easily . I do not know what you may call this , but I call it unnatural conduct . ' there be a piece of ornamental water immediately below the parapet , on the other side , into which have a very strong inclination to pitch junior , as the injured man of threaten to pitch they property into the . but he preserve he easy attitude ; and nothing more solid go over the stone balustrade than the accumulated rosebud now float about , a little surface - island . ' my dear , ' say , ' let I try to be you banker . ' ' for 's sake , ' reply , suddenly , ' do not talk about banker ! ' and very white he look , in contrast with the rose . very white . , as a thoroughly well - breed man , accustom to the best society , be not to be surprise - he could as soon have be affect - but he raise he eyelid a little more , as if they be lift by a feeble touch of wonder . albeit it be as much against the precept of he school to wonder , as it be against the doctrine of the . ' what be the present need , ? three figure ? out with they . say what they be . ' ' , ' return , now actually cry ; and he tear be better than he injury , however pitiful a figure he make : ' it be too late ; the money be of no use to I at present . I should have have it before to be of use to I . but I be very much oblige to you ; you be a true friend . ' a true friend ! ' Whelp , whelp ! ' think , lazily ; ' what a ass you be ! ' ' and I take you offer as a great kindness , ' say , grasp he hand . 'A a great kindness , . ' ' well , ' return the other , ' it may be of more use by and by . and , my good fellow , if you will open you bedevilment to I when they come thick upon you , I may show you better way out of they than you can find for yourself . ' ' thank you , ' say , shak he head dismally , and chew rosebud . 'i wish I have know you sooner , . ' ' now , you see , , ' say in conclusion , himself toss over a rose or two , as a contribution to the island , which be always drift to the wall as if it want to become a part of the mainland : ' every man be selfish in everything he do , and I be exactly like the rest of my fellow - creature . I be desperately intent ;' the languor of he desperation be quite tropical ; 'on you softening towards you sister - which you ought to do ; and on you be a more loving and agreeable sort of brother - which you ought to be . ' 'I will be , . ' ' no time like the present , . begin at once . ' '
' certainly I will . and my sister shall say so . ' ' have make which bargain , , ' say Harthouse , clapp he on the shoulder again , with a air which leave he at liberty to infer - as he do , poor fool - that this condition be imposed upon he in mere careless good nature to lessen he sense of obligation , 'we will tear ourselves asunder until dinner - time . ' when appear before dinner , though he mind seem heavy enough , he body be on the alert ; and he appear before come in . 'I do not mean to be cross , , ' he say , give she he hand , and kiss she . 'I know you be fond of I , and you know I be fond of you . ' after this , there be a smile upon 's face that day , for some one else . Alas , for some one else ! ' so much the less be the whelp the only creature that she care for , ' think , reverse the reflection of he first day 's knowledge of she pretty face . ' so much the less , so much the less . ' - the next morning be too bright a morning for sleep , and rise early , and sit in the pleasant bay window of he dressing - room , smoke the rare tobacco that have have so wholesome a influence on he young friend . Repose in the sunlight , with the fragrance of he eastern pipe about he , and the dreamy smoke vanish into the air , so rich and soft with summer odour , he reckon up he advantages as a idle winner might count he gain . he be not at all bo for the time , and could give he mind to it . he have establish a confidence with she , from which she husband be exclude . he have establish a confidence with she , that absolutely turn upon she indifference towards she husband , and the absence , now and at all time , of any congeniality between they . he have artfully , but plainly , assure she that he know she heart in it be last most delicate recess ; he have come so near to she through its tenderest sentiment ; he have associate himself with that feeling ; and the barrier behind which she liv , have melt away . all very odd , and very satisfactory ! and yet he have not , even now , any earnest wickedness of purpose in he . publicly and privately , it be much better for the age in which he liv , that he and the legion of whom he be one be designedly bad , than indifferent and purposeless . it be the drifting iceberg set with any current anywhere , that wreck the ship . when the about like a roaring lion , he about in a shape by which few but savage and hunter be attract . but , when he be trim , smooth , and varnish , accord to the mode ; when he be aweary of vice , and aweary of virtue , use up as to , and use up as to bliss ; then , whether he take to the serve out of red tape , or to the kindling of red fire , he be the very . so recline in the window , indolently smoke , and reckon up the step he have take on the road by which he happen to be travel . the end to which it lead be before he , pretty plainly ; but he trouble himself with no calculation about it . what will be , will be . as he have rather a long ride to take that day - for there be a public occasion 'to do ' at some distance , which afforde a tolerable opportunity of go in for the man - he dress early and go down to breakfast . he be anxious to see if she have relapse since the previous evening . no . he resume where he have leave off . there be a look of interest for he again . he get through the day as much ( or as little ) to he own satisfaction , as be to be expect under the fatiguing circumstance ; and come ride back at six o'clock . there be a sweep of some half - mile between the lodge and the house , and he be ride along at a foot pace over the smooth gravel , once 's , when burst out of the shrubbery , with such violence as to make he horse shy across the road . ' Harthouse ! ' cry . ' have you hear ? ' ' hear what ? ' say Harthouse , soothe he horse , and inwardly favour with no good wish . ' then you have not hear ! ' 'I have hear you , and so have this brute . I have hear nothing else . ' , red and hot , plan himself in the centre of the path before the horse 's head , to explode he bombshell with more effect . ' the 's robb ! ' ' you do not mean it ! ' ' robb last night , sir . robb in a extraordinary manner . robb with a false key . ' ' of much ? ' , in he desire to make the most of it , really see mortify by be oblige to reply , ' why , no ; not of very much . but it might have be . ' ' of how much ? ' 'Oh ! as a sum - if you stick to a sum - of not
not more than a hundred and fifty pound , ' say , with impatience . ' but it be not the sum ; it be the fact . it be the fact of the be rob , that be the important circumstance . I be surprise you do not see it . ' 'My dear , ' say , dismount , and give he bridle to he servant , 'I do see it ; and be as overcome as you can possibly desire I to be , by the spectacle afforde to my mental view . nevertheless , I may be allow , I hope , to congratulate you - which I do with all my soul , I assure you - on you not have sustain a greater loss . ' ' thank 'ee , ' reply , in a short , ungracious manner . ' but I tell you what . it might have be twenty thousand pound . ' 'I suppose it might . ' ' suppose it might ! by the , you may suppose so . by ! ' say , with sundry menacing nod and shake of he head . ' it might have be twice twenty . there be no know what it would have be , or would not have be , as it be , but for the fellows ' be disturb . ' have come up now , and , and . ' be 's daughter know pretty well what it might have be , if you do not , ' bluster . ' drop , sir , as if she be shoot when I tell she ! never know she do such a thing before . do she credit , under the circumstance , in my opinion ! ' she still look faint and pale . beg she to take he arm ; and as they move on very slowly , ask she how the robbery have be commit . ' why , I be go to tell you , ' say , irritably give he arm to . ' if you have not be so mighty particular about the sum , I should have begin to tell you before . you know this lady ( for she be a lady ) , ? ' 'I have already have the honour - ' ' very well . and this young man , Bitzer , you see he too on the same occasion ? ' inclin he head in assent , and knuckle he forehead . ' very well . they live at the . you know they live at the , perhaps ? very well . yesterday afternoon , at the close of business hour , everything be put away as usual . in the iron room that this young fellow sleep outside of , there be never mind how much . in the little safe in young 's closet , the safe use for petty purpose , there be a hundred and fifty odd pound . ' 'a hundred and fifty - four , seven , one , ' say . ' come ! ' retort , stop to wheel round upon he , ' let 's have none of you interruption . it be enough to be rob while you be snor because you be too comfortable , without be put right with you four seven one . I do not snore , myself , when I be you age , let I tell you . I have not victual enough to snore . and I do not four seven one . not if I know it . ' knuckle he forehead again , in a sneaking manner , and see at once particularly impressed and depresse by the instance last given of 's moral abstinence . 'a hundred and fifty odd pound , ' resume . ' that sum of money , young lock in he safe , not a very strong safe , but that be no matter now . everything be leave , all right . some time in the night , while this young fellow snored - Sparsit , ma 'am , you say you have hear he snore ? ' ' , ' return , 'I can not say that I have hear he precisely snore , and therefore must not make that statement . but on winter evening , when he have fall asleep at he table , I have hear he , what I should prefer to describe as partially choke . I have hear he on such occasion produce sound of a nature similar to what may be sometimes hear in Dutch clock . not , ' say , with a lofy sense of give strict evidence , ' that I would convey any imputation on he moral character . far from it . I have always consider Bitzer a young man of the most upright principle ; and to that I beg to bear my testimony . ' ' well ! ' say the exasperated , ' while he be snor , or chok , or Dutch - clocking , or something or other - be asleep - some fellow , somehow , whether previously conceal in the house or not remain to be see , get to young 's safe , force it , and abstract the contents . be then disturb , they make off ; let themselves out at the main door , and double - lock it again ( it be double - lock , and the key under 's pillow ) with a false key , which be pick up in the street near the , about twelve o'clock to - day . no alarm take place , till this chap , Bitzer , turn out this morning , and begin to open and prepare the office for business . then , look at 's safe , he see the door ajar , and
and find the lock force , and the money go . ' ' where be , by the by ? ' ask , glance round . ' he have be help the police , ' say , ' and stay behind at the . I wish these fellow have try to rob I when I be at this time of life . they would have be out of pocket if they have invest eighteenpence in the job ; I can tell 'em that . ' ' be anybody suspect ? ' ' suspect ? I should think there be somebody suspect . ! ' say , relinquish 's arm to wipe he heat head . ' of be not to be plunder and nobody suspect . no , thank you ! ' Harthouse inquire who be suspect ? ' well , ' say , stop and face about to confront they all , 'I will tell you . it be not to be mention everywhere ; it be not to be mention anywhere : in order that the scoundrel concerned ( there be a gang of th'ey ) may be throw off they guard . so take this in confidence . now wait a bit . ' wip he head again . ' what should you say to ;' here he violently explode : 'to a be in it ? ' 'i hope , ' say , lazily , ' not we friend ? ' ' instead of , sir , ' return , ' and that be the man . ' faintly utter some word of incredulity and surprise . 'o yes ! I know ! ' say , immediately catch at the sound . 'I know ! I be use to that . I know all about it . they be the finest people in the world , these fellow be . they have get the gift of the gab , they have . they only want to have they rights explain to they , they do . but I tell you what . show I a dissatisfied , and I will show you a man that be fit for anything bad , I do not care what it be . ' another of the popular fictions of , which some pain have be take to disseminate - and which some people really believe . ' but I be acquaint with these chap , ' say . 'I can read th'ey off , like book . , 'am , I appeal to you . what warn do I give that fellow , the first time he set foot in the house , when the express object of he visit be to know how he could knock over , and floor the ? , in point of high connexion , you be on a level with the aristocracy , - do I say , or do I not say , to that fellow , " you can not hide the truth from I : you be not the kind of fellow I like ; you will come to no good " ? ' ' Assuredly , sir , ' return , ' you do , in a highly impressive manner , give he such a admonition . ' ' when he shocke you , ma 'am , ' say ; ' when he shock you feeling ? ' ' yes , sir , ' return , with a meek shake of she head , ' he certainly do so . though I do not mean to say but that my feeling may be weaker on such point - more foolish if the term be prefer - than they might have be , if I have always occupy my present position . ' star with a bursting pride at , as much as to say , 'I be the proprietor of this female , and she be worth you attention , I think . ' then , resume he discourse . ' you can recall for yourself , , what I say to he when you see he . I do not mince the matter with he . I be never meally with 'em . I know th'ey . very well , sir . three day after that , he bolt . go off , nobody know where : as my mother do in my infancy - only with this difference , that he be a worse subject than my mother , if possible . what do he do before he go ? what do you say ;' , with he hat in he hand , give a beat upon the crown at every little division of he sentence , as if it be a tambourine ; 'to he be see - night after night - watch the ? - to he lurking about there - after dark ? - to its striking - that he could be lurk for no good - to she call 's attention to he , and they both take notice of he - and to its appear on inquiry to -day - that he be also notice by the neighbour ? ' have come to the climax , , like a oriental dancer , put he tambourine on he head . ' suspicious , ' say , ' certainly . ' 'I think so , sir , ' say , with a defiant nod . 'I think so . but there be more of th'ey in it . there be a old woman . one never hear of these thing till the mischief 's do ; all sort of defect be find out in the stable door after the horse be steal ; there be a old woman turn up now . a old woman who seem to have be fly into town on a broomstick , every now and then . she watch the place a whole day before this fellow begin , and
and on the night when you see he , she steal away with he and hold a council with he - I suppose , to make she report on go off duty , and be damned to she . ' there be such a person in the room that night , and she shrink from observation , think . ' this be not all of th'ey , even as we already know 'em , ' say , with many nod of hidden meaning . ' but I have say enough for the present . you will have the goodness to keep it quiet , and mention it to no one . it may take time , but we shall have th'ey . it be policy to give 'em line enough , and there be no objection to that . ' ' of course , they will be punish with the utmost rigour of the law , as notice - board observe , ' reply , ' and serve they right . fellow who go in for bank must take the consequence . if there be no consequence , we should all go in for banks . ' he have gently take 's parasol from she hand , and have put it up for she ; and she walk under its shade , though the sun do not shine there . ' for the present , , ' say she husband , ' here 's Sparsit to look after . 's nerf have be act upon by this business , and she will stay here a day or two . so make she comfortable . ' ' thank you very much , sir , ' that discreet lady observe , ' but pray do not let my comfort be a consideration . anything will do for I . ' it soon appear that if . have a failing in she association with that domestic establishment , it be that she be so excessively regardless of herself and regardful of other , as to be a nuisance . on be show she chamber , she be so dreadfully sensible of its comforts as to suggest the inference that she would have prefer to pass the night on the mangle in the laundry . true , the Powler and the Scadgerse be accustom to splendour , ' but it be my duty to remember ,' be fond of observe with a lofty grace : particularly when any of the domestic be present , ' that what I be , I be no longer . indeed , ' say she , ' if I could altogether cancel the remembrance that be a Powler , or that I myself be related to the family ; or if I could even revoke the fact , and make myself a person of common descent and ordinary connexion ; I would gladly do so . I should think it , under exist circumstance , right to do so . ' the same Hermitical state of mind lead to she renunciation of make dish and wine at dinner , until fairly command by to take they ; when she say , ' indeed you be very good , sir ;' and depart from a resolution of which she have make rather formal and public announcement , to ' wait for the simple mutton . ' she be likewise deeply apologetic for want the salt ; and , feel amiably bound to bear out to the fullest extent in the testimony he have borne to she nerve , occasionally sit back in she chair and silently wept ; at which period a tear of large dimension , like a crystal ear - , might be observe ( or rather , must be , for it insist on public notice ) slide down she nose . but 's greatest point , first and last , be she determination to pity . there be occasion when in look at he she be involuntarily move to shake she head , as who would say , ' , poor ! ' after allow herself to be betraye into these evidences of emotion , she would force a lambent brightness , and would be fitfully cheerful , and would say , ' you have still good spirits , sir , I be thankful to find ;' and would appear to hail it as a bless dispensation that bear up as he do . one idiosyncrasy for which she often apologize , she find it excessively difficult to conquer . she have a curiious propensity to call ' , ' and yield to it some three or four score time in the course of the evening . she repetition of this mistake cover with modest confusion ; but indeed , she say , it seem so natural to say : whereas , to persuade herself that the young lady whom she have have the happiness of know from a child could be really and truly , she find almost impossible . it be a further singularity of this remarkable case , that the more she think about it , the more impossible it appear ; ' the difference , ' she observe , ' be such . ' in the drawing - room after dinner , try the case of the robbery , examine the witness , make note of the evidence , find the suspect person guilty , and sentence they to the extreme punishment of the law . that do , be dismiss to town with instruction to recommend to come home by the mail - train . when candle be bring , . Sparsit murmure , ' do not be low , sir . pray let I see you cheerful , sir , as I use to do . ' , upon whom these consolation have begin to produce the effect of make he , in a bull - head blundering way , sentimental
sentimental , sigh like some large sea-animal . 'I can not bear to see you so , sir , ' say . ' try a hand at backgammon , sir , as you use to do when I have the honour of live under you roof . ' 'I have not play backgammon , ma 'am , ' say , ' since that time . ' 'no , sir , ' say , soothingly , 'I be aware that you have not . I remember that take no interest in the game . but I shall be happy , sir , if you will condescmend . ' they play near a window , open on the garden . it be a fine night : not moonlight , but sultry and fragrant . and Harthouse stroll out into the garden , where they voice could be hear in the stillness , though not what they say . , from she place at the backgammon board , be constantly strain she eye to pierce the shadow without . ' what be the matter , ma 'am ? ' say ; ' you do not see a , do you ? ' ' oh dear no , sir , ' return , be think of the dew . ' ' what have you get to do with the dew , ma 'am ? ' say . ' it be not myself , sir , ' return , 'I be fearful of 's take cold . ' ' she never take cold , ' say . ' really , sir ? ' say . and be affect with a cough in she throat . when the time draw near for retiring , take a glass of water . 'Oh , sir ? ' say . ' not you sherry warm , with lemon - peel and nutmeg ? ' ' why , I have get out of the habit of take it now , ma 'am , ' say . ' the more be the pity , sir , ' return Sparsit ; ' you be lose all you good old habit . Cheer up , sir ! if will permit I , I will offer to make it for you , as I have often done . ' readily permit to do anything she pleased , that considerate lady make the beverage , and hand it to . ' it will do you good , sir . it will warm you heart . it be the sort of thing you want , and ought to take , sir . ' and when say , ' you health , ma 'am ! ' she answer with great feeling , ' thank you , sir . the same to you , and happiness also . ' finally , she wish he good night , with great patho ; and go to bed , with a maudlin persuasion that he have be cross in something tender , though he could not , for he life , have mention what it be . long after have undressed and alain down , she watch and wait for she brother 's come home . that could hardly be , she know , until a hour past midnight ; but in the country silence , which do anything but calm the trouble of she thought , time lag wearily . at last , when the darkness and stillness have see for hour to thicke one another , she hear the bell at the gate . she feel as though she would have be glad that it ring on until daylight ; but it cease , and the circle of it be last sound spread out fainter and wider in the air , and all be dead again . she wait yet some quarter of a hour , as she judge . then she arise , put on a loose robe , and go out of she room in the dark , and up the staircase to she brother 's room . he door be shut , she softly open it and speak to he , approach he bed with a noiseless step . she knee down beside it , pass she arm over he neck , and draw he face to hers . she know that he only feign to be asleep , but she say nothing to he . he start by and by as if he be just then awaken , and ask who that be , and what be the matter ? ' , have you anything to tell I ? if ever you love I in you life , and have anything conceal from every one beside , tell it to I . ' 'I do not know what you mean , . you have be dream . ' 'my dear brother :' she lay she head down on he pillow , and she hair flow over he as if she would hide he from every one but herself : 'i there nothing that you have to tell I ? be there nothing you can tell I if you will ? you can tell I nothing that will change I . of , tell I the truth ! ' 'I do not know what you mean , ! ' 'as you lie here alone , my dear , in the melancholy night , so you must lie somewhere one night , when even I , if I be live then , shall have leave you . as I be here beside you , barefoot , unclothed , undistinguishable in darkness , so must I lie through all the night of my decay , until I be dust . in the name of that time , , tell I the truth now ! ' ' what be it you want to know ? ' ' you may be certain ; ' in the energy of she love she
she take he to she bosom as if he be a child ; ' that I will not reproach you . you may be certain that I will be compassionate and true to you . you may be certain that I will save you at whatever cost . o , have you nothing to tell I ? Whisper very softly . say only " yes , " and I shall understand you ! ' she turn she ear to he lip , but he remain doggedly silent . ' not a word , ? ' ' how can I say yes , or how can I say no , when I do not know what you mean ? Loo , you be a brave , kind girl , worthy I begin to think of a better brother than I be . but I have nothing more to say . go to bed , go to bed . ' ' you be tired , ' she whisper presently , more in she usual way . ' yes , I be quite tire out . ' ' you have be so hurry and disturb to - day . have any fresh discoveries be make ? ' ' only those you have hear of , from - he . ' ' , have you say to any one that we make a visit to those people , and that we see those three together ? ' ' no . do not you yourself particularly ask I to keep it quiet when you ask I to go there with you ? ' ' yes . but I do not know then what be go to happen . ' ' nor I neither . how could I ? ' he be very quick upon she with this retort . ' ought I to say , after what have happen , ' say he sister , stand by the bed - she have gradually withdrawn herself and risen , ' that I make that visit ? should I say so ? must I say so ? ' ' , , ' return she brother , ' you be not in the habit of ask my advice . say what you like . if you keep it to yourself , I shall keep it to myself . if you disclose it , there be a end of it . ' it be too dark for either to see the other 's face ; but each see very attentive , and to consider before speak . ' , do you believe the man I give the money to , be really implicated in this crime ? ' 'I do not know . I do not see why he should not be . ' ' he seem to I a honest man . ' 'Another person may seem to you dishonest , and yet not be so . ' there be a pause , for he have hesitate and stop . 'In short , ' resume , as if he have make up he mind , ' if you come to that , perhaps I be so far from be altogether in he favour , that I take he outside the door to tell he quietly , that I think he might consider himself very well off to get such a windfall as he have get from my sister , and that I hope he would make good use of it . you remember whether I take he out or not . I say nothing against the man ; he may be a very good fellow , for anything I know ; I hope he be . ' ' be he offend by what you say ? ' ' no , he take it pretty well ; he be civil enough . where be you , ? ' he sit up in bed and kiss she . ' good night , my dear , good night . ' ' you have nothing more to tell I ? ' ' no . what should I have ? you would not have I tell you a lie ! ' 'I would not have you do that to - night , , of all the night in you life ; many and much happier as I hope they will be . ' ' thank you , my dear Loo . I be so tired , that I be sure I wonder I do not say anything to get to sleep . go to bed , go to bed . ' Kisse she again , he turn round , draw the coverlet over he head , and lay as still as if that time have come by which she have adjure he . she stand for some time at the bedside before she slowly move away . she stop at the door , look back when she have open it , and ask he if he have call she ? but he lay still , and she softly close the door and return to she room . then the wretched boy look cautiously up and find she gone , crept out of bed , fasten he door , and throw himself upon he pillow again : tear he hair , morosely cry , grudgingly love she , hatefully but impenitently spur himself , and no less hatefully and unprofitably spur all the good in the world . - hear the last of it Mr . Sparsin , lie by to recover the tone of she nerve in 's retreat , keep such a sharp look - out , night and day , under she Coriolanian eyebrow , that she eye , like a couple of lighthouse on a iron - bound coast , might have warn all prudent mariner from that bold rock she nose and the dark and craggy region in its neighbourhood , but for the placidity of she manner . although
although it be hard to believe that she retire for the night could be anything but a form , so severely wide awake be those classical eye of hers , and so impossible do it seem that she rigid nose could yield to any relaxing influence , yet she manner of sitting , smooth she uncomfortable , not to say , gritty mitten ( they be construct of a cool fabric like a meat - safe ) , or of ambling to unknown place of destination with she foot in she cotton stirrup , be so perfectly serene , that most observer would have be constrain to suppose she a dove , embody by some freak of nature , in the earthly tabernacle of a bird of the hook - beak order . she be a most wonderful woman for prowl about the house . how she get from story to story be a mystery beyond solution . a lady so decorous in herself , and so highly connect , be not to be suspect of drop over the banister or slide down they , yet she extraordinary facility of locomotion suggest the wild idea . another noticeable circumstance in be , that she be never hurrie . she would shoot with consummate velocity from the roof to the hall , yet would be in full possession of she breath and dignity on the moment of she arrival there . neither be she ever see by human vision to go at a great pace . she take very kindly to , and have some pleasant conversation with he soon after she arrival . she make he she stately curtsey in the garden , one morning before breakfast . ' it appear but yesterday , sir , ' say Sparsit , ' that I have the honour of receive you at the , when you be so good as to wish to be make acquainted with 's address . ' 'An occasion , I be sure , not to be forget by myself in the course of , ' say , inclin he head to . Sparsit with the most indolent of all possible air . ' we live in a singular world , sir , ' say . 'I have have the honour , by a coincidence of which I be proud , to have make a remark , similar in effect , though not so epigrammatically expressed . ' 'a singular world , I would say , sir , ' pursue ; after acknowledge the compliment with a drooping of she dark eyebrow , not altogether so mild in its expression as she voice be in its dulcet tone ; 'as regard the intimacy we form at one time , with individual we be quite ignorant of , at another . I recall , sir , that on that occasion you go so far as to say you be actually apprehensive of . ' ' you memory do I more honou than my insignificance deserve . I avail myself of you obliging hint to correct my timidity , and it be unnecessary to add that they be perfectly accurate . 's talent for - in fact for anything require accuracy - with a combination of strength of mind - and Family - be too habitually develop to admit of any question . ' he be almost fall asleep over this compliment ; it take he so long to get through , and he mind wander so much in the course of its execution . ' you find - I really can not call she ; it be very absurd of I - as youthful as I describe she ? ' ask , sweetly . ' you draw she portrait perfectly , ' say . ' present she dead image . ' ' Very engage , sir , ' say , cause she mitten slowly to revolve over one another . ' highly so . ' ' it use to be consider , ' say , ' that be want in animation , but I confess she appear to I considerably and strikingly improve in that respect . ay , and indeed here be ! ' cry , nodd she head a great many time , as if she have be talk and think of no one else . ' how do you find yourself this morning , sir ? pray let we see you cheerful , sir . ' now , these persistent assuagement of he misery , and lightening of he load , have by this time begin to have the effect of make softer than usual towards Sparsit , and harder than usual to most other people from he wife downward . so , when . Sparsit say with force lightness of heart , ' you want you breakfast , sir , but I dare say will soon be here to preside at the table , ' reply , ' if I wait to be take care of by my wife , ma 'am , I believe you know pretty well I should wait till , so I will trouble you to take charge of the teapot . ' Sparsit comply , and assume she old position at table . this again make the excellent woman vastly sentimental . she be so humble withal , that when appear , she rise , protest she never could think of sit in that place under exist circumstance , often as she have have the honour of make 's breakfast , before - she beg pardon , she mean to say - she hope to be excuse , but she really could not get it right yet , though she trust to become familiar with it by and by - have assume she present position . it be only ( she observ ) because happen to be a little late , and 's time be so very precious , and she
she know it of old to be so essential that he should breakfast to the moment , that she have take the liberty of comply with he request ; long as he will have be a law to she . ' there ! stop where you be , ma 'am , ' say , ' stop where you be ! will be very glad to be relieved of the trouble , I believe . ' ' do not say that , sir , ' return , almost with severity , ' because that be very unkind to . and to be unkind be not to be you , sir . ' ' you may set you mind at rest , ma 'am . - you can take it very quietly , can not you , ? ' say , in a bluster way to he wife . ' of course . it be of no moment . why should it be of any importance to I ? ' ' why should it be of any importance to any one , , ? ' say , swell with a sense of slight . ' you attach too much importance to these thing , ma 'am . by , you will be corrupt in some of you notion here . you be old - fashioned , ma 'am . you be behind 's child 's time . ' ' what be the matter with you ? ' ask , coldly surprised . ' what have give you offence ? ' ' Offence ! ' repeat . ' do you suppose if there be any offence give I , I should not name it , and request to have it correct ? I be a straightforward man , I believe . I do not go beat about for side - wind . ' 'I suppose no one ever have occasion to think you too diffident , or too delicate , ' answer he composedly : 'I have never make that objection to you , either as a child or as a woman . I do not understand what you would have . ' ' have ? ' return . ' Nothing . otherwise , do not you , , know thoroughly well that I , of , would have it ? ' she look at he , as he strike the table and make the teacup ring , with a proud colour in she face that be a new change , thought . ' you be incomprehensible this morning , ' say . ' pray take no further trouble to explain yourself . I be not curious to know you meaning . what do it matter ? ' nothing more be say on this theme , and be soon idly gay on indifferent subject . but from this day , the Sparsit action upon throw and more together , and strengthen the dangerous alienation from she husband and confidence against he with another , into which she have fall by degree so fine that she could not retrace they if she try . but whether she ever try or no , lay hide in she own closed heart . be so much affect on this particular occasion , that , assist to he hat after breakfast , and be then alone with he in the hall , she imprint a chaste kiss upon he hand , murmure ' my benefactor ! ' and retire , overwhelm with grief . yet it be a indubitable fact , within the cognizance of this history , that five minute after he have leave the house in the self - same hat , the same descendant of the Scadgerse and connexion by matrimony of the Powler , shook she right - hand mitten at he portrait , make a contemptuous grimace at that work of art , and say ' serve you right , you , and I be glad of it . ' have not be long gone , when appear . have come down by train , shriek and ratt over the long line of arch that bestrode the wild country of past and present coal - pit , with a express from . it be a hasty note to inform that lay very ill . she have never be well within she daughter 's knowledge ; but , she have decline within the last few day , have continue sink all through the night , and be now as nearly dead , as she limit capacity of be in any state that imply the ghost of a intention to get out of it , allow . accompany by the lightest of porter , fit colourless servitor at 's door when knock , rumble to , over the coal - pit past and present , and be whir into it be smoky jaw . she dismiss the messenger to he own device , and ride away to she old home . she have seldom be there since she marriage . she father be usually sift and sift at he parliamentary cinder - heap in ( without be observe to turn up many precious article among the rubbish ) , and be still hard at it in the national dust - yard . she mother have take it rather as a disturbance than otherwise , to be visit , as she recline upon she sofa ; young people , feel herself all unfit for ; she have never soften to again , since the night when the stroller 's child have raise she eye to look at 's intend wife . she have no inducement to go back , and have rarely gone . neither , as she approach she old home now , do any of the best influence of old home descend upon she . the dream of childhood - its airy fable ; its graceful , beautiful , humane , impossible adornment of the
the world beyond : so good to be believe in once , so good to be remember when outgrown , for then the least among they rise to the stature of a great Charity in the heart , suffer little child to come into the midst of it , and to keep with they pure hand a garden in the stony way of this world , wherein it be better for all the child of Adam that they should oftener sin themselves , simple and trustful , and not worldly -wise - what have she to do with these ? Remembrance of how she have journey to the little that she know , by the enchanted road of what she and million of innocent creature have hope and imagine ; of how , first come upon through the tender light of , she have see it a beneficent god , deferr to god as great as itself ; not a grim , cruel and cold , with its victim bound hand to foot , and its big dumb shape set up with a sightless stare , never to be move by anything but so many calculate ton of leverage - what have she to do with these ? she remembrance of home and childhood be remembrance of the drying up of every spring and fountain in she young heart as it gush out . the golden water be not there . they be flow for the fertilization of the land where grape be gather from thorn , and fig from thistle . she go , with a heavy , harden kind of sorrow upon she , into the house and into she mother 's room . since the time of she leave home , have live with the rest of the family on equal term . be at she mother 's side ; and , she sister , now ten or twelve year old , be in the room . there be great trouble before it could be make known to that she eldest child be there . she recline , prop up , from mere habit , on a couch : as nearly in she old usual attitude , as anything so helpless could be keep in . she have positively refuse to take to she bed ; on the ground that if she do , she would never hear the last of it . she feeble voice sound so far away in she bundle of shawl , and the sound of another voice address she seem to take such a long time in get down to she ear , that she might have be lie at the bottom of a well . the poor lady be nearer than she ever have be : which have much to do with it . on be tell that be there , she reply , at cross - purpose , that she have never call he by that name since he marry ; that pend she choice of a objectionable name , she have call he j ; and that she could not at present depart from that regulation , not be yet provide with a permanent substitute . have sit by she for some minute , and have speak to she often , before she arrive at a clear understanding who it be . she then seem to come to it all at once . ' well , my dear , ' say , ' and I hope you be go on satisfactorily to yourself . it be all you father 's do . he set he heart upon it . and he ought to know . ' 'I want to hear of you , mother ; not of myself . ' ' you want to hear of I , my dear ? that be something new , I be sure , when anybody want to hear of I . not at all well , . very faint and giddy . ' ' be you in pain , dear mother ? ' 'I think there be a pain somewhere in the room , ' say . , ' but I could not positively say that I have get it . ' after this strange speech , she lay silent for some time . , hold she hand , could feel no pulse ; but kiss it , could see a slight thing thread of life in fluttering motion . ' you very seldom see you sister , ' say . ' she grow like you . I wish you would look at she . Sissy , bring she here . ' she be bring , and stand with she hand in she sister 's . have observ she with she arm round 's neck , and she feel the difference of this approach . ' do you see the likeness , ? ' ' yes , mother . I should think she like I . but - ' ' ! yes , I always say so ,' cry , with unexpected quickness . ' and that remind I . I - I want to speak to you , my dear . Sissy , my good girl , leave we alone a minute . ' have relinquish the hand : have think that she sister 's be a better and brighter face than hers have ever be : have see in it , not without a rise feeling of resentment , even in that place and at that time , something of the gentleness of the other face in the room ; the sweet face with the trusting eye , make paler than watch a sympathy make it , by the rich dark hair . leave alone with she mother , see she lie with a awful lull upon she face , like one who be float away upon some great water , all resistance over , contend to be carry down the
the stream . she put the shadow of a hand to she lip again , and recal she . ' you be go to speak to I , mother . ' 'Eh ? yes , to be sure , my dear . you know you father be almost always away now , and therefore I must write to he about it . ' ' about what , mother ? do not be troublead . about what ? ' ' you must remember , my dear , that whenever I have say anything , on any subject , I have never hear the last of it : and consequently , that I have long leave off say anything . ' 'I can hear you , mother . ' but , it be only by dint of bend down to she ear , and at the same time attentively watch the lip as they move , that she could link such faint and break sound into any chain of connexion . ' you learn a great deal , , and so do you brother . Ology of all kind from morning to night . if there be any Ology leave , of any description , that have not be wear to rag in this house , all I can say be , I hope I shall never hear its name . ' 'I can hear you , mother , when you have strength to go on . ' this , to keep she from float away . ' but there be something - not a Ology at all - that you father have miss , or forgote , . I do not know what it be . I have often sit with near I , and think about it . I shall never get its name now . but you father may . it make I restless . I want to write to he , to find out for 's sake , what it be . give I a pen , give I a pen . ' even the power of restlessness be gone , except from the poor head , which could just turn from side to side . she fancie , however , that she request have be comply with , and that the pen she could not have hold be in she hand . it matter little what figure of wonderful no - mean she begin to trace upon she wrapper . the hand soon stop in the midst of they ; the light that have always be feeble and dim behind the weak transparency , go out ; and even , emerge from the shadow in which man walketh and disquieteth himself in vain , take upon she the dread solemnity of the sage and patriarch . - . SPARSIT 's . SPARSIT 's nerf be slow to recover they tone , the worthy woman make a stay of some week in duration at 's retreat , where , notwithstand she anchorite turn of mind base upon she become consciousness of she altered station , she resign herself with noble fortitude to lod , as one may say , in clover , and feed on the fat of the land . during the whole term of this recess from the guardianship of the , be a pattern of consistency ; continue to take such pity on to he face , as be rarely take on man , and to call he portrain a Noodle to its face , with the greatest acrimony and contempt . , have get it into he explosive composition that . be a highly superior woman to perceive that he have that general cross upon he in he desert ( for he have not yet settle what it be ) , and further that would have object to she as a frequent visitor if it have comport with he greatness that she should object to anything he choose to do , resolve not to lose sight of easily . so when she nerf be string up to the pitch of again consum sweetbread in solitude , he say to she at the dinner - table , on the day before she departure , 'I tell you what , ma 'am ; you shall come down here of a , while the fine weather last , and stay till . ' to which return , in effect , though not of the persuasion : 'to hear be to obey . ' now , be not a poetical woman ; but she take a idea in the nature of a allegorical fancy , into she head . much watching of , and much consequent observation of she impenetrable demeanour , which keenly whet and sharpen Mrs . Sparsit 's edge , must have give she as it be a lift , in the way of inspiration . she erect in she mind a mighty Staircase , with a dark pit of shame and ruin at the bottom ; and down those stair , from day to day and hour to hour , she see come . it become the business of 's life , to look up at she staircase , and to watch come down . sometimes slowly , sometimes quickly , sometimes several step at one bout , sometimes stop , never turn back . if she have once turn back , it might have be the death of in spleen and grief . she have be descend steadily , to the day , and on the day , when issue the weekly invitation record above . be in good spirit , and inclin to be conversational . ' and pray , sir , ' say she , ' if I may venture to ask a question appertain to any subject on which you show reserve - which be indeed hardy in I , for I well know you have a reason for everything you
you do - have you receive intelligence respect the robbery ? ' ' why , ma 'am , no ; not yet . under the circumstance , I do not expect it yet . be not build in a day , ma'am . ' ' very true , sir , ' say , shak she head . ' yet in a week , ma'am . ' 'no , indeed , sir , ' return , with a gentle melancholy upon she . ' in a similar manner , ma 'am , ' say , 'I can wait , you know . if and could wait , can wait . they be better off in they youth than I be , however . they have a she - wolf for a nurse ; I have only a she - wolf for a grandmother . she do not give any milk , ma 'am ; she give bruise . she be a regular at that . ' ' ah ! ' sigh and shudder . 'no , ma 'am , ' continue , 'I have not hear anything more about it . it be in hand , though ; and young , who rather stick to business at present - something new for he ; he have not the schooling I have - be help . my injunction be , keep it quiet , and let it seem to blow over . do what you like under the rose , but do not give a sign of what you be about ; or half a hundred of th'ey will combine together and get this fellow who have bolt , out of reach for good . keep it quiet , and the thief will grow in confidence by little and little , and we shall have 'em . ' ' very sagacious indeed , sir , ' say . ' very interesting . the old woman you mention , sir - ' ' the old woman I mention , ma 'am , ' say , cutte the matter short , as it be nothing to boast about , 'is not laid hold of ; but , she may take she oath she will be , if that be any satisfaction to she villainous old mind . in the mean time , ma 'am , I be of opinion , if you ask I my opinion , that the less she be talk about , the better . ' the same evening , , in she chamber window , rest from she packing operation , look towards she great staircase and see still descende . she sit by , in a alcove in the garden , talk very low ; he stand lean over she , as they whisper together , and he face almost touch she hair . ' if not quite ! ' say , strain she hawk 's eye to the utmost . be too distant to hear a word of they discourse , or even to know that they be speak softly , otherwise than from the expression of they figure ; but what they say be this : ' you recollect the man , ? ' 'Oh , perfectly ! ' ' he face , and he manner , and what he say ? ' ' perfectly . and a infinitely dreary person he appear to I to be . lengthy and prosy in the extreme . it be know to hold forth , in the humble - virtue school of eloquence ; but , I assure you I think at the time , " my good fellow , you be over -do this ! " ' ' it have be very difficult to I to think ill of that man . ' 'my dear - as say . ' which he never do say . ' you know no good of the fellow ? ' ' no , certainly . ' ' nor of any other such person ? ' ' how can I , ' she return , with more of she first manner on she than he have lately see , ' when I know nothing of they , man or woman ? ' 'My dear , then consent to receive the submissive representation of you devoted friend , who know something of several variety of he excellent fellow - creature - for excellent they be , I be quite ready to believe , in spite of such little foible as always help themselves to what they can get hold of . this fellow talk . well ; every fellow talk . he profess morality . well ; all sort of humbug profess morality . from the House of Commons to the House of correction , there be a general profession of morality , except among we people ; it really be that exception which make we people quite revive . you see and hear the case . here be one of the fluffy class pull up extremely short by my esteemed friend - who , as we know , be not possess of that delicacy which would soften so tight a hand . the member of the fluffy class be injur , exasperate , leave the house grumbl , meet somebody who propose to he to go in for some share in this business , go in , put something in he pocket which have nothing in it before , and relieve he mind extremely . really he would have be a uncommon , instead of a common , fellow , if he have not avail himself of such a opportunity . or he may have originate it altogether , if he have the cleverness . ' 'I almost feel as though it must be bad in I , ' return , after sit thoughtful awhile , 'too be so ready to agree with you , and to be so lightened in my heart by what
what you say . ' 'I only say what be reasonable ; nothing worse . I have talk it over with my friend more than once - of course I remain on term of perfect confidence with - and he be quite of my opinion , and I be quite of he . will you walk ? ' they stroll away , among the lane begin to be indistinct in the twilight - she lean on he arm - and she little think how she be go down , down , down , 's staircase . night and day , . Sparsit keep it stand . when have arrive at the bottom and disappear in the gulf , it might fall in upon she if it would ; but , until then , there it be to be , a build , before 's eye . and there always be , upon it . and always glid down , down , down ! see come and go ; she hear of he here and there ; she see the change of the face he have study ; she , too , remark to a nicety how and when it cloude , how and when it clear ; she keep she black eye wide open , with no touch of pity , with no touch of compunction , all absorb in interest . in the interest of see she , ever draw , with no hand to stay she , nearer and nearer to the bottom of this new 's . with all she deference for as contradistinguish from he portrait , . Sparsit have not the smallest intention of interrupt the descent . eager to see it accomplish , and yet patient , she wait for the last fall , as for the ripeness and fulness of the harvest of she hope . Hush in expectancy , she keep she wary gaze upon the stair ; and seldom so much as darkly shook she right mitten ( with she fist in it ) , at the figure come down . - and lower the figure descend the great stair , steadily , steadily ; always verge , like a weight in deep water , to the black gulf at the bottom . , apprise of he wife 's decease , make a expedition from , and bury she in a business - like manner . he then return with promptitude to the national cinder - heap , and resume he sifting for the odd and end he want , and he throw of the dust about into the eyes of other people who want other odd and end - in fact resume he parliamentary duty . in the meantime , Sparsit keep unwinking watch and ward . separate from she staircase , all the week , by the length of iron road divide from the country house , she yet maintain she cat - like observation of , through she husband , through she brother , through , through the outside of letter and packet , through everything animate and inanimate that at any time go near the stair . ' you foot on the last step , my lady , ' say Sparsit , apostrophize the descending figure , with the aid of she threatening mitten , ' and all you art shall never blind I . ' or nature though , the original stock of 's character or the graft of circumstance upon it , - she curious reserve do baffle , while it stimulate , one as sagacious as . there be time when be not sure of she . there be time when he could not read the face he have study so long ; and when this lonely girl be a greater mystery to he , than any woman of the world with a ring of satellite to help she . so the time go on ; until it happen that be call away from home by business which require he presence elsewhere , for three or four day . it be on a that he intimate this to at the , add : ' but you will go down to - morrow , ma 'am , all the same . you will go down just as if I be there . it will make no difference to you . ' ' pray , sir , ' return , reproachfully , ' let I beg you not to say that . you absence will make a vast difference to I , sir , as I think you very well know . ' ' well , ma 'am , then you must get on in my absence as well as you can , ' say , not displease . ' , ' retort , ' you will be to I a law , sir ; otherwise , it might be my inclination to dispute you kind command , not feel sure that it will be quite so agreeable to to receive I , as it ever be to you own munificent hospitality . but you shall say no more , sir . I will go , upon you invitation . ' ' why , when I invite you to my house , ma 'am , ' say , open he eye , 'I should hope you want no other invitation . ' 'no , indeed , sir , ' return , 'I should hope not . say no more , sir . I would , sir , I could see you gay again . ' ' what do you mean , ma 'am ? ' bluster . ' , ' rejoin , ' there be wo not to be a elasticity in you which I sadly miss . be buoyant , sir ! ' , under the influence of this difficult adjuration , back up by she compassionate eye , could only scratch he head in a
a feeble and ridiculous manner , and afterwards assert himself at a distance , by be hear to bully the small fry of business all the morning . ' Bitzer , ' say Sparsit that afternoon , when she patron be go on he journey , and the be close , ' present my compliment to yoing , and ask he if he would step up and partake of a lamb chop and walnut ketchup , with a glass of ale ? ' yong be usually ready for anything in that way , return a gracious answer , and follow on its heel . ' , ' say , ' these plain viands be on table , I think you might be temp . ' ' thank 'ee , , ' say the whelp . and gloomily fall to . ' how be , ? ' ask . 'Oh , he be all right , ' say . ' where may he be at present ? ' ask in a light conversational manner , after mentally devote the whelp to the Fury for be so uncommunicative . ' he be shoot in , ' say . ' send Lo a basket half as big as a church , yesterday . ' ' the kind of gentleman , now , ' say Sparsit , sweetly , ' whom one might wager to be a good shot ! ' ' crack , ' say . he have long be a down - look young fellow , but this characteristic have so increase of late , that he never raise he eye to any face for three seconds together . consequently have ample means of watch he look , if she be so inclined . ' be a great favourite of mine , ' say , 'as indeed he be of most people . may we expect to see he again shortly , ? ' ' why , I expect to see he to - morrow , ' return the whelp . ' good news ! ' cry , blandly . 'I have get a appointment with he to meet he in the evening at the station here , ' say , ' and I be go to dine with he afterwards , I believe . he be not come down to the country house for a week or so , be due somewhere else . at least , he say so ; but I should not wonder if he be to stop here over , and stray that way . ' ' which remind I ! ' say . ' would you remember a message to you sister , , if I be to charge you with one ? ' ' well ? I will try , ' return the reluctant whelp , ' if it be not a long un . ' ' it be merely my respectful compliment , ' say , ' and I fear I may not trouble she with my society this week ; be still a little nervous , and better perhaps by my poor self . ' 'Oh ! if that be all , ' observ , ' it would not much matter , even if I be to forget it , for Loo be not likely to think of you unless she see you . ' have pay for he entertainment with this agreeable compliment , he relapse into a hangdog silence until there be no more ale leave , when he say , ' well , Sparsit , I must be off ! ' and go off . next day , , sit at she window all day long look at the customer come in and out , watch the postman , keep a eye on the general traffic of the street , revolve many thing in she mind , but , above all , keep she attention on she staircase . the evening come , she put on she bonnet and shawl , and go quietly out : have she reason for hovering in a furtive way about the station by which a passenger would arrive from , and for preferring to peep into it round pillars and corner , and out of lady 's waiting - room window , to appear in its precinct openly . be in attendance , and loiter about until the expect train come in . it bring no Harthouse . wait until the crowd have disperse , and the bustle be over ; and then refer to a posted list of train , and take counsel with porter . that do , he stroll away idly , stop in the street and look up it and down it , and lift he hat off and put it on again , and yawn and stretch himself , and exhibit all the symptom of mortal weariness to be expect in one who have still to wait until the next train should come in , a hour and forty minute hence . ' this be a device to keep he out of the way , ' say . Sparsit , start from the dull office window whence she have watch he last . ' Harthouse be with he sister now ! ' it be the conception of a inspire moment , and she shoot off with she utmost swiftness to work it out . the station for the country house be at the opposite end of the town , the time be short , the road not easy ; but she be so quick in pouncing on a disengaged coach , so quick in dart out of it , produce she money , seize she ticket , and diive into the train , that she be borne along the arch spann the land of coal - pit past and present , as if she have be catch up in a cloud and whir away . all the journey , immovable
immovable in the air though never leave behind ; aplain to the dark eye of she mind , as the electric wir which rule a colossal strip of music - paper out of the evening sky , be plain to the dark eye of she body ; see she staircase , with the figure come down . very near the bottom now . upon the brink of the abyss . a overcast evening , just at nightfall , see beneath its drooping eyelid glide out of she carriage , pass down the wooden step of the little station into a stony road , cross it into a green lane , and become hide in a summer - growth of leave and branch . one or two late bird sleepily chirp in they nests , and a bat heavily cross and recrosse she , and the reek of she own tread in the thick dust that feel like velvet , be all hear or see until she very softly close a gate . she go up to the house , keep within the shrubbery , and go round it , pee between the leaf at the lower window . most of they be open , as they usually be in such warm weather , but there be no light yet , and all be silent . she try the garden with no better effect . she think of the wood , and steal towards it , heedless of long grass and brier : of worm , snail , and slug , and all the creeping thing that be . with she dark eye and she hook nose warily in advance of she , . Sparsit softly crush she way through the thick undergrowth , so intent upon she object that she probably would have do no less , if the wood have be a wood of adder . ! the smaller bird might have tumble out of they nests , fascinate by the glittering of 's eye in the gloom , as she stop and listen . low voice close at hand . he voice and hers . the appointment be a device to keep the brother away ! there they be yonder , by the felled tree . bend low among the dewy grass , Sparsit advance closer to they . she draw herself up , and stand behind a tree , like in he ambuscade against the savage ; so near to they that at a spring , and that no great one , she could have touch they both . he be there secretely , and have not show himself at the house . he have come on horseback , and must have pass through the neighbour field ; for he horse be tie to the meadow side of the fence , within a few pace . ' my dearest love , ' say he , ' what could I do ? know you be alone , be it possible that I could stay away ? ' ' you may hang you head , to make yourself the more attractive ; I do not know what they see in you when you hold it up , ' think Sparsit ; ' but you little think , my dearest love , whose eye be on you ! ' that she hang she head , be certain . she urge he to go away , she command he to go away ; but she neither turn she face to he , nor raise it . yet it be remarkable that she sit as still as ever the amiable woman in ambuscade have see she sit , at any period in she life . she hand rest in one another , like the hand of a statue ; and even she manner of speaking be not hurrie . 'my dear child , ' say ; . see with delight that he arm embrace she ; ' will you not bear with my society for a little while ? ' ' not here . ' ' where , ? ' not here . ' ' but we have so little time to make so much of , and I have come so far , and be altogether so devote , and distract . there never be a slave at once so devoted and ill - use by he mistress . to look for you sunny welcome that have warm I into life , and to be receive in you frozen manner , be heart - rending . ' ' be I to say again , that I must be leave to myself here ? ' ' but we must meet , my dear . where shall we meet ? ' they both start . the listener start , guiltily , too ; for she think there be another listener among the tree . it be only rain , begin to fall fast , in heavy drop . ' shall I ride up to the house a few minute hence , innocently suppose that its master be at home and will be charme to receive I ? ' ' no ! ' ' you cruel command be implicitly to be obey ; though I be the most unfortunate fellow in the world , I believe , to have be insensible to all other woman , and to have fall prostrate at last under the foot of the most beautiful , and the most engage , and the most imperious . my dearest , I can not go myself , or let you go , in this hard abuse of you power . ' see he detain she with he encircling arm , and hear he then and there , within she ( 's ) greedy hearing , tell she how he love she , and how she be the stake for which he ardently desire to play away all that he have in life
life . the object he have lately pursue , turn worthless beside she ; such success as be almost in he grasp , he fling away from he like the dirt it be , compare with she . it be pursuit , nevertheless , if it keep he near she , or its renunciation if it take he from she , or flight if she share it , or secrecy if she command it , or any fate , or every fate , all be alike to he , so that she be true to he , - the man who have see how cast away she be , whom she have inspire at they first meeting with a admiration , a interest , of which he have think himself incapable , whom she have receive into she confidence , who be devoted to she and adore she . all this , and more , in he hurry , and in hers , in the whirl of she own gratify malice , in the dread of be discover , in the rapidly increase noise of heavy rain among the leave , and a thunderstorm roll up - . receive into she mind , set off with such a unavoidable halo of confusion and indistinctness , that when at length he climb the fence and lead he horse away , she be not sure where they be to meet , or when , except that they have say it be to be that night . but one of they yet remain in the darkness before she ; and while she track that one she must be right . ' oh , my dearest love , ' think . Sparsit , ' you little think how well attend you be ! ' see she out of the wood , and see she enter the house . what to do next ? it raine now , in a sheet of water . 's white stocking be of many colour , green predominating ; prickly thing be in she shoe ; caterpillar slng themselves , in hammock of they own making , from various part of she dress ; rill run from she bonnet , and she Roman nose . in such condition , . Sparsit stand hide in the density of the shrubbery , consider what next ? lo , come out of the house ! Hastily cloak and muff , and steal away . she elope ! she fall from the lowermost stair , and be swallow up in the gulf . indifferent to the rain , and move with a quick determined step , she strike into a side - path parallel with the ride . follow in the shadow of the tree , at but a short distance ; for it be not easy to keep a figure in view go quickly through the umbrageous darkness . when she stop to close the side - gate without noise , stop . when she go on , Sparsit go on . she go by the way . have come , emerge from the green lane , cross the stony road , and ascend the wooden step to the railroad . a train for would come through presently , . Sparsit know ; so she understand to be she first place of destination . in 's limp and stream state , no extensive precaution be necessary to change she usual appearance ; but , she stop under the lee of the station wall , tumble she shawl into a new shape , and put it on over she bonnet . so disguise she have no fear of be recognize when she follow up the railroad step , and pay she money in the small office . sit wait in a corner . sit wait in another corner . both listen to the thunder , which be loud , and to the rain , as it wash off the roof , and patter on the parapet of the arch . two or three lamp be raine out and blow out ; so , both see the lightning to advantage as it quiver and zigzag on the iron track . the seizure of the station with a fit of trembling , gradually deepen to a complaint of the heart , announce the train . and steam , and smoke , and red light ; a hiss , a crash , a bell , and a shriek ; put into one carriage , put into another : the little station a desert speck in the thunderstorm . though she tooth chatter in she head from wet and cold , Sparsit exult hugely . the figure have plunge down the precipice , and she feel herself , as it be , attend on the body . could she , who have be so active in the get up of the funeral triumph , do less than exult ? ' she will be at long before he , ' think , ' though he horse be never so good . where will she wait for he ? and where will they go together ? patience . we shall see . ' the tremendous rain occasion infinite confusion , when the train stop at its destination . Gutter and pipe have burst , drain have overflow , and street be under water . in the first instant of alighting , . Sparsit turn she distract eye towards the waiting coach , which be in great request . ' she will get into one , ' she consider , ' and will be away before I can follow in another . at all risks of be run over , I must see the number , and hear the order give to the coachman . ' but , be wrong in she calculation . get into no coach , and be already gone . the black eye keep upon the railroad
railroad - carriage in which she have travel , settle upon it a moment too late . the door not be open after several minute , . pass it and repass it , see nothing , look in , and find it empty . wet through and through : with she foot squelch and squash in she shoe whenever she move ; with a rash of rain upon she classical visage ; with a bonnet like a over -ripe fig ; with all she clothes spoil ; with damp impressions of every button , string , and hook - and - eye she wear , print off upon she highly connect back ; with a stagnant verdure on she general exterior , such as accumulate on a old park fence in a mouldy lane ; . Sparsit have no resource but to burst into tear of bitterness and say , 'I have lose she ! ' - the national dustman , after entertain one another with a great many noisy little fight among themselves , have disperse for the present , and be at home for the vacation . he sit writing in the room with the deadly statistical clock , prove something no doubt - probably , in the main , that the be a bad Economist . the noise of the rain do not disturb he much ; but it attract he attention sufficiently to make he raise he head sometimes , as if he be rather remonstrat with the element . when it thunder very loudly , he glance towards , have it in he mind that some of the tall chimney might be strike by lightning . the thunder be roll into distance , and the rain be pour down like a deluge , when the door of he room open . he look round the lamp upon he table , and see , with amazement , he eldest daughter . ' ! ' ' Father , I want to speak to you . ' ' what be the matter ? how strange you look ! and good , ' say , wonder more and more , ' have you come here expose to this storm ? ' she put she hand to she dress , as if she hardly know . ' yes . ' then she uncover she head , and let she cloak and hood fall where they might , stand look at he : so colourless , so dishevelled , so defiant and despairing , that he be afraid of she . ' what be it ? I conjure you , , tell I what be the matter . ' she drop into a chair before he , and put she cold hand on he arm . ' Father , you have train I from my cradle ? ' ' yes , . ' curse the hour in which I be bear to such a destiny . ' he look at she in doubt and dread , vacantly repeat : ' curse the hour ? curse the hour ? ' ' how could you give I life , and take from I all the inappreciable thing that raise it from the state of conscious death ? where be the graces of my soul ? where be the sentiment of my heart ? what have you do , of father , what have you do , with the garden that should have bloom once , in this great wilderness here ! ' she struck herself with both she hand upon she bosom . ' if it have ever be here , it be ash alone would save I from the void in which my whole life sink . I do not mean to say this ; but , father , you remember the last time we converse in this room ? ' he have be so wholly unprepared for what he hear now , that it be with difficulty he answer , ' yes , . ' ' what have risen to my lip now , would have risen to my lip then , if you have give I a moment 's help . I do not reproach you , father . what you have never nurture in I , you have never nurture in yourself ; but o ! if you have only do so long ago , or if you have only neglect I , what a much better and much happier creature I should have be this day ! ' on hear this , after all he care , he bow he head upon he hand and groan aloud . ' Father , if you have know , when we be last together here , what even I fear while I strove against it - as it have be my task from infancy to strive against every natural prompting that have arisen in my heart ; if you have know that there linger in my breast , sensibility , affection , weakness capable of be cherish into strength , defy all the calculation ever make by man , and no more known to he arithmetic than he Creator be , - would you have give I to the husband whom I be now sure that I hate ? ' he say , ' no . no , my poor child . ' ' would you have doom I , at any time , to the frost and blight that have harden and spoil I ? would you have rob I - for no one 's enrichment - only for the greater desolation of this world - of the immaterial part of my life , the spring and summer of my belief , my refuge from what be sordid and bad in the real thing around I , my school in which I should have learn to be more humble and more trusting with they , and to hope in my little
little sphere to make they better ? ' 'o no , no . no , . ' ' Yet , father , if I have be stone blind ; if I have grope my way by my sense of touch , and have be free , while I know the shape and surface of thing , to exercise my fancy somewhat , in regard to they ; I should have be a million time wiser , happier , more loving , more contented , more innocent and human in all good respects , than I be with the eyes I have . now , hear what I have come to say . ' he move , to support she with he arm . she rise as he do so , they stand close together : she , with a hand upon he shoulder , look fixedly in he face . ' with a hunger and thirst upon I , father , which have never be for a moment appease ; with a ardent impulse towards some region where rule , and figure , and definition be not quite absolute ; I have grow up , battle every inch of my way . ' 'I never know you be unhappy , my child . ' ' Father , I always know it . in this strife I have almost repulse and crush my better angel into a demon . what I have learn have leave I doubt , misbelieve , despise , regret , what I have not learn ; and my dismal resource have be to think that life would soon go by , and that nothing in it could be worth the pain and trouble of a contest . ' ' and you so young , ! ' he say with pity . ' and I so young . in this condition , father - for I show you now , without fear or favour , the ordinary deaden state of my mind as I know it - you propose my husband to I . I take he . I never make a pretence to he or you that I love he . I know , and , father , you know , and he know , that I never do . I be not wholly indifferent , for I have a hope of be pleasant and useful to . I make that wild escape into something visionary , and have slowly find out how wild it be . but have be the subject of all the little tenderness of my life ; perhaps he become so because I know so well how to pity he . it matter little now , except as it may dispose you to think more leniently of he error . ' as she father hold she in he arm , she put she other hand upon he other shoulder , and still look fixedly in he face , go on . ' when I be irrevocably married , there rise up into rebellion against the tie , the old strife , make fiercer by all those cause of disparity which arise out of we two individual nature , and which no general law shall ever rule or state for I , father , until they shall be able to direct the anatomist where to strike he knife into the secret of my soul . ' ' ! ' he say , and say imploringly ; for he well remember what have pass between they in they former interview . 'I do not reproach you , father , I make no complaint . I be here with another object . ' ' what can I do , child ? ask I what you will . ' 'I be come to it . Father , chance then throw into my way a new acquaintance ; a man such as I have have no experience of ; use to the world ; light , polish , easy ; make no pretence ; avow the low estimate of everything , that I be half afraid to form in secret ; convey to I almost immediately , though I do not know how or by what degree , that he understand I , and read my thought . I could not find that he be worse than I . there seem to be a near affinity between we . I only wonder it should be worth he while , who care for nothing else , to care so much for I . ' ' for you , ! ' she father might instinctively have loose he hold , but that he feel she strength depart from she , and see a wild dilating fire in the eyes steadfastly regard he . 'I say nothing of he plea for claim my confidence . it matter very little how he gain it . Father , he do gain it . what you know of the story of my marriage , he soon know , just as well . ' she father 's face be ashy white , and he hold she in both he arm . 'I have do no worse , I have not disgrace you . but if you ask I whether I have love he , or do love he , I tell you plainly , father , that it may be so . I do not know . ' she take she hand suddenly from he shoulders , and press they both upon she side ; while in she face , not like itself - and in she figure , draw up , resolute to finish by a last effort what she have to say - the feeling long suppress broke loose . ' this night , my husband be away , he have be with I , declare himself my lover . this minute he expect I , for I could release myself of he presence
presence by no other means . I do not know that I be sorry , I do not know that I be asham , I do not know that I be degrad in my own esteem . all that I know is , you philosophy and you teaching will not save I . now , father , you have bring I to this . save I by some other means ! ' he tighten he hold in time to prevent she sinke on the floor , but she cry out in a terrible voice , 'I shall die if you hold I ! let I fall upon the ground ! ' and he lay she down there , and see the pride of he heart and the triumph of he system , lie , a insensible heap , at he foot . end of the the third - Garnering chapter I - another thing awoke from a torpor , and she eye languidly open on she old bed at home , and she old room . it seem , at first , as if all that have happene since the day when these objects be familiar to she be the shadow of a dream , but gradually , as the object become more real to she sight , the event become more real to she mind . she could scarcely move she head for pain and heaviness , she eye be strained and sore , and she be very weak . a curious passive inattention have such possession of she , that the presence of she little sister in the room do not attract she notice for some time . even when they eye have meet , and she sister have approach the bed , lay for minute look at she in silence , and suffer she timidly to hold she passive hand , before she ask : ' when be I bring to this room ? ' ' last night , . ' ' who bring I here ? ' ' Sissy , I believe . ' ' why do you believe so ? ' ' because I find she here this morning . she do not come to my bedside to wake I , as she always do ; and I go to look for she . she be not in she own room either ; and I go look for she all over the house , until I find she here take care of you and cool you head . will you see father ? say I be to tell he when you wake . ' ' what a beam face you have , ! ' say , as she young sister - timidly still - bend down to kiss she . ' have I ? I be very glad you think so . I be sure it must be 's do . ' the arm have begin to twine around she neck , unbent itself . ' you can tell father if you will . ' then , stay she for a moment , she say , ' it be you who make my room so cheerful , and give it this look of welcome ? ' ' oh no , , it be do before I come . it be - ' turn upon she pillow , and hear no more . when she sister have withdrawn , she turn she head back again , and lay with she face towards the door , until it open and she father enter . he have a jaded anxious look upon he , and he hand , usually steady , tremble in hers . he sit down at the side of the bed , tenderly ask how she be , and dwell on the necessity of she keep very quiet after she agitation and exposure to the weather last night . he speak in a subdue and trouble voice , very different from he usual dictatorial manner ; and be often at a loss for word . ' my dear . my poor daughter . ' he be so much at a loss at that place , that he stop altogether . he try again . ' my unfortunate child . ' the place be so difficult to get over , that he try again . ' it would be hopeless for I , , to endeaavor to tell you how overwhelm I have be , and still am , by what break upon I last night . the ground on which I stand have cease to be solid under my foot . the only support on which I lean , and the strength of which it see , and still do seem , impossible to question , have give way in a instant . I be stun by these discoveries . I have no selfish mean in what I say ; but I find the shock of what break upon I last night , to be very heavy indeed . ' she could give he no comfort herein . she have suffer the wreck of she whole life upon the rock . 'I will not say , , that if you have by any happy chance undeceive I some time ago , it would have be better for we both ; better for you peace , and better for mine . for I be sensible that it may not have be a part of my system to invite any confidence of that kind . I have prove my - my system to myself , and I have rigidly administer it ; and I must bear the responsibility of its failure . I only entreat you to believe , my favourite child , that I have mean to do right . ' he say it earnestly , and to do he justice he have . in gauging fathomless deep with he little mean excise - rod , and
and in staggering over the universe with he rusty stiff - leg compass , he have mean to do great thing . within the limit of he short tether he have tumble about , annihilat the flower of existence with greater singleness of purpose than many of the blatant personage whose company he keep . 'I be well assure of what you say , father . I know I have be you favourite child . I know you have intend to make I happy . I have never blame you , and I never shall . ' he take she outstretched hand , and retain it in he . ' my dear , I have remain all night at my table , ponder again and again on what have so painfully pass between we . when I consider you character ; when I consider that what have be know to I for hour , have be conceal by you for year ; when I consider under what immediate pressure it have be force from you at last ; I come to the conclusion that I can not but mistrust myself . ' he might have add more than all , when he see the face now look at he . he do add it in effect , perhaps , as he softly move she scatter hair from she forehead with he hand . such little action , slight in another man , be very noticeable in he ; and he daughter receive they as if they have be word of contrition . ' but , ' say , slowly , and with hesitation , as well as with a wretch sense of happiness , ' if I see reason to mistrust myself for the past , , I should also mistrust myself for the present and the future . to speak unreservedly to you , I do . I be far from feeling convince now , however differently I might have feel only this time yesterday , that I be fit for the trust you repose in I ; that I know how to respond to the appeal you have come home to make to I ; that I have the right instinct - suppose it for the moment to be some quality of that nature - how to help you , and to set you right , my child . ' she have turn upon she pillow , and lay with she face upon she arm , so that he could not see it . all she wildness and passion have subside ; but , though soften , she be not in tear . she father be change in nothing so much as in the respect that he would have be glad to see she in tear . ' some person hold ,' he pursue , still hesitat , ' that there be a wisdom of the , and that there be a wisdom of the heart . I have not suppose so ; but , as I have say , I mistrust myself now . I have suppose the head to be all - sufficient . it may not be all - sufficient ; how can I venture this morning to say it be ! if that other kind of wisdom should be what I have neglect , and should be the instinct that be want , - ' he suggest it very doubtfully , as if he be half unwilling to admit it even now . she make he no answer , lie before he on she bed , still half -dressed , much as he have see she lie on the floor of he room last night . ' , ' and he hand rest on she hair again , 'I have be absent from here , my dear , a good deal of late ; and though you sister 's training have be pursue accord to - the system ,' he appear to come to that word with great reluctance always , ' it have necessarily be modify by daily associations begin , in she case , at a early age . I ask you - ignorantly and humbly , my daughter - for the better , do you think ? ' ' Father , ' she reply , without stirring , ' if any harmony have be awaken in she young breast that be mute in mine until it turn to discord , let she thank for it , and go upon she happier way , take it as she greatest blessing that she have avoid my way . ' 'o my child , my child ! ' he say , in a forlorn manner , 'I be a unhappy man to see you thus ! what avail it to I that you do not reproach I , if I so bitterly reproach myself ! ' he bend he head , and speak low to she . ' Louisa , I have a misgiving that some change may have be slowly work about I in this house , by mere love and gratitude : that what the have leave undone and could not do , the heart may have be do silently . can it be so ? ' she make he no reply . 'I be not too proud to believe it , . how could I be arrogant , and you before I ! can it be so ? be it so , my dear ? ' he look upon she once more , lie cast away there ; and without another word go out of the room . he have not be long gone , when she hear a light tread near the door , and know that some one stand beside she . she do not raise she head . a dull anger that she should be see in she distress , and that the involuntary look she have so resented
resented should come to this fulfilment , smoulder within she like a unwholesome fire . all closely imprison force rend and destroy . the air that would be healthful to the earth , the water that would enrich it , the heat that would ripen it , tear it when cage up . so in she bosom even now ; the strongest quality she possess , long turn upon themselves , become a heap of obduracy , that rise against a friend . it be well that soft touch come upon she neck , and that she understand herself to be suppose to have fall asleep . the sympathetic hand do not claim she resentment . let it lie there , let it lie . it lay there , warm into life a crowd of gentler thought ; and she rest . as she soften with the quiet , and the consciousness of be so watch , some tear make they way into she eye . the face touche hers , and she know that there be tear upon it too , and she the cause of they . as feign to rouse herself , and sit up , retire , so that she stand placidly near the bedside . 'i hope I have not disturb you . I have come to ask if you would let I stay with you ? ' ' why should you stay with I ? my sister will miss you . you be everything to she . ' ' be I ? ' return , shak she head . 'I would be something to you , if I might . ' ' what ? ' say , almost sternly . ' whatever you want most , if I could be that . at all event , I would like to try to be as near it as I can . and however far off that may be , I will never tire of try . will you let I ? ' ' my father send you to ask I . ' ' no indeed , ' reply . ' he tell I that I might come in now , but he send I away from the room this morning - or at least - ' she hesitate and stop . ' at least , what ? ' say , with she search eye upon she . 'I think it best myself that I should be send away , for I feel very uncertain whether you would like to find I here . ' ' have I always hate you so much ? ' 'I hope not , for I have always love you , and have always wish that you should know it . but you change to I a little , shortly before you leave home . not that I wonder at it . you know so much , and I know so little , and it be so natural in many way , go as you be among other friend , that I have nothing to complain of , and be not at all hurt . ' she colour rise as she say it modestly and hurriedly . understand the loving pretence , and she heart smote she . ' may I try ? ' say , embolden to raise she hand to the neck that be insensibly droop towards she . , take down the hand that would have embrace she in another moment , hold it in one of hers , and answer : ' first , , do you know what I be ? I be so proud and so hardened , so confused and troubled , so resentful and unjust to every one and to myself , that everything be stormy , dark , and wick to I . do not that repel you ? ' ' no ! ' 'I be so unhappy , and all that should have make I otherwise be so laid waste , that if I have be bereft of sense to this hour , and instead of be as learn as you think I , have to begin to acquire the simplest truth , I could not want a guide to peace , contentment , honour , all the good of which I be quite devoid , more abjectly than I do . do not that repel you ? ' ' no ! ' in the innocence of she brave affection , and the brim up of she old devoted spirit , the once desert girl shone like a beautiful light upon the darkness of the other . raise the hand that it might clasp she neck and join it be fellow there . she fall upon she knee , and cling to this stroller 's child look up at she almost with veneration . ' forgive I , pity I , help I ! have compassion on my great need , and let I lay this head of mine upon a loving heart ! ' 'o lay it here ! ' cry . ' Lay it here , my dear . ' chapter ii - very pass a whole night and a day in a state of so much hurry , that the World , with it be best glass in he eye , would scarcely have recognize he during that insane interval , as the brother Jem of the honourable and jocular member . he be positively agitate . he several time speak with a emphasis , similar to the vulgar manner . he go in and go out in a unaccountable way , like a man without a object . he ride like a highwayman . in a word , he be so horribly bo by exist circumstance , that he forget to go in for boredom in the manner prescribe by the authority . after put he horse at through the storm , as if it be a leap
leap , he wait up all night : from time to time ring he bell with the greatest fury , charge the porter who keep watch with delinquency in withholding letter or message that could not fail to have be entrust to he , and demand restitution on the spot . the dawn come , the morning come , and the day come , and neither message nor letter come with either , he go down to the country house . there , the report be , away , and in town . leave for town suddenly last evening . not even know to be go until receipt of message , import that she return be not to be expect for the present . in these circumstance he have nothing for it but to follow she to town . he go to the house in town . not there . he look in at the . away and away . away ? who could have be reduce to sudden extremity for the company of that griffin ! ' well ! I do not know , ' say , who have he own reason for be uneasy about it . ' she be off somewhere at daybreak this morning . she be always full of mystery ; I hate she . so I do that white chap ; he be always get he blinking eye upon a fellow . ' ' where be you last night , ? ' ' where be I last night ! ' say . ' come ! I like that . I be wait for you , , till it come down as I never see it come down before . where be I too ! where be you , you mean . ' be prevent from come - detain . ' ' detain ! ' murmure . ' two of we be detain . I be detain look for you , till I lose every train but the mail . it would have be a pleasant job to go down by that on such a night , and have to walk home through a pond . I be oblige to sleep in town after all . ' ' where ? ' ' where ? why , in my own bed at 's . ' ' do you see you sister ? ' ' how the deuce , ' return , star , ' could I see my sister when she be fifteen mile off ? ' Curs these quick retort of the young gentleman to whom he be so true a friend , disembarrass himself of that interview with the smallest conceivable amount of ceremony , and debate for the hundredth time what all this could mean ? he make only one thing clear . it be , that whether she be in town or out of town , whether he have be premature with she who be so hard to comprehend , or she have lost courage , or they be discover , or some mischance or mistake , at present incomprehensible , have occur , he must remain to confront he fortune , whatever it be . the hotel where he be know to live when condemned to that region of blackness , be the stake to which he be tie . as to all the rest - what will be , will be . ' so , whether I be wait for a hostile message , or a assignation , or a penitent remonstrance , or a impromptu wrestle with my friend in the manner - which would seem as likely as anything else in the present state of affair - I will dine , ' say . ' have the advantage in point of weight ; and if anything of a british nature be to come off between we , it may be as well to be in training . ' therefore he ring the bell , and toss himself negligently on a sofa , order ' some dinner at six - with a beefsteak in it , ' and get through the intervening time as well as he could . that be not particularly well ; for he remain in the greatest perplexity , and , as the hour go on , and no kind of explanation offer itself , he perplexity augment at compound interest . however , he take affair as coolly as it be in human nature to do , and entertaine himself with the facetious idea of the training more than once . ' it would not be bad ,' he yawn at one time , 'to give the waiter five shilling , and throw he . ' at another time it occur to he , ' or a fellow of about thirteen or fourteen stone might be hire by the hour . ' but these jest do not tell materially on the afternoon , or he suspense ; and , sooth to say , they both lag fearfully . it be impossible , even before dinner , to avoid often walk about in the pattern of the carpet , look out of the window , listen at the door for footstep , and occasionally become rather hot when any step approach that room . but , after dinner , when the day turn to twilight , and the twilight turn to night , and still no communication be make to he , it begin to be as he express it , ' like the and slow torture . ' however , still true to he conviction that indifference be the genuine high - breeding ( the only conviction he have ) , he seize this crisis as the opportunity for order candle and a newspaper . he have be try in vain , for half a hour , to read this newspaper , when the waiter appear and say , at once mysteriously and apologetically :
: ' beg you pardon , sir . you be want , sir , if you please . ' a general recollection that this be the kind of thing the Police say to the swell mob , cause to ask the waiter in return , with bristl indignation , what the he mean by ' want ' ? ' beg you pardon , sir . young lady outside , sir , wish to see you . ' ' outside ? where ? ' ' outside this door , sir . ' give the waiter to the personage before mention , as a block - head duly qualified for that consignment , hurrie into the gallery . a young woman whom he have never see stand there . Plainly dress , very quiet , very pretty . as he conduct she into the room and place a chair for she , he observe , by the light of the candle , that she be even prettier than he have at first believe . she face be innocent and youthful , and its expression remarkably pleasant . she be not afraid of he , or in any way disconcert ; she seem to have she mind entirely preoccupy with the occasion of she visit , and to have substitute that consideration for herself . 'I speak to ? ' she say , when they be alone . ' to . ' he add in he mind , ' and you speak to he with the most confid eye I ever see , and the most earnest voice ( though so quiet ) I ever hear . ' ' if I do not understand - and I do not , sir' - say , ' what you honour as a gentleman bind you to , in other matter :' the blood really rise in he face as she begin in these word : 'I be sure I may rely upon it to keep my visit secret , and to keep secret what I be go to say . I will rely upon it , if you will tell I I may so far trust - ' ' you may , I assure you . ' 'I be young , as you see ; I be alone , as you see . in come to you , sir , I have no advice or encouragement beyond my own hope . ' he think , ' but that be very strong , ' as he follow the momentary upward glance of she eye . he think besides , ' this be a very odd beginning . I do not see where we be go . ' 'I think , ' say , ' you have already guess whom I leave just now ! ' 'I have be in the greatest concern and uneasiness during the last four - and - twenty hour ( which have appear as many year ) ,' he return , 'on a lady 's account . the hope I have be encourage to form that you come from that lady , do not deceive I , I trust . ' 'I leave she within a hour . ' - ! ' ' at she father 's . ' 's face lengthen in spite of he coolness , and he perplexity increase . ' then I certainly , ' he think , 'do not see where we be go . ' ' she hurry there last night . she arrive there in great agitation , and be insensible all through the night . I live at she father 's , and be with she . you may be sure , sir , you will never see she again as long as you live . ' draw a long breath ; and , if ever man find himself in the position of not know what to say , make the discovery beyond all question that he be so circumstanced . the child - like ingenuousness with which he visitor speak , she modest fearlessness , she truthfulness which put all artifice aside , she entire forgetfulness of herself in she earnest quiet hold to the object with which she have come ; all this , together with she reliance on he easily give promise - which in itself sham he - present something in which he be so inexperienced , and against which he know any of he usual weapon would fall so powerless ; that not a word could he rally to he relief . at last he say : ' so start a announcement , so confidently make , and by such lip , be really disconcert in the last degree . may I be permit to inquire , if you be charge to convey that information to I in those hopeless word , by the lady of whom we speak ? ' 'I have no charge from she . ' ' the drown man catch at the straw . with no disrespect for you judgament , and with no doubt of you sincerity , excuse my say that I cling to the belief that there be yet hope that I be not condemn to perpetual exile from that lady 's presence . ' ' there be not the least hope . the first object of my come here , sir , be to assure you that you must believe that there be no more hope of you ever speak with she again , than there would be if she have die when she come home last night . ' ' must believe ? but if I can not - or if I should , by infirmity of nature , be obstinate - and will not - ' ' it be still true . there be no hope . ' look at she with a incredulous smile upon he lip ; but she mind look over and beyond he , and the
the smile be quite throw away . he bit he lip , and take a little time for consideration . ' well ! if it should unhappily appear ,' he say , ' after due pain and duty on my part , that I be bring to a position so desolate as this banishment , I shall not become the lady 's persecutor . but you say you have no commission from she ? ' 'I have only the commission of my love for she , and she love for I . I have no other trust , than that I have be with she since she come home , and that she have give I she confidence . I have no further trust , than that I know something of she character and she marriage . of , I think you have that trust too ! ' he be touch in the cavity where he heart should have be - in that nest of add egg , where the bird of heaven would have live if they have not be whistle away - by the fervour of this reproach . 'I be not a moral sort of fellow , ' he say , ' and I never make any pretension to the character of a moral sort of fellow . I be as immoral as need be . at the same time , in bring any distress upon the lady who be the subject of the present conversation , or in unfortunately compromise she in any way , or in commit myself by any expression of sentiment towards she , not perfectly reconcilable with - in fact with - the domestic hearth ; or in take any advantage of she father 's be a machine , or of she brother 's be a whelp , or of she husband 's be a bear ; I beg to be allow to assure you that I have have no particularly evil intention , but have glide on from one step to another with a smoothness so perfectly diabolical , that I have not the slightest idea the catalogue be half so long until I begin to turn it over . whereas I find , ' say , in conclusion , ' that it be really in several volume . ' though he say all this in he frivolous way , the way seem , for that once , a conscious polishing of but a ugly surface . he be silent for a moment ; and then proceed with a more self - possess air , though with trace of vexation and disappointment that would not be polish out . ' after what have be just now represent to I , in a manner I find it impossible to doubt - I know of hardly any other source from which i could have accept it so readily - I feel bound to say to you , in whom the confidence you have mention have be repose , that I can not refuse to contemplate the possibility ( however unexpected ) of my see the lady no more . I be solely to blame for the thing have come to this - and - and , I can not say ,' he add , rather hard up for a general peroration , ' that I have any sanguine expectation of ever become a moral sort of fellow , or that I have any belief in any moral sort of fellow whatever . ' 's face sufficientely show that she appeal to he be not finish . ' you speak ,' he resume , as she raise she eye to he again , 'have you first object . I may assume that there be a second to be mention ? ' 'yes . ' ' will you oblige I by confid it ? ' ' , ' return , with a blending of gentleness and steadiness that quite defeat he , and with a simple confidence in he be bound to do what she require , that hold he at a singular disadvantage , ' the only reparation that remain with you , be to leave here immediately and finally . I be quite sure that you can mitigate in no other way the wrong and harm you have do . I be quite sure that it be the only compensation you have leave it in you power to make . I do not say that it be much , or that it be enough ; but it be something , and it be necessary . therefore , though without any other authority than I have give you , and even without the knowledge of any other person than yourself and myself , I ask you to depart from this place to - night , under a obligation never to return to it . ' if she have assert any influence over he beyond she plain faith in the truth and right of what she say ; if she have conceal the least doubt or irresolution , or have harbour for the best purpose any reserve or pretence ; if she have show , or feel , the lightest trace of any sensitiveness to he ridicule or he astonishment , or any remonstrance he might offer ; he would have carry it against she at this point . but he could have easily have change a clear sky by look at it in surprise , as affect she . ' but do you know ,' he ask , quite at a loss , ' the extent of what you ask ? you probably be not aware that I be here on a public kind of business , preposterous enough in itself , but which I have go in for , and swear by , and be suppose to be devote to in quite a desperate manner ? you probably be not aware of that ,
, but I assure you it be the fact . ' it have no effect on , fact or no fact . ' besides which , ' say , take a turn or two across the room , dubiously , ' it be so alarmingly absurd . it would make a man so ridiculous , after go in for these fellows , to back out in such a incomprehensible way . ' 'I be quite sure , ' repeat , ' that it be the only reparation in you power , sir . I be quite sure , or I would not have come here . ' he glance at she face , and walk about again . ' upon my soul , I do not know what to say . so immensely absurd ! ' it fall to he lot , now , to stipulate for secrecy . ' if i be to do such a very ridiculous thing ,' he say , stop again presently , and lean against the chimney - piece , ' it could only be in the most inviolable confidence . ' 'I will trust to you , sir , ' return , ' and you will trust to I . ' he lean against the chimney - piece remind he of the night with the whelp . it be the self - same chimney - piece , and somehow he feel as if he be the whelp to - night . he could make no way at all . 'I suppose a man never be place in a more ridiculous position ,' he say , after look down , and look up , and laugh , and frown , and walk off , and walk back again . ' but I see no way out of it . what will be , will be . this will be , I suppose . I must take off myself , I imagine - in short , I engage to do it . ' rose . she be not surprise by the result , but she be happy in it , and she face beam brightly . ' you will permit I to say , ' continue , ' that I doubt if any other ambassador , or ambassadress , could have address I with the same success . I must not only regard myself as be in a very ridiculous position , but as be vanquish at all point . will you allow I the privilege of remember my enemy 's name ? ' 'My name ? ' say the ambassadress . ' the only name I could possibly care to know , to - night . ' ' . ' ' pardon my curiosity at parting . relate to the family ? ' 'I be only a poor girl , ' return . be separate from my father - he be only a stroller - and take pity on by Gradgrind . I have live in the house ever since . ' she be gone . ' it want this to complete the defeat , ' say , sink , with a resign air , on the sofa , after stand transfix a little while . ' the defeat may now be consider perfectly accomplished . only a poor girl - only a stroller - only make nothing of - only a great pyramid of failure . ' the great pyramid put it into he head to go up the . he take a pen upon the instant , and write the follow note ( in appropriate hieroglyphic ) to he brother : dear Jack , - all up at . bo out of the place , and go in for camel . Affectionately , , he ring the bell . ' send my fellow here . ' ' go to bed , sir . ' ' tell he to get up , and pack up . ' he write two more note . one , to , announce he retirement from that part of the country , and show where he would be find for the next fortnight . the other , similar in effect , to . almost as soon as the ink be dry upon they superscription , he have leave the tall chimney of , and be in a railway carriage , tear and glar over the dark landscape . the moral sort of fellow might suppose that derive some comfortable reflection afterwards , from this prompt retreat , as one of he few action that make any amend for anything , and as a token to himself that he have escape the climax of a very bad business . but it be not so , at all . a secret sense of have fail and be ridiculous - a dread of what other fellow who go in for similar sort of thing , would say at he expense if they know it - so oppress he , that what be about the very best passage in he life be the one of all other he would not have own to on any account , and the only one that make he asham of himself . chapter iii - very decided the indefatigable , with a violent cold upon she , she voice reduce to a whisper , and she stately frame so rack by continual sneeze that it see in danger of dismemberment , give chase to she patron until she find he in the metropolis ; and there , majestically swee in upon he at he hotel in 's , explode the combustible with which she be charge , and blow up . have execute she mission with infinite relish , this high - minded woman then faint away on 's coat - collar . 's first procedure be to shake off , and leave she to progress as she might through various stage of suffering on the floor
floor . he next have recourse to the administration of potent restorative , such as screw the patient 's thumb , smit she hand , abundantly water she face , and insert salt in she mouth . when these attention have recovere she ( which they speedily do ) , he hustl she into a fast train without offer any other refreshment , and carry she back to more dead than alive . regard as a classical ruin , . Sparsit be a interesting spectacle on she arrival at she journey 's end ; but consider in any other light , the amount of damage she have by that time sustain be excessive , and impaire she claim to admiration . utterly heedless of the wear and tear of she clothes and constitution , and adamant to she pathetic sneeze , immediately cramm she into a coach , and bear she off to . ' now , , ' say , burst into he father - in - law 's room late at night ; ' here be a lady here - - you know - who have something to say to you that will strike you dumb . ' ' you have miss my letter ! ' exclaim , surprise by the apparition . ' Misse you letter , sir ! ' bawl . ' the present time be no time for letter . no man shall talk to of about letter , with he mind in the state it be in now . ' ' , ' say , in a tone of temperate remonstrance , ' I speak of a very special letter I have write to you , in reference to . ' ' , ' reply , knock the flat of he hand several time with great vehemence on the table , ' I speak of a very special messenger that have come to I , in reference to . , ma 'am , stand forward ! ' that unfortunate lady hereupon essay to offer testimony , without any voice and with painful gesture expressive of a inflam throat , become so aggravating and underwent so many facial contortion , that , unable to bear it , seize she by the arm and shake she . ' if you can not get it out , ma 'am , ' say , ' leave I to get it out . this be not a time for a lady , however highly connect , to be totally inaudible , and seemingly swallow marble . , latterly find herself , by accident , in a situation to overhear a conversation out of door between you daughter and you precious gentleman - friend , . ' ' indeed ! ' say . 'Ah ! indeed ! ' cry . ' and in that conversation - ' ' it be not necessary to repeat its tenor , . I know what pass . ' ' you do ? perhaps , ' say , star with all he might at he so quiet and assuasive father - in - law , ' you know where you daughter be at the present time ! ' ' undoubtedly . she be here . ' ' Here ? ' 'My dear Bounderby , let I beg you to restrain these loud out - break , on all account . be here . the moment she could detach herself from that interview with the person of whom you speak , and whom I deeply regret to have be the means of introducing to you , hurrie here , for protection . I myself have not be at home many hour , when I receive she - here , in this room . she hurry by the train to town , she run from town to this house , through a raging storm , and present herself before I in a state of distraction . of course , she have remain here ever since . let I entreat you , for you own sake and for hers , to be more quiet . ' silently gaze about he for some moment , in every direction except . 's direction ; and then , abruptly turn upon the niece of , say to that wretch woman : ' now , ma 'am ! we shall be happy to hear any little apology you may think proper to offer , for go about the country at express pace , with no other luggage than a - and - a -Bull , ma'am ! ' ' ,' whisper , 'my nerves be at present too much shaken , and my health be at present too much impaired , in you service , to admit of my do more than take refuge in tear . ' ( which she do . ) ' well , ma 'am , ' say , ' without make any observation to you that may not be make with propriety to a woman of good family , what I have get to add to that , be that there be something else in which it appear to I you may take refuge , namely , a coach . and the coach in which we come here be at the door , you will allow I to hand you down to it , and pack you home to the : where the best course for you to pursue , will be to put you foot into the hottest water you can bear , and take a glass of scalding rum and butter after you get into bed . ' with these word , extend he right hand to the weeping lady , and escort she to the conveyance in question , shed many plaintive sneeze by the way . he soon return alone . ' now , as you show I in you face , , that you want to speak to I ,' he resume ,
, ' here I be . but , I be not in a very agreeable state , I tell you plainly : not relish this business , even as it be , and not consider that I be at any time as dutifully and submissively treat by you daughter , as of ought to be treat by he wife . you have you opinion , I dare say ; and I have mine , I know . if you mean to say anything to I to - night , that go against this cando remark , you have better let it alone . ' Gradgrind , it will be observ , be much soften , take particular pain to hare himself at all point . it be he amiable nature . ' my dear , ' begin in reply . ' now , you will excuse I , ' say , ' but I do not want to be too dear . that , to start with . when I begin to be dear to a man , I generally find that he intention be to come over I . I be not speak to you politely ; but , as you be aware , I be not polite . if you like politeness , you know where to get it . you have you gentleman- friend , you know , and they will serve you with as much of the article as you want . I do not keep it myself . ' ' , ' urge , 'we be all liable to mistake - ' ' I think you could not make 'em , ' interrupt . ' perhaps I think so . but , I say we be all liable to mistake and I should feel sensible of you delicacy , and grateful for it , if you would spare I these reference to . I shall not associate he in we conversation with you intimacy and encouragement ; pray do not persist in connect he with mine . ' 'I never mention he name ! ' say . ' well , well ! ' return , with a patient , even a submissive , air . and he sit for a little while ponder . ' , I see reason to doubt whether we have ever quite understood . ' ' who do you mean by we ? ' ' let I say I , then ,' he return , in answer to the coarsely blurted question ; 'I doubt whether I have understood . I doubt whether I have be quite right in the manner of she education . ' ' there you hit it , ' return . ' there I agree with you . you have find it out at last , have you ? Education ! I will tell you what education be - to be tumble out of door , neck and crop , and put upon the shortest allowance of everything except blow . that be what I call education . ' 'I think you good sense will perceive , ' remonstrate in all humility , ' that whatever the merit of such a system may be , it would be difficult of general application to girl . ' 'I do not see it at all , sir , ' return the obstinate . ' well , ' sigh , 'we will not enter into the question . I assure you I have no desire to be controversial . I seek to repair what be amiss , if I possibly can ; and I hope you will assist I in a good spirit , , for I have be very much distressed . ' 'I do not understand you , yet , ' say , with determine obstinacy , ' and therefore I will not make any promise . ' ' in the course of a few hour , my dear , ' proceed , in the same depressed and propitiatory manner , ' I appear to myself to have become better inform as to 's character , than in previous year . the enlightenment have be painfully force upon I , and the discovery be not mine . I think there be - , you will be surprised to hear I say this - I think there be qualitie in , which - which have be harshly neglect , and - and a little pervert . and - and I would suggest to you , that - that if you would kindly meet I in a timely endeavour to leave she to she better nature for a while - and to encourage it to develop itself by tenderness and consideration - it - it would be the better for the happiness of all of we . , ' say , shade he face with he hand , ' have always be my favourite child . ' the blustrous crimson and swell to such a extent on hear these word , that he seem to be , and probably be , on the brink of a fit . with he very ear a bright purple shot with crimson , he pend up he indignation , however , and say : ' you would like to keep she here for a time ? ' 'I - I have intend to recommend , my dear , that you should allow to remain here on a visit , and be attend by ( I mean of course ) , who understand she , and in whom she trust . ' 'I gather from all this , , ' say , stand up with he hand in he pocket , ' that you be of opinion that there be what people call some incompatibility between and myself . ' 'I fear there be at present a general incompatibility between , and - and - and almost all the relation in which I have place she
she , ' be she father 's sorrowful reply . ' now , look you here , , ' say Bounderby the flushed , confront he with he leg wide apart , he hand deeper in he pocket , and he hair like a hayfield wherein he windy anger be boisterous . ' you have say you say ; I be go to say mine . I be a man . I be of . I know the brick of this town , and I know the work of this town , and I know the chimney of this town , and I know the smoke of this town , and I know the hand of this town . I know th'ey all pretty well . they be real . when a man tell I anything about imaginative quality , I always tell that man , whoever he be , that I know what he mean . he mean turtle soup and venison , with a gold spoon , and that he want to be set up with a coach and six . that be what you daughter want . since you be of opinion that she ought to have what she want , I recommend you to provide it for she . because , , she will never have it from I . ' ' , ' say , 'I hope , after my entreaty , you would have take a different tone . ' ' just wait a bit , ' retort ; ' you have say you say , I believe . I hear you out ; hear I out , if you please . do not make yourself a spectacle of unfairness as well as inconsistency , because , although I be sorry to see reduce to he present position , I should be doubly sorry to see he bring so low as that . now , there be a incompatibility of some sort or another , I be give to understand by you , between you daughter and I . I will give you to understand , in reply to that , that there unquestionably be a incompatibility of the first magnitude - to be sum up in this - that you daughter do not properly know she husband 's merit , and be not impress with such a sense as would become she , by ! of the honour of he alliance . that be aplain speak , I hope . ' ' , ' urge , ' this be unreasonable . ' ' be it ? ' say . 'I be glad to hear you say so . because when , with he new light , tell I that what I say be unreasonable , I be convince at once it must be devilish sensible . with you permission I be go on . you know my origin ; and you know that for a good many year of my life I do not want a shoeing - horn , in consequence of not have a shoe . yet you may believe or not , as you think proper , that there be lady - bear lady - belong to family - family ! - who next to worship the ground I walk on . ' he discharge this like a rocket , at he father - in - law 's head . ' whereas you daughter , ' proceed , ' be far from be a bear lady . that you know , yourself . not that I care a pinch of candle - snuff about such thing , for you be very well aware I do not ; but that such be the fact , and you , , can not change it . why do I say this ? ' ' not , I fear , ' observe , in a low voice , 'to spare I . ' 'Hear I out , ' say , ' and refrain from cutting in till you turn come round . I say this , because highly connect female have be astonished to see the way in which you daughter have conduct herself , and to witness she insensibility . they have wonder how I have suffer it . and I wonder myself now , and I will not suffer it . ' ' , ' return Gradgrind , rise , ' the less we say to - night the better , I think . ' 'On the contrary , , the more we say to - night , the better , I think . that be , ' the consideration check he , 'till I have say all I mean to say , and then I do not care how soon we stop . I come to a question that may shorten the business . what do you mean by the proposal you make just now ? ' ' what do I mean , ? ' ' by you visit proposition , ' say , with a inflexible jerk of the hayfield . 'I mean that I hope you may be induce to arrange in a friendly manner , for allow a period of repose and reflection here , which may tend to a gradual alteration for the better in many respects . ' 'to a softening down of you idea of the incompatibility ? ' say . ' if you put it in those term . ' ' what make you think of this ? ' say . 'I have already say , I fear have not be understand . be it ask too much , , that you , so far she elder , should aid in try to set she right ? you have accept a great charge of she ; for better for worse , for - ' may have be annoye by the repetition of he own word to , but he cut the quotation short with a
a angry start . ' come ! ' say he , 'I do not want to be tell about that . I know what I take she for , as well as you do . never you mind what I take she for ; that be my look out . ' 'I be merely go on to remark , , that we may all be more or less in the wrong , not even except you ; and that some yielding on you part , remember the trust you have accept , may not only be a act of true kindness , but perhaps a debt incur towards . ' 'I think differently , ' bluster . 'I be go to finish this business accord to my own opinion . now , I do not want to make a quarrel of it with you , . to tell you the truth , I do not think it would be worthy of my reputation to quarrel on such a subject . as to you gentleman - friend , he may take himself off , wherever he like best . if he fall in my way , I shall tell he my mind ; if he do not fall in my way , I sha not , for it will not be worth my while to do it . as to you daughter , whom I make , and might have do better by leave , if she do not come home to - morrow , by twelve o'clock at noon , I shall understand that she prefer to stay away , and I shall send she wear apparel and so forth over here , and you will take charge of she for the future . what I shall say to people in general , of the incompatibility that lead to my so lay down the law , will be this . I be , and I have my bringing - up ; she be the daughter of , and she have she bring - up ; and the two horse would not pull together . I be pretty well know to be rather a uncommon man , I believe ; and most people will understand fast enough that it must be a woman rather out of the common , also , who , in the long run , would come up to my mark . ' ' let I seriously entreat you to reconsider this , , ' urge , ' before you commit yourself to such a decision . ' 'I always come to a decision , ' say , toss he hat on : 'and whatever I do , I do at once . I should be surprise at 's address such a remark to of , know what he know of he , if I could be surprised by anything do , after he make himself a party to sentimental humbug . I have give you my decision , and I have get no more to say . good night ! ' so go home to he town house to bed . at five minute past twelve o'clock next day , he direct 's property to be carefully pack up and send to 's ; advertise he country retreat for sale by private contract ; and resume a bachelor life . chapter iv - lose the robbery at the have not languish before , and do not cease to occupy a front place in the attention of the principal of that establishment now . in boastful proof of he promptitude and activity , as a remarkable man , and a self - make man , and a commercial wonder more admirable than , who have risen out of the mud instead of the sea , he like to show how little he domestic affair abate he business ardour . consequently , in the first few week of he resume bachelorhood , he even advanc upon he usual display of bustle , and every day make such a rout in renew he investigation into the robbery , that the officer who have it in hand almost wish it have never be commit . they be at fault too , and off the scent . although they have be so quiet since the first outbreak of the matter , that most people really do suppose it to have be abandon as hopeless , nothing new occur . no implicated man or woman take untimely courage , or make a self - betraie step . more remarkable yet , could not be hear of , and the mysterious old woman remain a mystery . thing have come to this pass , and show no latent sign of stirring beyond it , the upshot of 's investigation be , that he resolve to hazard a bold burst . he draw up a placard , offer twenty pound reward for the apprehension of , suspect of complicity in the robbery of on such a night ; he describe the say by dress , complexion , estimate height , and manner , as minutely as he could ; he recit how he have leave the town , and in what direction he have be last see go ; he have the whole print in great black letter on a stare broadsheet ; and he cause the wall to be post with it in the dead of night , so that it should strike upon the sight of the whole population at one blow . the factory - bell have need to ring they loudest that morning to disperse the group of worker who stand in the tardy daybreak , collect round the placard , devour they with eager eye . not the least eager of the eyes assemble , be the eye of those who could not read . these people , as they listen to the friendly voice that read aloud - there be
be always some such ready to help they - star at the character which mean so much with a vague awe and respect that would have be half ludicrous , if any aspect of public ignorance could ever be otherwise than threatening and full of evil . many ears and eyes be busy with a vision of the matter of these placard , among turn spindle , rattling loom , and whir wheel , for hour afterwards ; and when the hand clear out again into the street , there be still as many reader as before . , the delegate , have to address he audience to that night ; and have obtain a clean bill from the printer , and have bring it in he pocket . oh , my friend and fellow - countryman , the down - trodden operative of , oh , my fellow - brother and fellow- workmen and fellow - citizen and fellowmen , what a to - do be there , when unfold what he call ' that damne document , ' and hold it up to the gaze , and for the execration of the work - man community ! ' oh , my fellow - man , behold of what a traitor in the camp of those great spirit who be enrol upon the holy scroll of and of Union , be appropriately capable ! oh , my prostrate friend , with the galling yoke of tyrant on you neck and the iron foot of despotism tread down you fallen form into the dust of the earth , upon which right glad would you oppressor be to see you creepe on you belly all the day of you life , like the serpent in the garden - oh , my brother , and shall I as a man not add , my sister too , what do you say , now , of , with a slight stoop in he shoulders and about five foot seven in height , as set forth in this degrading and disgusting document , this blighting bill , this pernicious placard , this abominable advertisement ; and with what majesty of denouncement will you crush the viper , who would bring this stain and shame upon the - like race that happily have cast he out for ever ! yes , my compatriot , happily cast he out and send he forth ! for you remember how he stand here before you on this platform ; you remember how , face to face and foot to foot , I pursue he through all he intricate windings ; you remember how he sneak and slink , and sidle , and split of straw , until , with not a inch of ground to which to cling , I hurl he out from amongst we : a object for the undying finger of scorn to point at , and for the avenging fire of every free and think mind to scorch and scar ! and now , my friend - my labouring friend , for I rejoice and triumph in that stigma - my friend whose hard but honest bed be make in toil , and whose scanty but independent pots be boil in hardship ; and now , I say , my friend , what appellation have that dastard craven take to himself , when , with the mask tear from he feature , he stand before we in all he native deformity , a what ? a thief ! a plunderer ! a proscribe fugitive , with a price upon he head ; a fester and a wound upon the noble character of the operative ! therefore , my band of brother in a sacred bond , to which you child and you child 's child yet unborn have set they infant hand and seal , I propose to you on the part of the , ever watchful for you welfare , ever zealous for you benefit , that this meeting do resolve : that , weaver , refer to in this placard , have be already solemnly disown by the community of , the same be free from the shame of he misdeed , and can not as a class be reproach with he dishonest action ! ' thus Slackbridge ; gnash and perspir after a prodigious sort . a few stern voice call out ' no ! ' and a score or two hail , with assent cry of ' , hear ! ' the caution from one man , ' , y'or over hetter I not ; y'or a goen too fast ! ' but these be pigmy against a army ; the general assemblage subscribe to the gospel accord to , and give three cheer for he , as he sit demonstratively pante at they . these man and woman be yet in the street , pass quietly to they home , when , who have be call away from some minute before , return . ' who be it ? ' ask . ' it be , ' say , timid of the name , ' and you brother , and a young woman who say she name be , and that you know she . ' ' what do they want , dear ? ' ' they want to see you . have be cry , and seem angry . ' ' , ' say , for he be present , 'I can not refuse to see they , for a reason that will explain itself . shall they come in here ? ' as he answer in the affirmative , go away to bring they . she reappear with they directly . be last ; and remain stand in the obscurest part of the room , near the door . ' . , ' say she husband , enter with a cool nod , 'I do not disturb you
you , I hope . this be a unseasonable hour , but here be a young woman who have be make statement which render my visit necessary . , as you son , young , refuse for some obstinate reason or other to say anything at all about those statement , good or bad , I be oblige to confront she with you daughter . ' ' you have see I once before , young lady , ' say , stand in front of . cough . ' you have see I , young lady , ' repeat , as she do not answer , ' once before . ' coughe again . 'I have . ' cast she eye proudly towards , and say , ' will you make it know , young lady , where , and who be there ? ' 'I go to the house where lod , on the night of he discharge from he work , and I see you there . he be there too ; and a old woman who do not speak , and whom I could scarcely see , stand in a dark corner . my brother be with I . ' ' why could not you say so , young ? ' demand . 'I promise my sister I would not . ' which hastily confirm . ' and besides , ' say the whelp bitterly , ' she tell she own story so precious well - and so full - that what business have I to take it out of she mouth ! ' ' , young lady , if you please , ' pursue , ' why , in a evil hour , you ever come to 's that night . ' 'I feel compassion for he , ' say , she colour deepen , 'and I wish to know what he be go to do , and wish to offer he assistance . ' ' thank you , ma 'am , ' say . ' Much flatter and oblige . ' ' do you offer he , ' ask , bank - note ? ' ' yes ; but he refuse it , and would only take two pound in gold . ' cast she eye towards again . 'Oh , certainly ! ' say . ' if you put the question whether you ridiculous and improbable account be true or not , I be bound to say it be confirm . ' ' young lady , ' say , ' be now name as a thief in public print all over this town , and where else ! there have be a meeting to - night where he have be speak of in the same shameful way . ! the honestest lad , the truest lad , the best ! ' she indignation fail she , and she break off sobbing . 'I be very , very sorry , ' say . 'Oh , young lady , young lady , ' return , ' I hope you may be , but I do not know ! I can not say what you may ha ' done ! the like of you do not know we , do not care for we , do not belong to we . I be not sure why you may ha ' come that night . I can not tell but what you may ha ' come wi' some aim of you own , not mindin to what trouble you bring such as the poor lad . I say then , bless you for come ; and I say it of my heart , you seem to take so pitifully to he ; but I do not know now , I do not know ! ' could not reproach she for she unjust suspicion ; she be so faithful to she idea of the man , and so afflict . ' and when I think , ' say through she sob , ' that the poor lad be so grateful , thinkin you so good to he - when I mind that he put he hand over he hard - worken face to hide the tear that you bring up there - oh , I hope you may be sorry , and ha ' no bad cause to be it ; but I do not know , I do not know ! ' ' you be a pretty article , ' grow the whelp , move uneasily in he dark corner , 'to come here with these precious imputation ! you ought to be bundle out for not know how to behave yourself , and you would be by rights . ' she say nothing in reply ; and she low weeping be the only sound that be hear , until spoke . ' come ! ' say he , ' you know what you have engage to do . you have better give you mind to that ; not this . ' '' deed , I be loath , ' return , dry she eye , ' that any here should see I like this ; but I will not be see so again . young lady , when I have read what 's put in print of - and what have just as much truth in it as if it have be put in print of you - I go straight to the to say I know where Stephen be , and to give a sure and certain promise that he should be here in two day . I could not meet wi' then , and you brother send I away , and I try to find you , but you be not to be find , and I go back to work . as I come out of the to - night , I hasten to hear what be say of - for I know wi's pride he
he will come back to shame it ! - and then I go again to seek , and I find he , and I tell he every word I know ; and he believe no word I say , and bring I here . ' 'So far , that be true enough , ' assent , with he hand in he pocket and he hat on . ' but I have know you people before to - day , you will observe , and I know you never die for want of talking . now , I recommend you not so much to mind talk just now , as do . you have undertake to do something ; all I remark upon that at present be , do it ! ' 'I have write to by the post that go out this afternoon , as I have write to he once before sin ' he go away , ' say ; ' and he will be here , at furthest , in two day . ' ' then , I will tell you something . you be not aware perhaps , ' retort , ' that you yourself have be look after now and then , not be consider quite free from suspicion in this business , on account of most people be judge accord to the company they keep . the post-office have not be forget either . what I will tell you be , that no letter to have ever get into it . therefore , what have become of yours , I leave you to guess . perhaps you be mistaken , and never write any . ' ' he have not be go from here , young lady , ' say , turn appealingly to , 'as much as a week , when he send I the only letter I have have from he , say that he be force to seek work in another name . ' 'Oh , by ! ' cry , shak he head , with a whistle , ' he change he name , do he ! that be rather unlucky , too , for such a immaculate chap . it be consider a little suspicious in courts of , I believe , when a innocent happen to have many name . ' ' what , ' say , with the tear in she eye again , ' what , young lady , in the name of , be leave the poor lad to do ! the master against he on one hand , the man against he on the other , he only wantin to work hard in peace , and do what he feel right . can a man have no soul of he own , no mind of he own ? must he go wrong all through wi' this side , or must he go wrong all through wig that , or else be hunt like a hare ? ' ' indeed , indeed , I pity he from my heart , ' return ; ' and I hope that he will clear himself . ' ' you need have no fear of that , young lady . he be sure ! ' ' all the surer , I suppose , ' say , ' for you refuse to tell where he be ? Eh ? ' ' he shall not , through any act of mine , come back wi' the unmerited reproach of be bring back . he shall come back of he own accord to clear himself , and put all those that have injure he good character , and he not here for its defence , to shame . I have tell he what have be do against he , ' say , throw off all distrust as a rock throw of the sea , ' and he will be here , at furthest , in two day . ' ' Notwithstand which , ' add , ' if he can be laid hold of any sooner , he shall have a earlier opportunity of clearing himself . as to you , I have nothing against you ; what you come and tell I turn out to be true , and I have give you the means of prove it to be true , and there be a end of it . I wish you good night all ! I must be off to look a little further into this . ' come out of he corner when move , move with he , keep close to he , and go away with he . the only part salutation of which he deliver himself be a sulky ' good night , father ! ' with a brief speech , and a scowl at he sister , he leave the house . since he sheet - anchor have come home , have be sparing of speech . he still sit silent , when mildly say : ' , you will not distrust I one day , when you know I better . ' ' it go against I , ' answer , in a gentler manner , 'to mistrust any one ; but when I be so mistrusted - when we all be - I can not keep such thing quite out of my mind . I ask you pardon for have do you a injury . I do not think what I say now . yet I might come to think it again , wi' the poor lad so wronged . ' ' do you tell he in you letter , ' inquire , ' that suspicion seem to have fall upon he , because he have be see about the at night ? he would then know what he would have to explain on come back , and would be ready . ' ' yes , dear , ' she return ; ' but
but I can not guess what can have ever take he there . he never use to go there . it be never in he way . he way be the same as mine , and not near it . ' have already be at she side ask she where she liv , and whether she might come to - morrow night , to inquire if there be news of he . 'i doubt , ' say , ' if he can be here till next day . ' ' then I will come next night too , ' say . when , assent to this , be gone , lift up he head , and say to he daughter : ' , my dear , I have never , that I know of , see this man . do you believe he to be implicate ? ' 'I think I have believe it , father , though with great difficulty . I do not believe it now . ' ' that be to say , you once persuade yourself to believe it , from know he to be suspect . he appearance and manner ; be they so honest ? ' ' very honest . ' ' and she confidence not to be shaken ! I ask myself , ' say Gradgrind , muse , ' do the real culprit know of these accusation ? where be he ? who be he ? ' he hair have latterly begin to change its colour . as he lean upon he hand again , look gray and old , , with a face of fear and pity , hurriedly go over to he , and sit close at he side . she eye by accident meet 's at the moment . flush and start , and put she finger on she lip . next night , when return home and tell that be not come , she tell it in a whisper . next night again , when she come home with the same account , and add that he have not be hear of , she speak in the same low frightened tone . from the moment of that interchange of look , they never utter he name , or any reference to he , aloud ; nor ever pursue the subject of the robbery , when spoke of it . the two appointed day run out , three day and night run out , and be not come , and remain unheard of . on the fourth day , , with unabated confidence , but consider she despatch to have miscarried , go up to the , and show she letter from he with he address , at a work colony , one of many , not upon the main road , sixty mile away . Messenger be send to that place , and the whole town look for to be bring in next day . during this whole time the whelp move about with like he shadow , assist in all the proceedings . he be greatly excited , horribly fever , bit he nail down to the quick , speak in a hard rattling voice , and with lip that be black and burn up . at the hour when the suspect man be look for , the whelp be at the station ; offer to wager that he have make off before the arrival of those who be send in quest of he , and that he would not appear . the whelp be right . the messenger return alone . 's letter have go , 's letter have be deliver . have decamp in that same hour ; and no soul know more of he . the only doubt in be , whether have write in good faith , believe that he really would come back , or warn he to fly . on this point opinion be divide . six day , seven day , far on into another week . the wretch whelp pluck up a ghastly courage , and begin to grow defiant . ' be the suspect fellow the thief ? a pretty question ! if not , where be the man , and why do he not come back ? ' where be the man , and why do he not come back ? in the dead of night the echoe of he own word , which have roll know how far away in the daytime , come back instead , and abide by he until morning . - and night again , day and night again . no . where be the man , and why do he not come back ? every night , go to 's lodging , and sit with she in she small neat room . all day , toil as such people must toil , whatever they anxiety . the smoke - serpent be indifferent who be lose or find , who turn out bad or good ; the melancholy mad elephant , like the hard fact man , abate nothing of they set routine , whatever happen . day and night again , day and night again . the monotony be unbroken . even 's disappearance be fall into the general way , and become as monotonous a wonder as any piece of machinery in . 'i misdoubt , ' say , ' if there be as many as twenty leave in all this place , who have any trust in the poor dear lad now . ' she say it to , as they sit in she lodging , light only by the lamp at the street corner . have come there when it be already dark , to await she return from work ; and they have since sit at the window where have find she , want no brighter light to shine on they sorrowful talk . ' if it have
have not be mercifully bring about , that I be to have you to speak to , ' pursue , ' time be , when I think my mind would not have keep right . but I get hope and strength through you ; and you believe that though appearance may rise against he , he will be prove clear ? ' 'I do believe so , ' return , ' with my whole heart . I feel so certain , , that the confidence you hold in yours against all discouragement , be not like to be wrong , that I have no more doubt of he than if I have know he through as many year of trial as you have . ' ' and I , my dear , ' say , with a tremble in she voice , ' have know he through they all , to be , accord to he quiet way , so faithful to everything honest and good , that if he be never to be hear of more , and I be to live to be a hundred year old , I could say with my last breath , know my heart . I have never once leave trust ! ' ' we all believe , up at the , , that he will be free from suspicion , sooner or later . ' ' the better I know it to be so believe there , my dear , ' say , ' and the kinder I feel it that you come away from there , purposely to comfort I , and keep I company , and be see wi' I when I be not yet free from all suspicion myself , the more grieved I be that I should ever have speak those mistrusting word to the young lady . and yet I - ' ' you do not mistrust she now , ? ' ' now that you have bring we more together , no . but I can not at all time keep out of my mind - ' she voice so sunk into a low and slow commun with herself , that Sissy , sit by she side , be obliged to listen with attention . 'I can not at all time keep out of my mind , mistrusting of some one . I can not think who ' tis , I can not think how or why it may be do , but I mistrust that some one have put Stephen out of the way . I mistrust that by he come back of he own accord , and show himself innocent before they all , some one would be confound , who - to prevent that - have stop he , and put he out of the way . ' ' that be a dreadful thought , ' say , turn pale . ' it be a dreadful thought to think he may be murder . ' shudder , and turn paler yet . ' when it make its way into my mind , dear , ' say , ' and it will come sometimes , though I do all I can to keep it out , wi' count on to high number as I work , and say over and over again piece that I know when I be a child - I fall into such a wild , hot hurry , that , however tired I be , I want to walk fast , mile and mile . I must get the better of this before bed - time . I will walk home wi' you . ' ' he might fall ill upon the journey back , ' say , faintly offer a worn - out scrap of hope ; ' and in such a case , there be many place on the road where he might stop . ' ' but he be in none of they . he have be seek for in all , and he be not there . ' ' true , ' be 's reluctant admission . ' he would walk the journey in two day . if he be footsore and could not walk , I send he , in the letter he get , the money to ride , lest he should have none of he own to spare . ' ' let we hope that to - morrow will bring something better , . come into the air ! ' she gentle hand adjust 's shawl upon she shining black hair in the usual manner of she wear it , and they go out . the night be fine , little knot of hand be here and there linger at street corner ; but it be supper - time with the greater part of they , and there be but few people in the street . ' you be not so hurry now , , and you hand be cooler . ' 'I get better , dear , if I can only walk , and breathe a little fresh . ' when I can not , I turn weak and confused . ' ' but you must not begin to fail , , for you may be want at any time to stand by . to -morrow be . if no news come to - morrow , let we walk in the country on morning , and strengthen you for another week . will you go ? ' ' yes , dear . ' they be by this time in the street where 's house stood . the way to 's destination lead they past the door , and they be go straight towards it . some train have newly arrive in , which have put a number of vehicle in motion , and scatter a considerable bustle about the town . several coach be ratt before they and behind they as they approach
approach 's , and one of the latter drew up with such briskness as they be in the act of pass the house , that they look round involuntarily . the bright gaslight over 's step show they Mrs . Sparsit in the coach , in a ecstasy of excitement , struggle to open the door ; Sparsit see they at the same moment , call to they to stop . ' it be a coincidence , ' exclaim , as she be release by the coachman . ' it be a Providence ! come out , ma 'am ! ' then say . Sparsit , to some one inside , ' come out , or we will have you drag out ! ' Hereupon , no other than the mysterious old woman descend . whom incontinently collar . ' leave she alone , everybody ! ' cry , with great energy . ' let nobody touch she . she belong to I . come in , ma 'am ! ' then say , reverse she former word of command . ' come in , ma 'am , or we will have you drag in ! ' the spectacle of a matron of classical deportment , seize a ancient woman by the throat , and haul she into a dwelling - house , would have be under any circumstance , sufficient temptation to all true English straggler so blest as to witness it , to force a way into that dwelling - house and see the matter out . but when the phenomenon be enhance by the notoriety and mystery by this time associate all over the town with the robbery , it would have lure the straggler in , with a irresistible attraction , though the roof have be expect to fall upon they head . accordingly , the chance witness on the ground , consist of the busiest of the neighbour to the number of some five - and - twenty , close in after and , as they close in after and she prize ; and the whole body make a disorderly irruption into 's dining - room , where the people behind lose not a moment 's time in mount on the chair , to get the better of the people in front . ' down ! ' cry . ' , young woman ; you know who this be ? ' ' it be , ' say . 'I should think it be ! ' cry , exult . ' . away , everybody ! ' here old , muff herself up , and shrink from observation , whisper a word of entreaty . ' do not tell I , ' say Sparsit , aloud . 'I have tell you twenty time , come along , that I will not leave you till I have hand you over to he myself . ' now appear , accompany by and the whelp , with whom he have be hold conference up - stair . look more astonished than hospitable , at sight of this uninvited party in he dining - room . ' why , what be the matter now ! ' say he . ' , ? ' ' ,' explain that worthy woman , 'i trust it be my good fortune to produce a person you have much desire to find . Stimulate by my wish to relieve you mind , sir , and connect together such imperfect clue to the part of the country in which that person might be suppose to reside , as have be afforde by the young woman , , fortunately now present to identify , I have have the happiness to succeed , and to bring that person with I - I need not say most unwillingly on she part . it have not be , sir , without some trouble that I have effect this ; but trouble in you service be to I a pleasure , and hunger , thirst , and cold a real gratification . ' here cease ; for 's visage exhibit a extraordinary combination of all possible colour and expression of discomfiture , as old be disclose to he view . ' why , what do you mean by this ? ' be he highly unexpected demand , in great warmth . 'I ask you , what do you mean by this , , ma'am ? ' ' ! ' exclaim , faintly . ' why do not you mind you own business , ma 'am ? ' roar . ' how dare you go and poke you officious nose into my family affair ? ' this allusion to she favourite feature overpower . she sit down stifinitely in a chair , as if she be freeze ; and with a fix stare at , slowly grate she mitten against one another , as if they be freeze too . ' my dear ! ' cry , trembl . ' my darl boy ! I be not to blame . it be not my fault , . I tell this lady over and over again , that I know she be do what would not be agreeable to you , but she would do it . ' ' what do you let she bring you for ? could not you knock she cap off , or she tooth out , or scratch she , or do something or other to she ? ' ask . ' my own boy ! she threaten I that if I resist she , I should be bring by constable , and it be better to come quietly than make that stir in such ag - . glance timidly but proudly round the wall - ' such a fine house as this . indeed , indeed , it be not my fault ! my dear , noble , stately boy ! I have always live quiet , and
and secret , , my dear . I have never break the condition once . I have never say I be you mother . I have admire you at a distance ; and if I have come to town sometimes , with long time between , to take a proud peep at you , I have do it unbeknown , my love , and go away again . ' , with he hand in he pockets , walk in impatient mortification up and down at the side of the long dining - table , while the spectator greedily take in every syllable of 's appeal , and at each succeed syllable become more and more round - eyed . still walk up and down when have do , addresse that malign old lady : 'I be surprised , madam ,' he observe with severity , ' that in you old age you have the face to claim for you son , after you unnatural and inhuman treatment of he . ' ' I unnatural ! ' cry poor old . ' I inhuman ! to my dear boy ? ' ' dear ! ' repeat . ' yes ; dear in he self - make prosperity , madam , I dare say . not very dear , however , when you desert he in he infancy , and leave he to the brutality of a drunken grandmother . ' 'I desert my ! ' cry , clasp she hand . ' now , forgive you , sir , for you wicked imagination , and for you scandal against the memory of my poor mother , who die in my arm before be bear . may you repent of it , sir , and live to know better ! ' she be so very earnest and injured , that , shocke by the possibility which dawn upon he , say in a gentler tone : ' do you deny , then , madam , that you leave you son to - to be bring up in the gutter ? ' ' in the gutter ! ' exclaim . ' no such a thing , sir . never ! for shame on you ! my dear boy know , and will give you to know , that though he come of humble parent , he come of parent that love he as dear as the best could , and never think it hardship on themselves to pinch a bit that he might write and cipher beautiful , and I have he book at home to show it ! aye , have I ! ' say , with indignant pride . ' and my dear boy know , and will give you to know , sir , that after he belove father die , when he be eight year old , he mother , too , could pinch a bit , as it be she duty and she pleasure and she pride to do it , to help he out in life , and put he ' prentice . and a steady lad he be , and a kind master he have to lend he a hand , and well he work he own way forward to be rich and thrive . and I will give you to know , sir - for this my dear boy will not - that though he mother keep but a little village shop , he never forget she , but pension I on thirty pound a year - more than I want , for I put by out of it - only make the condition that I be to keep down in my own part , and make no boast about he , and not trouble he . and I never have , except with look at he once a year , when he have never knowed it . and it be right , ' say poor old , in affectionate championship , ' that I should keep down in my own part , and I have no doubt that if I be here I should do a many unbefitting thing , and I be well contente , and I can keep my pride in my to myself , and I can love for love 's own sake ! and I be asham of you , sir , ' say . , lastly , ' for you slander and suspicion . and I never stand here before , nor never want to stand here when my dear son say no . and I should not be here now , if it have not be for be bring here . and for shame upon you , oh , for shame , to accuse I of be a bad mother to my son , with my son stand here to tell you so different ! ' the bystander , on and off the dining - room chair , raise a murmur of sympathy with , and feel himself innocently place in a very distressing predicament , when , who have never cease walk up and down , and have every moment swell larger and larger , and grow redder and redder , stop short . 'I do not exactly know , ' say , ' how I come to be favour with the attendance of the present company , but I do not inquire . when they be quite satisfied , perhaps they will be so good as to disperse ; whether they be satisfied or not , perhaps they will be so good as to disperse . I be not bound to deliver a lecture on my family affair , I have not undertake to do it , and I be not a go to do it . therefore those who expect any explanation whatever upon that branch of the subject , will be disappoint - particularly , and he can not know it too soon . in
in reference to the robbery , there have be a mistake make , concern my mother . if there have not be over-officiousness it would not have be make , and I hate over-officiousness at all time , whether or no . good evening ! ' although carry it off in these term , hold the door open for the company to depart , there be a blustering sheepishness upon he , at once extremely crestfallen and superlatively absurd . detect as the of humility , who have build he windy reputation upon lie , and in he boastfulness have put the honest truth as far away from he as if he have advance the mean claim ( there be no meaner ) to tack himself on to a pedigree , he cut a most ridiculous figure . with the people file off at the door he hold , who he know would carry what have pass to the whole town , to be give to the four wind , he could not have look a Bully more shorn and forlorn , if he have have he ear crop . even that unlucky female , , fall from she pinnacle of exultation into the of , be not in so bad a plight as that remarkable man and self - make , of . and , leave . Pegler to occupy a bed at she son 's for that night , walk together to the gate of and there part . join they before they have go very far , and speak with much interest of ; for whom he think this signal failure of the suspicion against be likely to work well . as to the whelp ; throughout this scene as on all other late occasion , he have stuck close to . he seem to feel that as long as could make no discovery without he knowledge , he be so far safe . he never visit he sister , and have only see she once since she go home : that be to say on the night when he still stick close to , as already relate . there be one dim unformed fear linger about he sister 's mind , to which she never give utterance , which surround the graceless and ungrateful boy with a dreadful mystery . the same dark possibility have present itself in the same shapeless guise , this very day , to , when spoke of some one who would be confound by 's return , have put he out of the way . have never speak of harbour any suspicion of she brother in connexion with the robbery , she and have hold no confidence on the subject , save in that one interchange of look when the unconscious father rest he gray head on he hand ; but it be understand between they , and they both know it . this other fear be so awful , that it hover about each of they like a ghostly shadow ; neither da to think of it be be near herself , far less of its be near the other . and still the force spirit which the whelp have pluck up , throve with he . if be not the thief , let he show himself . why do not he ? another night . another day and night . no . where be the man , and why do he not come back ? - the Starlight the be a bright in autumn , clear and cool , when early in the morning and meet , to walk in the country . as cast ash not only on its own head but on the neighbourhood 's too - after the manner of those pious person who do penance for they own sins by put other people into sackcloth - it be customary for those who now and then thirst for a dratch of pure air , which be not absolutely the most wick among the vanity of life , to get a few mile away by the railroad , and then begin they walk , or they lounge in the field . and help themselves out of the smoke by the usual means , and be put down at a station about midway between the town and 's retreat . though the green landscape be blot here and there with heap of coal , it be green elsewhere , and there be tree to see , and there be lark singe ( though it be ) , and there be pleasant scent in the air , and all be over -arch by a bright blue sky . in the distance one way , show as a black mist ; in another distance hill begin to rise ; in a third , there be a faint change in the light of the horizon where it shine upon the far - off sea . under they foot , the grass be fresh ; beautiful shadow of branch flicker upon it , and speckle it ; hedgerow be luxuriant ; everything be at peace . Engines at pit ' mouth , and lean old horse that have wear the circle of they daily labour into the ground , be alike quiet ; wheel have cease for a short space to turn ; and the great wheel of earth seem to revolve without the shocks and noise of another time . they walk on across the field and down the shady lane , sometimes get over a fragment of a fence so rotten that it drop at a touch of the foot , sometimes pass near a wreck of brick and beam overgrow with grass , mark the site of desert work . they follow path and track , however slight . mound where the grass be rank and high , and where bramble , dock - we , and such - like
like vegetation , be confusedly heape together , they always avoid ; for dismal story be tell in that country of the old pit hide beneath such indication . the sun be high when they sit down to rest . they have see no one , near or distant , for a long time ; and the solitude remain unbroken . ' it be so still here , , and the way be so untrodden , that I think we must be the first who have be here all the summer . ' as say it , she eye be attract by another of those rotten fragment of fence upon the ground . she get up to look at it . ' and yet I do not know . this have not be break very long . the wood be quite fresh where it give way . here be footstep too . - of ! ' she run back , and catch she round the neck . have already start up . ' what be the matter ? ' 'I do not know . there be a hat lie in the grass . ' they go forward together . take it up , shake from head to foot . she break into a passion of tear and lamentation : be write in he own hand on the inside . 'o the poor lad , the poor lad ! he have be make away with . he be lie murdered here ! ' ' be there - have the hat any blood upon it ? ' falter . they be afraid to look ; but they do examine it , and find no mark of violence , inside or out . it have be lie there some day , for rain and dew have stain it , and the mark of its shape be on the grass where it have fall . they look fearfully about they , without move , but could see nothing more . ' ,' whisper , 'I will go on a little by myself . ' she have unclasp she hand , and be in the act of stepping forward , when catch she in both arm with a scream that resound over the wide landscape . before they , at they very foot , be the brink of a black rag chasm hide by the thick grass . they spring back , and fall upon they knee , each hide she face upon the other 's neck . 'o , my good ! he be down there ! down there ! ' at first this , and she terrific scream , be all that could be get from , by any tear , by any prayer , by any representation , by any means . it be impossible to hush she ; and it be deadly necessary to hold she , or she would have fling herself down the shaft . ' , dear , good , for the love of , not these dreadful cry ! think of Stephen , think of Stephen , think of ! ' by a earnest repetition of this entreaty , pour out in all the agony of such a moment , Sissy at last bring she to be silent , and to look at she with a tearless face of stone . ' , may be live . you would not leave he lie maim at the bottom of this dreadful place , a moment , if you could bring help to he ? ' 'no , no , no ! ' ' do not stir from here , for he sake ! let I go and listen . ' she shudder to approach the pit ; but she crept towards it on she hand and knee , and call to he as loud as she could call . she listen , but no sound reply . she call again and listen ; still no answering sound . she do this , twenty , thirty time . she take a little clod of earth from the broken ground where he have stumble , and throw it in . she could not hear it fall . the wide prospect , so beautiful in its stillness but a few minute ago , almost carry despair to she brave heart , as she rise and look all round she , see no help . ' , we must lose not a moment . we must go in different direction , seek aid . you shall go by the way we have come , and I will go forward by the path . tell any one you see , and every one what have happen . think of Stephen , think of ! ' she know by 's face that she might trust she now . and after stand for a moment to see she run , wringe she hand as she run , she turn and go upon she own search ; she stop at the hedge to tie she shawl there as a guide to the place , then throw she bonnet aside , and run as she have never run before . , Sissy , run , in 's name ! do not stop for breath . run , run ! Quicken herself by carry such entreaty in she thought , she run from field to field , and lane to lane , and place to place , as she have never run before ; until she come to a shed by a engine - house , where two man lay in the shade , asleep on straw . first to wake they , and next to tell they , all so wild and breathless as she be , what have bring she there , were difficulty ; but they no sooner understand she than they spirit be on fire like hers . one of the man be in a
a drunken slumber , but on he comrade 's shout to he that a man have fall down the , he start out to a pool of dirty water , put he head in it , and come back sober . with these two man she run to another half - a - mile further , and with that one to another , while they run elsewhere . then a horse be find ; and she get another man to ride for life or death to the railroad , and send a message to , which she write and give he . by this time a whole village be up : and windlass , rope , pole , candle , lantern , all thing necessary , be fast collecting and be brotch into one place , to be carry to the . it seem now hour and hour since she have leave the lost man lie in the grave where he have be bury alive . she could not bear to remain away from it any longer - it be like desert he - and she hurrie swiftly back , accompany by half - a - dozen labourer , include the drunken man whom the news have sober , and who be the best man of all . when they come to the , they find it as lonely as she have leave it . the man call and listen as she have do , and examine the edge of the chasm , and settle how it have happen , and then sit down to wait until the implement they want should come up . every sound of insects in the air , every stirring of the leave , every whisper among these man , make tremble , for she think it be a cry at the bottom of the pit . but the wind blow idly over it , and no sound arise to the surface , and they sit upon the grass , wait and wait . after they have wait some time , straggl people who have hear of the accident begin to come up ; then the real help of implement begin to arrive . in the midst of this , return ; and with she party there be a surgeon , who bring some wine and medicine . but , the expectation among the people that the man would be find alive be very slight indeed . there be now people enough present to impede the work , the sobered man put himself at the head of the rest , or be put there by the general consent , and make a large ring round the , and appointed man to keep it . besides such volunteer as be accept to work , only and be at first permit within this ring ; but , later in the day , when the message bring a express from , and , and , and the whelp , be also there . the sun be four hour lower than when and have first sit down upon the grass , before a means of enable two man to descmend securely be rig with pole and rope . difficulty have arisen in the construction of this machine , simple as it be ; requisite have be found want , and message have have to go and return . it be five o'clock in the afternoon of the bright autumnal , before a candle be send down to try the air , while three or four rough face stood crowd close together , attentively watch it : the man at the windlass lower as they be tell . the candle be brotch up again , feebly burn , and then some water be cast in . then the bucket be hook on ; and the sobered man and another get in with light , give the word 's lower away ! ' as the rope go out , tight and strained , and the windlass creak , there be not a breath among the one or two hundred man and woman look on , that come as it be will not to come . the signal be give and the windlass stop , with abundant rope to spare . apparently so long a interval ensue with the man at the windlass stand idle , that some woman shriek that another accident have happen ! but the surgeon who hold the watch , declare five minute not to have elapse yet , and sternly admonish they to keep silence . he have not well do speak , when the windlass be reverse and work again . Practise eye know that it do not go as heavily as it would if both workman have be come up , and that only one be return . the rope come in tight and strained ; and ring after ring be coil upon the barrel of the windlass , and all eye be fasten on the pit . the sobered man be bring up and leape out briskly on the grass . there be a universal cry of ' alive or dead ? ' and then a deep , profound hush . when he say ' ! ' a great shout arose and many eye have tear in they . ' but he be hurt very bad ,' he add , as soon as he could make himself hear again . ' where 's doctor ? he be hurt so very bad , sir , that we do not know how to get he up . ' they all consult together , and look anxiously at the surgeon , as he ask some question , and shake he head on receive the reply . the sun be set now ; and the red light in the evening sky touch every face there , and cause it to be distinctly see in all it be rapt suspense
suspense . the consultation end in the man return to the windlass , and the pitman go down again , carry the wine and some other small matter with he . then the other man come up . in the meantime , under the surgeon 's direction , some man bring a hurdle , on which other make a thick bed of spare clothes cover with loose straw , while he himself contrive some bandage and sling from shawl and handkerchief . as these be make , they be hang upon a arm of the pitman who have last come up , with instruction how to use they : and as he stand , show by the light he carry , lean he powerful loose hand upon one of the pole , and sometimes glance down the pit , and sometimes glance round upon the people , he be not the least conspicuous figure in the scene . it be dark now , and torch be kind . it appear from the little this man say to those about he , which be quickly repeat all over the circle , that the lose man have fall upon a mass of crumble rubbish with which the pit be half chok up , and that he fall have be further break by some jag earth at the side . he lay upon he back with one arm double under he , and accord to he own belief have hardly stir since he fall , except that he have move he free hand to a side pocket , in which he remember to have some bread and meat ( of which he have swallow crumb ) , and have likewise scoop up a little water in it now and then . he have come straight away from he work , on be write to , and have walk the whole journey ; and be on he way to 's country house after dark , when he fall . he be cross that dangerous country at such a dangerous time , because he be innocent of what be laid to he charge , and could not rest from come the nearest way to deliver himself up . the , the pitman say , with a curse upon it , be worthy of its bad name to the last ; for though Stephen could speak now , he believe it would soon be find to have mang the life out of he . when all be ready , this man , still take he last hurried charge from he comrade and the surgeon after the windlass have begin to lower he , disappear into the pit . the rope go out as before , the signal be make as before , and the windlass stop . no man remove he hand from it now . every one wait with he grasp set , and he body bend down to the work , ready to reverse and wind in . at length the signal be give , and all the ring lean forward . for , now , the rope come in , tighten and straine to its utmost as it appear , and the man turn heavily , and the windlass complain . it be scarcely endurable to look at the rope , and think of its give way . but , ring after ring be coil upon the barrel of the windlass safely , and the connect chain appear , and finally the bucket with the two man hold on at the side - a sight to make the head swim , and oppress the heart - and tenderly support between they , sling and tie within , the figure of a poor , crush , human creature . a low murmur of pity go round the throng , and the woman wept aloud , as this form , almost without form , be move very slowly from its iron deliverance , and laid upon the bed of straw . at first , none but the surgeon go close to it . he do what he could in its adjustment on the couch , but the best that he could do be to cover it . that gently do , he call to he and . and at that time the pale , worn , patient face be see look up at the sky , with the broken right hand lie bare on the outside of the cover garment , as if wait to be take by another hand . they give he drink , moisten he face with water , and administer some drop of cordial and wine . though he lay quite motionless look up at the sky , he smile and say , ' . ' she stoop down on the grass at he side , and bend over he until she eye be between he and the sky , for he could not so much as turn they to look at she . ' , my dear . ' she take he hand . he smile again and say , ' do not let ot go . ' ' thou 'rt in great pain , my own dear ? ' 'i ha ' be , but not now . I ha ' be - dreadful , and dree , and long , my dear - but ' ti ower now . ah , , ee a muddle ! Fro' first to last , a muddle ! ' the spectre of he old look seem to pass as he say the word . 'I ha ' fall into th ' pit , my dear , as have cost wi'in the knowledge of ' old fok now livin , hundred and hundred of ' man 's life - fathers , son , brother , dear to thousand a ' thousand , a ' keep th'ey fro's want and hunger . I ha '
' fall into a pit that ha ' be wi's th' Firedamp crueller than battle . I ha ' read on 't in the public petition , as onny one may read , fro' the man that work in pit , in which they ha ' pray'n and pray'n the lawmaker for 's sake not to let they work be murder to th'ey , but to spare them for th 's wife and child that they love as well as gentlefok love theirs . when it be in work , it kill wi'out need ; when 'tis let alone , it kill wi'out need . see how we die a ' no need , one way a ' another - in a muddle - every day ! ' he faintly say it , without any anger against any one . merely as the truth . ' thy little sister , , thou hast not forgot she . thou 'rt not like to forget she now , and I so nigh she . thou know 'st - poor , patient , suff'rin , dear - how thou didst work for she , seet'n all day long in she little chair at thy winder , and how she die , young and misshapen , awlng of ' sickly air as have and no need to be , a ' awlung of ' work people 's miserable home . a muddle ! Aw a muddle ! ' approach he ; but he could not see she , lie with he face turn up to the night sky . ' if aw th' thing that tooch we , my dear , be not so muddle , I should 'n ha ' have and need to coom heer . if we be not in a muddle among ourseln , I should 'n ha ' be , by my own fellow weaver and workin ' brother , so mistook . if have ever know ' I right - if he would ever know ' I at aw - he would 'n ha ' take 'n offence wi' I . he would 'n ha ' suspect'n I . but look up yonder , ! look aboove ! ' follow he eye , she see that he be gaze at a star . 'It ha ' shin upon I ,' he say reverently , 'in my pain and trouble down below . it ha' shin into my mind . I ha ' look 'n at 't and thowt of ' thee , , till the muddle in my mind have cleared awa , above a bit , I hope . if soom ha ' be wantin ' in unnerstan 'in I better , I , too , ha ' be wantin ' in unnerstan 'in they better . when I get thy letter , I easily believen that what the yoong ledy sen and do to I , and what she brother sen and do to I , be one , and that there be a wicked plot betwixt th'ey . when I fall , I be in anger wi' she , a ' hurryin on t ' be as onjust t ' she as oother be t ' I . but in we judgments , like as in we doin , we mun bear and forbear . in my pain a ' trouble , lookin up yonder , - wi' it shinin on I - I ha ' see more clear , and ha ' make it my dyin prayer that ee th's world may on 'y coom toogether more , a ' get a better unnerstan 'in o' one another , than when I be in ot my own weak seln . ' hear what he say , bend over he on the opposite side to , so that he could see she . ' you ha ' hear ? ' he say , after a few moment ' silence . 'I ha ' not forget you , ledy . ' ' yes , , I have hear you . and you prayer be mine . ' ' you ha ' a father . will yo tak ' a message to he ? ' ' he be here , ' say , with dread . ' shall I bring he to you ? ' ' if yo please . ' return with she father . stand hand - in - hand , they both look down upon the solemn countenance . ' Sir , yo will clear I a ' mak my name good wi' aw man . this I leave to yo . ' be troublead and ask how ? ' , ' be the reply : ' yor son will tell yo how . ask he . I mak no charge : I leave none ahint I : not a single word . I ha ' see a ' spok'n wi' yor son , one night . I ask no more of ' yo than that yo clear I - an' I trust to yo to do ot . ' the bearer be now ready to carry he away , and the surgeon be anxious for he removal , those who have torch or lantern , prepare to go in front of the litter . before it be raise , and while they be arrange how to go , he say to , look upward at the star : ' often as I coom to myseln , and find it shinin ' on I down there in my trouble , I thowt it be the star as guide to Our saviour 's home . I awmust think it be the very star ! ' they lift he up , and he be overjoyed to find that they be about to take he in the direction whither the star seem to he to lead . ' , belove lass ! do not let go my hand
hand . we may walk toogether tg night , my dear ! ' 'I will hold thy hand , and keep beside thee , , all the way . ' ' bless thee ! will soombody be pleased to coover my face ! ' they carry he very gently along the field , and down the lane , and over the wide landscape ; always hold the hand in hers . very few whisper break the mournful silence . it be soon a funeral procession . the star have show he where to find the of the poor ; and through humility , and sorrow , and forgiveness , he have go to he Redeemer 's rest . - - before the ring form round the be break , one figure have disappear from within it . and he shadow have not stand near , who hold she father 's arm , but in a retired place by themselves . when be summon to the couch , Sissy , attentive to all that happen , slipp behind that wick shadow - a sight in the horror of he face , if there have be eye there for any sight but one - and whisper in he ear . without turn he head , he confer with she a few moment , and vanish . thus the whelp have go out of the circle before the people move . when the father reach home , he send a message to 's , desire he son to come to he directly . the reply be , that have miss he in the crowd , and see nothing of he since , have suppose he to be at . 'I believe , father , ' say , ' he will not come back to town to -night . ' turn away , and say no more . in the morning , he go down to the himself as soon as it be open , and see he son 's place empty ( he have not the courage to look in at first ) go back along the street to meet on he way there . to whom he say that , for reason he would soon explain , but entreate not then to be ask for , he have find it necessary to employ he son at a distance for a little while . also , that he be charge with the duty of vindicat 's memory , and declare the thief . quite confound , stand stock - still in the street after he father - in - law have leave he , swell like a immense soap - bubble , without its beauty . go home , lock himself in he room , and keep it all that day . when and tap at he door , he say , without open it , ' not now , my dear ; in the evening . ' on they return in the evening , he say , 'I be not able yet - to - morrow . ' he eat nothing all day , and have no candle after dark ; and they hear he walk to and for late at night . but , in the morning he appear at breakfast at the usual hour , and take he usual place at the table . a and bend he look , and quite bow down ; and yet he look a wiser man , and a better man , than in the day when in this life he want nothing - but fact . before he leave the room , he appoint a time for they to come to he ; and so , with he gray head droop , go away . ' dear father , ' say , when they keep they appointment , ' you have three young child leave . they will be different , I will be different yet , with 's help . ' she give she hand to , as if she mean with she help too . ' you wretch brother , ' say . ' do you think he have plan this robbery , when he go with you to the lodging ? ' 'i fear so , father . I know he have want money very much , and have spend a great deal . ' ' the poor man be about to leave the town , it come into he evil brain to cast suspicion on he ? ' 'I think it must have flash upon he while he sit there , father . for I ask he to go there with I . the visit do not originate with he . ' ' he have some conversation with the poor man . do he take he aside ? ' 'he take he out of the room . I ask he afterwards , why he have do so , and he make a plausible excuse ; but since last night , father , and when I remember the circumstance by its light , I be afraid I can imagine too truly what pass between they . ' ' let I know , ' say she father , ' if you thought present you guilty brother in the same dark view as mine . ' fear , father , ' hesitate , ' that he must have make some representation to - perhaps in my name , perhaps in he own - which induce he to do in good faith and honesty , what he have never do before , and to wait about the Bank those two or three night before he leave the town . ' ' too plain ! ' return the father . ' too plain ! ' he shade he face , and remain silent for some moment . recovere himself , he say : ' and now , how be he to be find ? how
how be he to be save from justice ? in the few hour that I can possibly allow to elapse before I publish the truth , how be he to be find by we , and only by we ? ten thousand pound could not effect it . ' ' have effect it , father . ' he raise he eye to where she stand , like a good fairy in he house , and say in a tone of softened gratitude and grateful kindness , ' it be always you , my child ! ' ' we have we fear ,' Sissy explain , glance at , ' before yesterday ; and when I see you bring to the side of the litter last night , and hear what pass ( be close to Rachael all the time ) , I go to he when no one see , and say to he , " do not look at I . see where you father be . escape at once , for he sake and you own ! " he be in a tremble before I whisper to he , and he start and tremble more then , and say , " where can I go ? I have very little money , and I do not know who will hide I ! " I think of father 's old circus . I have not forget where go at this time of year , and I read of he in a paper only the other day . I tell he to hurry there , and tell he name , and ask Sleary to hide he till I come . " I will get to he before the morning , " he say . and I see he shrink away among the people . ' ' thank ! ' exclaim he father . ' he may be get abroad yet . ' it be the more hopeful as the town to which have direct he be within three hour ' journey of , whence he could be swiftly dispatch to any part of the world . but , caution be necessary in communicate with he - for there be a greater danger every moment of he be suspect now , and nobody could be sure at heart but that himself , in a bully vein of public zeal , might play a part - it be consent that and should repair to the place in question , by a circuitous course , alone ; and that the unhappy father , set forth in a opposite direction , should get round to the same bourne by another and wider route . it be further agree that he should not present himself to , lest he intentions should be mistrust , or the intelligence of he arrival should cause he son to take flight anew ; but , that the communication should be leave to and to open ; and that they should inform the cause of so much misery and disgrace , of he father 's be at hand and of the purpose for which they have come . when these arrangement have be well consider and be fully understand by all three , it be time to begin to carry they into execution . Early in the afternoon , walk direct from he own house into the country , to be take up on the line by which he be to travel ; and at night the remain two set forth upon they different course , encourage by not see any face they know . the two travel all night , except when they be leave , for odd number of minute , at branch - place , up illimitable flight of step , or down well - which be the only variety of those branch - and , early in the morning , be turn out on a swamp , a mile or two from the town they seek . from this dismal spot they be rescue by a savage old postilion , who happen to be up early , kick a horse in a fly : and so be smuggle into the town by all the back lane where the pig liv : which , although not a magnificent or even savoury approach , be , as be usual in such case , the legitimate highway . the first thing they see on enter the town be the skeleton of 's . the company have depart for another town more than twenty mile off , and have open there last night . the connection between the two place be by a hilly turnpike - road , and the travelling on that road be very slow . though they take but a hasty breakfast , and no rest ( which it would have be in vain to seek under such anxious circumstance ) , it be noon before they begin to find the bill of 's horse - ride on barn and wall , and one o'clock when they stop in the market - place . a performance by the rider , commence at that very hour , be in course of announcement by the bellman as they set they foot upon the stone of the street . recommend that , to avoid make inquiry and attract attention in the town , they should present themselves to pay at the door . if be take the money , he would be sure to know she , and would proceed with discretion . if he be not , he would be sure to see they inside ; and , know what he have do with the fugitive , would proceed with discretion still . therefore , they repair , with flutter heart , to the well - remember booth . the flag with the inscription 's - be there ; and the Gothic niche be there ; but be not there
there . master Kidderminster , grow too maturely turfy to be receive by the wildest credulity as Cupid any more , have yield to the invincible force of circumstance ( and he beard ) , and , in the capacity of a man who make himself generally useful , preside on this occasion over the exchequer - have also a drum in reserve , on which to expend he leisure moment and superfluous force . in the extreme sharpness of he look out for base coin , , as at present situate , never see anything but money ; so pass he unrecognised , and they go in . the emperor of , on a steady old white horse stencill with black spot , be twirl five wash - hand basin at once , as it be the favourite recreation of that monarch to do . Sissy , though well acquaint with he line , have no personal knowledge of the present emperor , and he reign be peaceful . , in she celebrate graceful , be then announce by a new clown ( who humorously say ) , and appear , lead she in . have only make one cut at the with he long whip - lash , and the Clown have only say , ' if you do it again , I will throw the horse at you ! ' when be recognise both by father and daughter . but they get through the act with great self - possession ; and Sleary , save for the first instant , convey no more expression into he locomotive eye than into he fix one . the performance seem a little long to and , particularly when it stop to afford the a opportunity of tell ( who say ' indeed , sir ! ' to all he observation in the calmest way , and with he eye on the house ) about two leg sit on three leg look at one leg , when in come four leg , and laid hold of one leg , and up get two leg , catch hold of three leg , and throw th'ey at four leg , who run away with one leg . for , although a ingenious relate to a butcher , a three - leg stool , a dog , and a leg of , this narrative consum time ; and they be in great suspense . at last , however , little fair - haire make she curtsey amid great applause ; and the , leave alone in the ring , have just warm himself , and say , ' now I will have a turn ! ' when be touch on the shoulder , and beckon out . she take with she ; and they be receive by in a very little private apartment , with canva side , a grass floor , and a wooden ceiling all aslant , on which the box company stamp they approbation , as if they be come through . ' , ' say , who have brandy and water at hand , ' it doth I good to thee you . you wath alwayth a favourite with uth , and you have do uth credith thinth the old timeth I be thure . you mutht thee we people , my dear , afore we thpeak of bithnith , or they will break they hearth - ethpethially the woman . here 'th hath be and get marry to . , and thee hath get a boy , and though he 'th only three yearth old , he thtickth on to any pony you can bring againtht he . he 'th name the wonder of ; and if you do not hear of that boy at 'th , you will hear of he at . and you recollect , that wath think to be rather thweet upon yourthelf ? well . he 'th marry too . marry a widder . old enough to be hith mother . Thee wath Tightrope , thee wath , and now thee 'th nothing - on accounth of fat . they have get two child , though we be thtrong in the Fairy bithnith and the . if you wath to thee we child in the , with they father and mother both a dyin ' on a horthe - they uncle a retheiving of th'ey ath hith wardth , upon a horto - themthelvth both a goin ' a black - berryin ' on a horthey - and the a come in to cover them with leavth , upon a horto - you would thay it wath the completetht thing ath ever you thet you eyeth on ! and you remember , my dear , ath wath a'motht a mother to you ? of courthey you do ; I need not athk . well ! , thee lotht she huthband . he wath throw have a heavy back - fall off a elephant in a thort of a thing ath the of the , and he never get the better of it ; and thee marry a thecond time - marry a ath fall in love with she from the front - and he 'th a Overtheer and makin ' a fortun . ' these various change , , very short of breath now , related with great heartiness , and with a wonderful kind of innocence , consider what a bleary and brandy - and - watery old veteran he be . afterwards he bring in , and . Childer ( rather deeply line in the jaw by daylight ) , and the little wonder of , and in a word , all the company . amazing creature they be in 's eye , so white and pink of complexion , so scant of dress , and so demonstrative of leg ; but it be very agreeable to see they crowd about , and
and very natural in to be unable to refrain from tear . ' there ! now Thethilia hath kithd all the child , and hug all the woman , and thake handth all round with all the man , clear , every one of you , and ring in the band for the thecond part ! ' as soon as they be go , he continue in a low tone . ' now , , I do not athk to know any thecreth , but I thuppothe I may conthider thith to be . ' ' this be he sister . yes . ' ' a t'other on 'th daughter . that 'h what I mean . hope I thee you well , mith . and I hope the 'th well ? ' ' my father will be here soon , ' say , anxious to bring he to the point . ' be my brother safe ? ' ' Thafe and thound ! ' he reply . 'I want you jutht to take a peep at the ring , mith , through here . Thethilia , you know the dodgeth ; find a thpy - hole for yourthelf . ' they each look through a chink in the board . ' that 'h Jack the - pieto of comic infant bithnith , ' say . ' there 'th a property - houthe , you thee , for to hide in ; there 'th my Clown with a thauthepan - lid and a thpit , for thervant ; there 'th little jack himthelf in a thplendid thoot of armour ; there 'th two comic black thervanth twito ath big ath the houthey , to thtand by it and to bring it in and clear it ; and the giant ( a very ecthpenthive bathket one ) , he can not on yet . now , do you thee th'ey all ? ' ' yes , ' they both say . ' look at 'em again , ' say , ' look at 'em well . you thee they all ? very good . now , mith ;' he put a form for they to sit on ; 'I have my opinionth , and the Thquire you father hath hith . I do not want to know what you brother'th be up to ; ith better for I not to know . all I thay ith , the Thquire hath thtood by , and I will thtand by the Thquire . you brother ith one they black thervanth . ' utter a exclamation , partly of distress , partly of satisfaction . ' Ith a fact , ' say , ' and even knowin ' it , you could not put you finger on he . let the Thquire come . I thall keep you brother here after the performanth . I thant undreth he , nor yet wath hill paint off . let the Thquire come here after the performanth , or come here yourthelf after the performanth , and you thall find you brother , and have the whole plathey to talk to he in . never mind the lookth of he , ath long ath he 'th well hide . ' Louisa , with many thanks and with a lightened load , detain no longer then . she leave she love for she brother , with she eye full of tear ; and she and go away until later in the afternoon . arrive within a hour afterwards . he too have encounter no one whom he know ; and be now sanguine with 's assistance , of get he disgraced son to in the night . as neither of the three could be he companion without almost identify he under any disguise , he prepare a letter to a correspondent whom he could trust , beseech he to ship the bearer off at any cost , to or , or any distant part of the world to which he could be the most speedily and privately dispatch . this do , they walk about , wait for the to be quite vacated ; not only by the audience , but by the company and by the horse . after watch it a long time , they see bring out a chair and sit down by the side - door , smoking ; as if that be he signal that they might approach . ' you thervant , , ' be he cautious salutation as they pass in . ' if you want I you will find I here . you muth not mind you thon have a comic livery on . ' they all three go in ; and sit down forlorn , on the Clown 's perform chair in the middle of the ring . on one of the back benche , remite in the subdue light and the strangeness of the place , sit the villainous whelp , sulky to the last , whom he have the misery to call he son . in a preposterous coat , like a beadle 's , with cuff and flap exaggerate to a unspeakable extent ; in a immense waistcoat , knee - breech , buck shoe , and a mad cock hat ; with nothing fit he , and everything of coarse material , moth - eaten and full of hole ; with seam in he black face , where fear and heat have start through the greasy composition dau all over it ; anything so grimly , detestably , ridiculously shameful as the whelp in he comic livery , never could by any other means have believe in , weighable and measurable fact though it be . and one of he model child have come to this ! at first the whelp would not draw any nearer , but persist in remain up there by himself . Yield at length , if any concession so sullenly make
make can be call yielding , to the entreaty of - for he disown altogether - he come down , bench by bench , until he stand in the sawdust , on the verge of the circle , as far as possible , within its limit from where he father sit . ' how be this do ? ' ask the father . ' how be what do ? ' moodily answer the son . ' this robbery , ' say the father , raise he voice upon the word . 'I force the safe myself over night , and shut it up ajar before I go away . I have have the key that be found , make long before . I drop it that morning , that it might be suppose to have be use . I do not take the money all at once . I pretend to put my balance away every night , but I do not . now you know all about it . ' ' if a thunderbolt have fall on I , ' say the father , ' it would have shock I less than this ! ' 'I do not see why , ' grumble the son . 'So many people be employ in situation of trust ; so many people , out of so many , will be dishonest . I have hear you talk , a hundred time , of its be a law . how can I help law ? you have comforte other with such thing , father . Comfort yourself ! ' the father bury he face in he hand , and the son stood in he disgraceful grotesqueness , bite straw : he hand , with the black partly wear away inside , look like the hand of a monkey . the evening be fast close in ; and from time to time , he turn the whites of he eye restlessly and impatiently towards he father . they be the only part of he face that show any life or expression , the pigment upon it be so thick . ' you must be get to , and send abroad . ' 'I suppose I must . I can not be more miserable anywhere , ' whimper the whelp , ' than I have be here , ever since I can remember . that be one thing . ' go to the door , and return with , to whom he submit the question , how to get this deplorable object away ? ' why , I have be think of it , . there 'th not muth time to lothe , though you muth thay yeth or no . Ith over twenty mileth to the rail . there 'th a coath in half a hour , that goeth to the rail , ' purpothe to cath the mail train . that train will take he right to . ' ' but look at he , ' groan . 'will any coach - ' 'I do not mean that he thould go in the comic livery , ' say . ' Thay the word , and I will make a of he , out of the wardrobe , in five minute . ' 'I do not understand , ' say . - a Carter . make up you mind quick , . there will be beer to feth . I have never meet with nothing but beer ath will ever clean a comic blackamoor . ' rapidly assent ; rapidly turn out from a box , a smock frock , a feel hat , and other essential ; the whelp rapidly change clothes behind a screen of baize ; rapidly bring beer , and wash he white again . ' now , ' say , ' come along to the coath , and jump up behind ; I will go with you there , and they will thuppothe you one of my people . Thay farewell to you family , and tharp 'th the word . ' with which he delicately retire . ' here be you letter , ' say . ' all necessary means will be provide for you . , by repentance and better conduct , for the shocking action you have commit , and the dreadful consequence to which it have lead . give I you hand , my poor boy , and may forgive you as I do ! ' the culprit be move to a few abject tear by these word and they pathetic tone . but , when open she arm , he repulse she afresh . ' not you . I do not want to have anything to say to you ! ' 'o , , do we end so , after all my love ! ' 'After all you love ! ' he return , obdurately . ' pretty love ! leave old to himself , and pack my best friend off , and go home just when I be in the greatest danger . pretty love that ! come out with every word about we have go to that place , when you see the net be gather round I . pretty love that ! you have regularly give I up . you never care for I . ' ' Tharp 'th the word ! ' say , at the door . they all confusedly go out : cry to he that she forgave he , and love he still , and that he would one day be sorry to have leave she so , and glad to think of these she last word , far away : when some one run against they . and , who be both before he while he sister yet cling to he shoulder , stop and recoil . for , there be , out of breath , he thin lip part , he thin nostril distend , he
he white eyelash quivering , he colourless face more colourless than ever , as if he run himself into a white heat , when other people run themselves into a glow . there he stand , pante and heaive , as if he have never stop since the night , now long ago , when he have run they down before . 'I be sorry to interfere with you plan , ' say , shak he head , ' but I can not allow myself to be do by horse - rider . I must have young ; he must not be get away by horse - rider ; here he be in a smock frock , and I must have he ! ' by the collar , too , it seem . for , so he take possession of he . - they go back into the booth , shutt the door to keep intruder out . , still hold the paralysed culprit by the collar , stand in the ring , blink at he old patron through the darkness of the twilight . ' Bitzer , ' say , break down , and miserably submissive to he , ' have you a heart ? ' ' the circulation , sir , ' return , smile at the oddity of the question , ' could not be carry on without one . no man , sir , acquaint with the fact establish by relate to the circulation of the blood , can doubt that I have a heart . ' ' be it accessible , ' cry , 'to any compassionate influence ? ' ' it be accessible to , sir , ' return the excellent young man . ' and to nothing else . ' they stand look at each other ; 's face as white as the pursuer 's . ' what motive - even what motive in reason - can you have for prevent the escape of this wretch youth , ' say Gradgrind , 'and crush he miserable father ? see he sister here . Pity we ! ' ' , ' return , in a very business - like and logical manner , ' since you ask I what motive I have in reason , for take young back to , it be only reasonable to let you know . I have suspect young of this bank - robbery from the first . I have have my eye upon he before that time , for I know he way . I have keep my observation to myself , but I have make they ; and I have get ample proof against he now , besides he running away , and besides he own confession , which I be just in time to overhear . I have the pleasure of watch you house yesterday morning , and follow you here . I be go to take young back to , in order to deliver he over to . , I have no doubt whatever that will then promote I to yoing 's situation . and I wish to have he situation , sir , for it will be a rise to I , and will do I good . ' ' if this be solely a question of self - interest with you - ' begin . 'I beg you pardon for interrupt you , sir , ' return ; ' but I be sure you know that the whole social system be a question of self - interest . what you must always appeal to , be a person 's self - interest . it be you only hold . we be so constitute . I be brotch up in that catechism when I be very young , sir , as you be aware . ' ' what sum of money , ' say , ' will you set against you expect promotion ? ' ' thank you , sir , ' return , ' for hint at the proposal ; but I will not set any sum against it . know that you clear head would propose that alternative , I have go over the calculation in my mind ; and I find that to compound a felony , even on very high term indeed , would not be as safe and good for I as my improve prospects in the . ' ' Bitzer , ' say , stretch out he hand as though he would have say , see how miserable I be ! ' Bitzer , I have but one chance leave to soften you . you be many year at my school . if , in remembrance of the pain bestow upon you there , you can persuade yourself in any degree to disregard you present interest and release my son , I entreat and pray you to give he the benefit of that remembrance . ' 'I really wonder , sy , ' rejoin the old pupil in a argumentative manner , 'to find you take a position so untenable . my schooling be pay for ; it be a bargain ; and when I come away , the bargain end . ' it be a fundamental principle of the philosophy that everything be to be pay for . nobody be ever on any account to give anybody anything , or render anybody help without purchase . Gratitude be to be abolish , and the virtue spring from it be not to be . every inch of the existence of mankind , from birth to death , be to be a bargain across a counter . and if we do not get to that way , it be not a politico-economical place , and we have no business there . 'I do not deny , ' add , ' that my schooling be cheap . but that come right , sir . I be make in the cheapest market
market , and have to dispose of myself in the dearest . ' he be a little troublead here , by and cry . ' pray do not do that , ' say he , ' it be of no use do that : it only worries . you seem to think that I have some animosity against young ; whereas I have none at all . I be only go , on the reasonable grounds I have mention , to take he back to . if he be to resist , I should set up the cry of stop thiefinitely ! but , he will not resist , you may depend upon it . ' , who with he mouth open and he roll eye as immovably jam in he head as he fix one , have listen to these doctrine with profound attention , here step forward . ' Thquire , you know perfectly well , and you daughter knowth perfectly well ( better than you , becauthe I thed it to she ) , that I do not know what you thon have do , and that I do not want to know - I the it wath better not , though I only think , then , it wath thome thkylark . however , thith young man have make it know to be a robbery of a bank , why , that 'h a theriouth thing ; muth too theriouth a thing for I to compound , ath thith young man hath very properly call it . Conthequently , Thquire , you muth not quarrel with I if I take thith young man'th thide , and thay he 'th right and there 'th no help for it . but I tell you what I will do , Thquire ; I will drive you thon and thith young man over to the rail , and prevent expothure here . I can not conthent to do more , but I will do that . ' Fresh lamentation from , and deeper affliction on 's part , follow this desertion of they by they last friend . but , glance at he with great attention ; nor do she in she own breast misunderstand he . as they be all go out again , he favour she with one slight roll of he movable eye , desire she to linger behind . as he lock the door , he say excitedly : ' the thtood by you , , and I will thtand by the Thquire . more than that : thith ith a prethiouth rathcal , and belongth to that bluthter Cove that my people nearly pitht out of ' winder . it will be a dark night ; I have get a horthey that will do anything but thpeak ; I have get a pony that will go fifteen mile a hour with Childerth drive of he ; I have get a dog that will keep a man to one plato four - and - twenty hourth . get a word with the young Thquire . tell he , when he theeth we horthey begin to danthe , not to be afraid of be thpild , but to look out for a pony -gig come up . tell he , when he theeth that gig clothe by , to jump down , and it will take he off at a rattling pathe . if my dog leth thith young man thty a peg on foot , I give he leave to go . and if my horthey ever thtirth from that thpot where he beginth a danthing , till the morning - I do not know he ? - Tharp 'th the word ! ' the word be so sharp , that in ten minute , saunter about the market - place in a pair of slipper , have he cue , and 's equipage be ready . it be a fine sight , to behold the learn dog barking round it , and instruct he , with he one practicable eye , that be the object of he particular attention . after dark they all three get in and start ; the learn dog ( a formidable creature ) already pinne with he eye , and stick close to the wheel on he side , that he might be ready for he in the event of he show the slightest disposition to alight . the other three sit up at the inn all night in great suspense . at eight o'clock in the morning and the dog reappear : both in high spirit . ' all right , ! ' say , ' you thon may be aboard - a - thip by thith time . take he off , a hour and a half after we leave there latht night . the horthey danth the polka till he wath dead beat ( he would have walth if he have not be in harneth ) , and then I give he the word and he go to thleep comfortable . when that prethiouth young the he would go for afoot , the dog hang on to hith neck - hankercher with all four legth in the air and pull he down and roll he over . though he come back into the drag , and there he that , ' till I turn the horto 'th head , at half - patht thixth thith morning . ' overwhelm he with thanks , of course ; and hint as delicately as he could , at a handsome remuneration in money . 'I do not want money mythelf , ; but ith a family man , and if you wath to like to offer he a five - pound note , it might not be unactheptable . Likewithe if you wath to thtand a collar for the dog , or a thet of bellth for the horthey , I
I thould be very glad to take th'ey . and water I alwayth take . ' he have already call for a glass , and now call for another . ' if you would not think it go too far , , to make a little thpread for the company at about three and thixth ahead , not reckon , it would make th'ey happy . ' all these little token of he gratitude , very willingly undertake to render . though he think they far too slight , he say , for such a service . ' very well , ; then , if you will only give a horthe - riding , a bethpeak , whenever you can , you will more than balanto the account . now , Thquire , if you daughter will ethcuthe I , I thould like one part word with you . ' and withdraw into a adjoining room ; , stirr and drink he brandy and water as he stand , go on : ' , - you do not need to be tell that dogth ith wonderful animalth . ' ' they instinct , ' say , t'is surprising . ' ' whatever you call it - and I be bletht if I know what to call it ' - say , ' it ill athtonith . the way in whith a dog will find you - the dithtanto he will come ! ' ' he scent , ' say , ' be so fine . ' 'I be bletht if I know what to call it , ' repeat , shak he head , ' but I have have dogth find I , , in a way that make I think whether that dog have not go to another dog , and the , " you do not happen to know a perthon of the name of , do you ? Perthon of the name of , in the - way - thtout man - game eye ? " and whether that dog might not have the , " well , I can not thay I know he mythelf , but I know a dog that I think would be likely to be acquaint with he . " and whether that dog might not have think it over , and the , " , ! of yeth , to be thure ! a friend of mine menthion he to I at one time . I can get you hith addreth directly . " in conthequenth of my be afore the public , and go about tho muth , you thee , there mutht be a number of dogth acquaint with I , , that I do not know ! ' seem to be quite confound by this speculation . ' any way , ' say , after put he lip to he brandy and water , ' ith fourteen month ago , , thinto we wath at . we wath get up we child in the one morning , when there cometh into we ring , by the thtage door , a dog . he have travel a long way , he wath in a very bad condithon , he wath lame , and pretty well blind . he go round to we child , one after another , as if he wath a theeking for a child he know' ; and then he come to I , and throw hithelf up behind , and thtood on hith two forelegth , weak ath he wath , and then he wag hith tail and die . , that dog wath . ' ' 's father 's dog ! ' ' Thethilia 'th father 'th old dog . now , Thquire , I can take my oath , from my knowledge of that dog , that that man wath dead - and bury - afore that dog come back to I . and and I talk it over a long time , whether I thould write or not . but we agree , " no . there 'th nothing comfortable to tell ; why unthetle she mind , and make she unhappy ? " , whether she father bathely dethert she ; or whether he break hith own heart alone , rather than pull she down along with he ; never will be know , now , , till - no , not till we know how the dogth findth uth out ! ' ' she keep the bottle that he send she for , to this hour ; and she will believe in he affection to the last moment of she life , ' say . ' it theemth to prethent two thingth to a perthon , do not it , ? ' say Sleary , muse as he look down into the depth of he brandy and water : ' one , that there ith a love in the world , not all Thelf - interetht after all , but thomething very different ; t'other , that it bath a way of ith own of calculating or not calculate , whith thomehow or another ith at leatht ath hard to give a name to , ath the wayth of the dogth ith ! ' look out of window , and make no reply . empty he glass and recal the lady . ' Thethilia my dear , kill I and good - bye ! , to thee you treat of she like a thithter , and a thithter that you trutht and honour with all you heart and more , ith a very pretty thight to I . I hope you brother may live to be better detherve of you , and a greater comfort to you . Thquire , thake handth , firtht and latht ! do not be croth with uth poor vagabondth . people mutht be amuth . they can not be alwayth a learning , nor yet
yet they can not be alwayth a work , they can not make for it . you mutht have uth , . do the withe thing and the kind thing too , and make the betht of uth ; not the wurtht ! ' ' and I never think before , ' say , put he head in at the door again to say it , ' that I wath tho muth of a Cackler ! ' - it be a dangerous thing to see anything in the sphere of a vain blusterer , before the vain blusterer see it himself . feel that . Sparsit have audaciously anticipat he , and presume to be wiser than he . Inappeasably indignant with she for she triumphant discovery of , he turn this presumption , on the part of a woman in she dependent position , over and over in he mind , until it accumulate with turn like a great snowball . at last he make the discovery that to discharge this highly connect female - to have it in he power to say , ' she be a woman of family , and want to stick to I , but I would not have it , and get rid of herg - would be to get the utmost possible amount of crowning glory out of the connection , and at the same time to punish Sparsit accord to she desert . fill fuller than ever , with this great idea , come in to lunch , and sit himself down in the dining - room of former day , where he portrait be . sit by the fire , with she foot in she cotton stirrup , little think whither she be post . since the affair , this gentlewoman have cover she pity for with a veil of quiet melancholy and contrition . in virtue thereof , it have become she habit to assume a woful look , which woful look she now bestow upon she patron . ' what be the matter now , ma 'am ? ' say , in a very short , rough way . ' pray , sir , ' return Sparsit , 'do not bite my nose off . ' ' bite you nose off , ? ' repeat . ' you nose ! ' mean , as Mrs . Sparsit conceive , that it be too develop a nose for the purpose . after which offensive implication , he cut himself a crust of bread , and throw the knife down with a noise . take she foot out of she stirrup , and say , ' , sir ! ' ' well , ma 'am ? ' retort . ' what be you star at ? ' ' may I ask , sir , ' say . Sparsit , ' have you be ruffle this morning ? ' ' yes , ma'am . ' ' may I inquire , sir , ' pursue the injured woman , ' whether I be the unfortunate cause of you have lose you temper ? ' ' now , I will tell you what , ma 'am , ' say , 'I be not come here to be bully . a female may be highly connect , but she can not be permit to bother and badger a man in my position , and I be not go to put up with it . ' ( feel it necessary to get on : foresee that if he allow of detail , he would be beat . ) first elevate , then knit , she Coriolanian eyebrow ; gather up she work into its proper basket ; and rise . ' , ' say she , majestically . ' it be apparent to I that I be in you way at present . I will retire to my own apartment . ' ' allow I to open the door , ma'am . ' ' thank you , sir ; I can do it for myself . ' ' you have better allow I , ma 'am , ' say , pass she , and get he hand upon the lock ; ' because I can take the opportunity of say a word to you , before you go . , 'am , I rather think you be cramp here , do you know ? it appear to I , that , under my humble roof , there be hardly opening enough for a lady of you genius in other people 's affair . ' give he a look of the darkest scorn , and say with great politeness , ' really , sir ? ' 'I have be think it over , you see , since the late affair have happen , ma 'am , ' say ; ' and it appear to my poor judgment - ' ' oh ! pray , sir ,' Mrs . Sparsit interpose , with sprightly cheerfulness , ' do not disparage you judgment . everybody know how unerring 's judgment be . everybody have have proof of it . it must be the theme of general conversation . Disparage anything in yourself but you judgment , sir , ' say , laugh . , very red and uncomfortable , resume : ' it appear to I , ma 'am , I say , that a different sort of establishment altogether would bring out a lady of you power . such a establishment as you relation , 's , now . do not you think you might find some affair there , ma 'am , to interfere with ? ' ' it never occur to I before , sir , ' return ; ' but now you mention it , should think it highly probable . ' ' then suppose you try , ma 'am , ' say , lay a envelope with a cheque in it in she little
little basket . ' you can take you own time for go , ma 'am ; but perhaps in the meanwhile , it will be more agreeable to a lady of you power of mind , to eat she meal by herself , and not to be intrude upon . I really ought to apologise to you - be only of - for have stood in you light so long . ' ' pray do not name it , sir , ' return . ' if that portrait could speak , sir - but it have the advantage over the original of not possesse the power of commit itself and disgust other , - it would testify , that a long period have elapse since I first habitually address it as the picture of a Noodle . Nothe that a Noodle do , can awake surprise or indignation ; the proceeding of a Noodle can only inspire contempt . ' thus say , , with she Roman feature like a medal struck to commemorate she scorn of , survey he fixedly from head to foot , sweep disdainfully past he , and ascend the staircase . close the door , and stood before the fire ; project himself after he old explosive manner into he portrait - and into futurity . into how much of futurity ? he see . Sparsit fight out a daily fight at the point of all the weapon in the female armoury , with the grudging , smart , peevish , torment , still lay up in bed with she mysterious leg , and gobble she insufficient income down by about the middle of every quarter , in a mean little airless lodging , a mere closet for one , a mere crib for two ; but do he see more ? do he catch any glimpse of himself make a show of Bitzer to strangers , as the rise young man , so devoted to he master 's great merit , who have win young 's place , and have almost captured young himself , in the time when by various rascal he be spirite away ? do he see any faint reflection of he own image make a vain - glorious will , whereby five - and - twenty Humbug , past five - and - fifty year of age , each take upon himself the name , of , should for ever dine in , for ever lodge in building , for ever attend a chapel , for ever go to sleep under a chaplain , for ever be support out of a estate , and for ever nauseate all healthy stomach , with a vast amount of balderdash and bluster ? have he any prescience of the day , five year to come , when of be to die of a fit in the street , and this same precious will be to begin its long career of quibble , plunder , false pretence , vile example , little service and much law ? probably not . yet the portrait be to see it all out . here be on the same day , and in the same hour , sit thoughtful in he own room . how much of futurity do he see ? do he see himself , a white - haired decrepit man , bend he hitherto inflexible theory to appoint circumstance ; make he fact and figure subservient to , , and ; and no longer try to grind that trio in he dusty little mill ? do he catch sight of himself , therefore much despise by he late political associate ? do he see they , in the era of it be be quite settle that the national dustman have only to do with one another , and owe no duty to a abstraction call a people , ' taunt the honourable gentleman ' with this and with that and with what not , five night a - week , until the small hour of the morning ? probably he have that much foreknowledge , knowe he man . here be on the night of the same day , watch the fire as in day of yore , though with a gentler and a humbler face . how much of the future might arise before she vision ? Broadsides in the street , sign with she father 's name , exonerat the late , weaver , from misplaced suspicion , and publish the guilt of he own son , with such extenuation as he year and temptation ( he could not bring himself to add , he education ) might beseech ; be of the present . so , 's tombstone , with she father 's record of he death , be almost of the , for she know it be to be . these thing she could plainly see . but , how much of the ? a work woman , christen , after a long illness once again appear at the ringing of the factory bell , and pass to and for at the set hour , among the ; a woman of pensive beauty , always dress in black , but sweet - tempered and serene , and even cheerful ; who , of all the people in the place , alone appear to have compassion on a degrade , drunken wretch of she own sex , who be sometimes see in the town secretly begge of she , and cry to she ; a woman work , ever work , but content to do it , and prefer to do it as she natural lot , until she should be too old to labour any more ? do see this ? such a thing be to be . a lonely brother , many thousand of mile away , write , on paper blot with tear , that she word have too soon
