Wuther I 1801 . - I have just return from a visit to my landlord - the solitary neighbour that I shall be trouble with . this be certainly a beautiful country ! in all , I do not believe that I could have fix on a situation so completely remove from the stir of society . a perfect misanthropist 's heaven : and and I be such a suitable pair to divide the desolation between we . a capital fellow ! he little imagine how my heart warm towards he when I beheld he black eye withdraw so suspiciously under they brows , as I ride up , and when he finger shelter themselves , with a jealous resolution , still further in he waistcoat , as I announce my name . ' ? ' I say . a nod be the answer . ' , you new tenant , sir . I do myself the honour of call as soon as possible after my arrival , to express the hope that I have not inconvenience you by my perseverance in solicite the occupation of : I hear yesterday you have have some thought - ' ' be my own , sir , ' he interrupt , wincing . 'I should not allow any one to inconvenience I , if I could hinder it - walk in ! ' the ' walk in ' be utter with close tooth , and express the sentiment , ' go to the Deuce :' even the gate over which he lean manifest no sympathising movement to the word ; and I think that circumstance determine I to accept the invitation : I feel interested in a man who see more exaggeratedly reserve than myself . when he see my horse 's breast fairly push the barrier , he do put out he hand to unchain it , and then sullenly proceed I up the causeway , call , as we enter the court , - ' Joseph , take 's horse ; and bring up some wine . ' ' here we have the whole establishment of domestic , I suppose , ' be the reflection suggest by this compound order . ' no wonder the grass grow up between the flag , and cattle be the only hedge - cutter . ' be a elderly , nay , a old man : very old , perhaps , though hale and sinewy . ' the help we ! ' he soliloquise in a undertone of peevish displeasure , while relieive I of my horse : look , meantime , in my face so sourly that I charitably conjecture he must have need of divine aid to digest he dinner , and he pious ejaculation have no reference to my unexpected advent . Wuthering be the name of 's dwelling . ' Wuthering ' be a significant provincial adjective , descriptive of the atmospheric tumult to which its station be expose in stormy weather . pure , brace ventilation they must have up there at all time , indeed : one may guess the power of the north wind blow over the edge , by the excessive slant of a few stunted fir at the end of the house ; and by a range of gaunt thornd all stretch they limb one way , as if crave alm of the sun . happily , the architect have foresight to build it strong : the narrow window be deeply set in the wall , and the corner defend with large jutting stone . before pass the threshold , I pause to admire a quantity of grotesque carve lavish over the front , and especially about the principal door ; above which , among a wilderness of crumbling griffin and shameless little boy , I detect the date ' 1500 , ' and the name ' . ' I would have make a few comment , and request a short history of the place from the surly owner ; but he attitude at the door appear to demand my speedy entrance , or complete departure , and I have no desire to aggravate he impatience previous to inspect the penetralium . one stop bring we into the family sit - room , without any introductory lobby or passage : they call it here ' the house ' pre - eminently . it include kitchen and parlour , generally ; but I believe at Wuthering the kitchen be force to retreat altogether into another quarter : at least I distinguished a chatter of tongue , and a clatter of culinary utensil , deep within ; and I observe no sign of roasting , boiling , or baking , about the huge fireplace ; nor any glitter of copper saucepan and tin cullender on the wall . one end , indeed , reflect splendidly both light and heat from rank of immense pewter dish , intersperse with silver jug and tankard , towere row after row , on a vast oak dresser , to the very roof . the latter have never be under - draw : it be entire anatomy lay bare to a inquire eye , except where a frame of wood laden with oatcake and cluster of leg of beef , mutton , and ham , conceal it . above the chimney be sundry villainous old gun , and a couple of horse - pistol : and , by way of ornament , three gaudily - paint canisters dispose along its ledge . the floor be of smooth , white stone ; the chair , high - back , primitive structure , pain green : one or two heavy black one lurk in the shade . in a arch under the dresser repose a huge , liver - colou bitch pointer , surround by a swarm of squealing puppy ; and other dog haunt other recess . the apartment and furniture would have be nothing
nothing extraordinary as belonge to a homely , northern farmer , with a stubborn countenance , and stalwart limb set out to advantage in knee - breech and gaiter . such a individual seat in he arm -chair , he mug of ale frothing on the round table before he , be to be see in any circuit of five or six mile among these hill , if you go at the right time after dinner . but form a singular contrast to he abode and style of living . he be a dark - skinned gipsy in aspect , in dress and manners a gentleman : that be , as much a gentleman as many a country squire : rather slovenly , perhaps , yet not look amiss with he negligence , because he have a erect and handsome figure ; and rather morose . possibly , some people might suspect he of a degree of under - breed pride ; I have a sympathetic chord within that tell I it be nothing of the sort : I know , by instinct , he reserve spring from a aversion to showy display of feeling - to manifestation of mutual kindliness . he will love and hate equally under cover , and esteem it a species of impertinence to be love or hate again . no , I be run on too fast : I bestow my own attribute over -liberally on he . may have entirely dissimilar reason for keep he hand out of the way when he meet a would - be acquaintance , to those which actuate I . let I hope my constitution be almost peculiar : my dear mother use to say I should never have a comfortable home ; and only last summer I prove myself perfectly unworthy of one . while enjoy a month of fine weather at the sea - coast , I be throw into the company of a most fascinating creature : a real goddess in my eye , as long as she take no notice of I . I ' never tell my love ' vocally ; still , if look have language , the merest idiot might have guess I be over head and ears : she understand I at last , and look a return - the sweetest of all imaginable look . and what do I do ? I confess it with shame - shrunk icily into myself , like a snail ; at every glance retire colder and farther ; till finally the poor innocent be lead to doubt she own sense , and , overwhelm with confusion at she suppose mistake , persuade she mamma to decamp . by this curious turn of disposition I have gain the reputation of deliberate heartlessness ; how undeserved , I alone can appreciate . I take a seat at the end of the hearthstone opposite that towards which my landlord advanced , and fill up a interval of silence by attempt to caress the canine mother , who have leave she nursery , and be sneak wolfishly to the back of my leg , she lip curl up , and she white tooth water for a snatch . my caress provoke a long , guttural gnarl . ' you would better let the dog alone , ' grow in unison , check fiercer demonstration with a punch of he foot . ' she be not accustom to be spoil - not keep for a pet . ' then , strid to a side door , he shoute again , ' ! ' mumble indistinctly in the depth of the cellar , but give no intimation of ascending ; so he master div down to he , leave I - - the ruffianly bitch and a pair of grim shaggy sheep - dog , who share with she a jealous guardianship over all my movement . not anxious to come in contact with they fang , I sit still ; but , imagine they would scarcely understand tacit insult , I unfortunately indulge in winking and make face at the trio , and some turn of my physiognomy so irritate madam , that she suddenly break into a fury and leapt on my knee . I fling she back , and hasten to interpose the table between we . this proceeding arouse the whole hive : half - a - dozen four - foot fiend , of various size and age , issue from hide den to the common centre . I feel my heel and coat -laps peculiar subject of assault ; and parry off the larger combatant as effectually as I could with the poker , I be constrain to demand , aloud , assistance from some of the household in re-establishing peace . and he man climb the cellar step with vexatious phlegm : I do not think they move one second faster than usual , though the hearth be a absolute tempest of worrying and yelping . happily , a inhabitant of the kitchen make more despatch : a lusty dame , with tuck - up gown , bare arm , and fire - flush cheek , rush into the midst of we flourish a frying - pan : and use that weapon , and she tongue , to such purpose , that the storm subsid magically , and she only remain , heaive like a sea after a high wind , when she master enter on the scene . ' what the devil be the matter ? ' he ask , eye I in a manner that I could ill endure , after this inhospitable treatment . ' what the devil , indeed ! ' I mutter . ' the herd of possessed swine could have have no worse spirit in they than those animal of yours , sir . you might as well leave a stranger with a brood of tiger ! '
' ' they will not meddle with person who touch nothing ,' he remark , put the bottle before I , and restore the displace table . ' the dog do right to be vigilant . take a glass of wine ? ' ' no , thank you . ' ' not bite , be you ? ' ' if I have be , I would have set my signet on the biter . ' 's countenance relax into a grin . ' come , come ,' he say , ' you be flurry , . here , take a little wine . guest be so exceedingly rare in this house that I and my dog , I be willing to own , hardly know how to receive they . you health , sir ? ' I bow and return the pledge ; begin to perceive that it would be foolish to sit sulking for the misbehaviour of a pack of curs ; beside , I feel loth to yield the fellow further amusement at my expense ; since he humwe take that turn . he - probably sway by prudential consideration of the folly of offend a good tenant - relax a little in the laconic style of chipping off he pronoun and auxiliary verb , and introduce what he suppose would be a subject of interest to I , - a discourse on the advantages and disadvantage of my present place of retirement . I find he very intelligent on the topic we touch ; and before I go home , I be encourage so far as to volunteer another visit to - morrow . he evidently wish no repetition of my intrusion . I shall go , notwithstanding . it be astonish how sociable I feel myself compare with he . chapter ii afternoon set in misty and cold . I have half a mind to spend it by my study fire , instead of wad through heath and mud to . on come up from dinner , however , ( - I dine between twelve and one o'clock ; the housekeeper , a matronly lady , take as a fixture along with the house , could not , or would not , comprehend my request that I might be serve at five ) - on mount the stair with this lazy intention , and step into the room , I see a servant - girl on she knee surround by brush and coal -scuttle , and raise a infernal dust as she extinguish the flame with heap of cinder . this spectacle drive I back immediately ; I take my hat , and , after a four -mile ' walk , arrive at 's garden - gate just in time to escape the first feathery flake of a snow- shower . on that bleak hill - top the earth be hard with a black frost , and the air make I shiver through every limb . be unable to remove the chain , I jump over , and , run up the flag causeway border with straggling gooseberry - bushes , knock vainly for admittance , till my knuckle tingle and the dog how . ' Wretch inmate ! ' I ejaculate , mentally , ' you deserve perpetual isolation from you species for you churlish inhospitality . at least , I would not keep my door bar in the day - time . I do not care - I will get in ! ' so resolve , I grasp the latch and shake it vehemently . Vinegar - face project he head from a round window of the barn . ' what be ye for ? ' he shoute . ot ' maister 's down I ' t ' fowld . go round by th' end of ' t ' laith , if ye go to spake to he . ' ' be there nobody inside to open the door ? ' I halloo , responsively . ' there be nobbut t ' missis ; and shoo will not oppen ot a ye mak ' yer flaysome dins till neeght . ' ' why ? can not you tell she whom I be , eh , ? ' ' nor - ne I ! I will hae no hend with i't , ' mutter the head , vanish . the snow begin to drive thickly . I seize the handle to essay another trial ; when a young man without coat , and shouldere a pitchfork , appear in the yard behind . he hail I to follow he , and , after march through a wash - house , and a pave area contain a coal - shed , pump , and pigeon - cot , we at length arrive in the huge , warm , cheerful apartment where I be formerly receive . it glow delightfully in the radiance of a immense fire , compound of coal , peat , and wood ; and near the table , laid for a plentiful evening meal , I be pleased to observe the ' missis , ' a individual whose existence I have never previously suspect . I bow and wait , think she would bid I take a seat . she look at I , lean back in she chair , and remain motionless and mute . ' Rough weather ! ' I remarke . 'I be afraid , . , the door must bear the consequence of you servants 's leisure attendance : I have hard work to make they hear I . ' she never open she mouth . I star - she star also : at any rate , she keep she eye on I in a cool , regardless manner , exceedingly embarrassing and disagreeable . ' sit down , ' say the young man , grufinitely . ' he will be in soon . ' I obey ; and hem
hem , and call the , who deign , at this second interview , to move the extreme tip of she tail , in token of own my acquaintance . 'a beautiful animal ! ' I commence again . ' do you intend part with the little one , madam ? ' ' they be not mine , ' say the amiable hostess , more repellingly than himself could have reply . 'Ah , you favourite be among these ? ' I continue , turn to a obscure cushion full of something like cat . 'a strange choice of favourite ! ' she observ scornfully . Unluckily , it be a heap of dead rabbit . I hem once more , and draw closer to the hearth , repeat my comment on the wildness of the evening . ' you should not have come out , ' she say , rise and reach from the chimney - piece two of the painted canister . she position before be shelter from the light ; now , I have a distinct view of she whole figure and countenance . she be slender , and apparently scarcely past girlhood : a admirable form , and the most exquisite little face that I have ever have the pleasure of beholding ; small feature , very fair ; flaxen ringlet , or rather golden , hang loose on she delicate neck ; and eye , have they be agreeable in expression , that would have be irresistible : fortunately for my susceptible heart , the only sentiment they evince hover between scorn and a kind of desperation , singularly unnatural to be detect there . the canister be almost out of she reach ; I make a motion to aid she ; she turn upon I as a miser might turn if any one attempt to assist he in count he gold . 'I do not want you help , ' she snap ; 'I can get they for myself . ' 'I beg you pardon ! ' I hasten to reply . ' be you ask to tea ? ' she demand , tie a apron over she neat black frock , and stand with a spoonful of the leaf poise over the pot . 'I shall be glad to have a cup ,' I answer . ' be you ask ? ' she repeat . ' no ,' I say , half smile . ' you be the proper person to ask I . ' she fling the tea back , spoon and all , and resume she chair in a pet ; she forehead corrugate , and she red under - lip push out , like a child 's ready to cry . meanwhile , the young man have sling on to he person a decidedly shabby upper garment , and , erect himself before the blaze , look down on I from the corner of he eye , for all the world as if there be some mortal feud unavenge between we . I begin to doubt whether he be a servant or not : he dress and speech be both rude , entirely devoid of the superiority observable in and ; he thick brown curl be rough and uncultivated , he whisker encroach bearishly over he cheek , and he hand be embrown like those of a common labourer : still he bearing be free , almost haughty , and he show none of a domestic 's assiduity in attend on the lady of the house . in the absence of clear proof of he condition , I deem it best to abstain from noticing he curiious conduct ; and , five minute afterwards , the entrance of relieve I , in some measure , from my uncomfortable state . ' you see , sir , I be come , accord to promise ! ' I exclaim , assume the cheerful ; ' and I fear I shall be weather - bound for half a hour , if you can afford I shelter during that space . ' ' half a hour ? ' he say , shak the white flake from he clothes ; 'I wonder you should select the thick of a snow - storm to ramble about in . do you know that you run a risk of be lose in the marsh ? people familiar with these moor often miss they road on such evening ; and I can tell you there be no chance of a change at present . ' ' perhaps I can get a guide among you lad , and he might stay at the till morning - could you spare I one ? ' ' no , I could not . ' 'Oh , indeed ! well , then , I must trust to my own sagacity . ' ' Umph ! ' ' be you go to mak ' the tea ? ' demand he of the shabby coat , shift he ferocious gaze from I to the young lady . 'I he to have any ? ' she ask , appeal to . ' get it ready , will you ? ' be the answer , uttere so savagely that I start . the tone in which the word be say reveal a genuine bad nature . I no longer feel inclined to call Heathcliff a capital fellow . when the preparation be finish , he invite I with - ' now , sir , bring forward you chair . ' and we all , include the rustic youth , draw round the table : a austere silence prevail while we discuss we meal . I think , if I have cause the cloud , it be my duty to make a effort to dispel it . they could not every day sit so grim and taciturn ; and it be impossible , however ill - tempere they might be
be , that the universal scowl they wear be they every - day countenance . ' it be strange ,' I begin , in the interval of swallow one cup of tea and receive another - ' it be strange how custom can mould we taste and idea : many could not imagine the existence of happiness in a life of such complete exile from the world as you spend , ; yet , I will venture to say , that , surround by you family , and with you amiable lady as the presiding genius over you home and heart - ' ' my amiable lady ! ' he interrupt , with a almost diabolical sneer on he face . ' where be she - my amiable lady ? ' ' Mrs . Heathcliff , you wife , I mean . ' ' well , yes - oh , you would intimate that she spirit have take the post of ministering angel , and guard the fortune of Wuthering , even when she body be gone . be that it ? ' perceive myself in a blunder , I attempt to correct it . I might have see there be too great a disparity between the age of the party to make it likely that they be man and wife . one be about forty : a period of mental vigour at which men seldom cherish the delusion of be marry for love by girl : that dream be reserve for the solace of we declining year . the other do not look seventeen . then it flash on I - ' the clown at my elbow , who be drink he tea out of a basin and eat he broad with unwashed hand , may be she husband : Heathcliff junior , of course . here be the consequence of be bury alive : she have throw herself away upon that boor from sheer ignorance that better individual exist ! a sad pity - I must beware how I cause she to regret she choice . ' the last reflection may seem conceit ; it be not . my neighbour struck I as bordering on repulsive ; I know , through experience , that I be tolerably attractive . ' . be my daughter - in - law , ' say , corroborat my surmise . he turn , as he speak , a peculiar look in she direction : a look of hatred ; unless he have a most perverse set of facial muscle that will not , like those of other people , interpret the language of he soul . 'Ah , certainly - I see now : you be the favoured possessor of the beneficent fairy ,' I remark , turn to my neighbour . this be worse than before : the youth grow crimson , and clench he fist , with every appearance of a meditate assault . but he seem to recollect himself presently , and smother the storm in a brutal curse , mutter on my behalf : which , however , I take care not to notice . ' unhappy in you conjecture , sir , ' observ my host ; 'we neither of we have the privilege of own you good fairy ; she mate be dead . I say she be my daughter - in - law : therefore , she must have marry my son . ' ' and this young man be - ' ' not my son , assuredly . ' smile again , as if it be rather too bold a jest to attribute the paternity of that bear to he . ' my name be ,' grow the other ; ' and I would counsel you to respect it ! ' 'I have show no disrespect , ' be my reply , laugh internally at the dignity with which he announce himself . he fix he eye on I longer than I care to return the stare , for fear I might be temp either to box he ear or render my hilarity audible . I begin to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant family circle . the dismal spiritual atmosphere overcame , and more than neutralise , the glow physical comfort round I ; and I resolve to be cautious how I venture under those rafter a third time . the business of eating be conclude , and no one utter a word of sociable conversation , I approach a window to examine the weather . a sorrowful sight I see : dark night come down prematurely , and sky and hill mingl in one bitter whirl of wind and suffocat snow . 'I do not think it possible for I to get home now without a guide ,' I could not help exclaim . ' the roads will be bury already ; and , if they be bear , I could scarcely distinguish a foot in advance . ' ' , drive those dozen sheep into the barn porch . they will be cover if leave in the fold all night : and put a plank before they , ' say . ' how must I do ? ' I continue , with rise irritation . there be no reply to my question ; and on look round I see only bring in a pail of porridge for the dog , and . Heathcliff lean over the fire , divert herself with burn a bundle of match which have fall from the chimney - piece as she restore the tea - canister to its place . the former , when he have deposit he burden , take a critical survey of the room , and in crack tone grate out - ' Aw wonder how yah can faishion to stand thear I ' idleness un war , when all on ' em goan out ! be a nowt , and it
it be no use talk - yah will niver mmend o'yer ill way , but goa raight to t ' divil , like yer mother afore ye ! ' I imagine , for a moment , that this piece of eloquence be address to I ; and , sufficiently enrage , step towards the a rascal with a intention of kick he out of the door . Heathcliff , however , check I by she answer . ' you scandalous old hypocrite ! ' she reply . ' be you not afraid of be carry away bodily , whenever you mention the 's name ? I warn you to refrain from provoke I , or I will ask you abduction as a special favour ! stop ! look here , , ' she continue , take a long , dark book from a shelf ; 'I will show you how far I have progress in the : I shall soon be competent to make a clear house of it . the red cow do not die by chance ; and you rheumatism can hardly be reckon among providential visitation ! ' 'Oh , wick , wick ! ' gas the elder ; ' may the deliver we from evil ! ' 'no , reprobate ! you be a castaway - be off , or I will hurt you seriously ! I will have you all model in wax and clay ! and the first who pass the limit I fix shall - I will not say what he shall be do to - but , you will see ! go , I be look at you ! ' the little witch put a mock malignity into she beautiful eye , and , trembl with sincere horror , hurrie out , pray , and ejaculat ' wick ' as he go . I think she conduct must be prompt by a species of dreary fun ; and , now that we be alone , I endeavoure to interest she in my distress . ' ,' I say earnestly , ' you must excuse I for trouble you . I presume , because , with that face , I be sure you can not help be good - hear . do point out some landmarks by which I may know my way home : I have no more idea how to get there than you would have how to get to ! ' ' take the road you come , ' she answer , ensconce herself in a chair , with a candle , and the long book open before she . ' it be brief advice , but as sound as I can give . ' ' then , if you hear of I be discover dead in a bog or a pit full of snow , you conscience will not whisper that it be partly you fault ? ' ' how so ? I can not escort you . they would not let I go to the end of the garden wall . ' ' you ! I should be sorry to ask you to cross the threshold , for my convenience , on such a night ,' I cry . 'I want you to tell I my way , not to show it : or else to persuade to give I a guide . ' ' who ? there be himself , , , and I . which would you have ? ' ' be there no boy at the farm ? ' ' no ; those be all . ' ' then , it follow that I be compelle to stay . ' ' that you may settle with you host . I have nothing to do with it . ' 'I hope it will be a lesson to you to make no more rash journey on these hill , ' cry 's stern voice from the kitchen entrance . ' as to stay here , I do not keep accommodation for visitor : you must share a bed with or , if you do . ' 'I can sleep on a chair in this room ,' I reply . 'no , no ! a stranger be a stranger , be he rich or poor : it will not suit I to permit any one the range of the place while I be off guard ! ' say the unmannerly wretch . with this insult my patience be at a end . I utter a expression of disgust , and push past he into the yard , run against in my haste . it be so dark that I could not see the means of exit ; and , as I wander round , I hear another specimen of they civil behaviour amongst each other . at first the young man appear about to befriend I . 'I will go with he as far as the park , ' he say . ' you will go with he to hell ! ' exclaim he master , or whatever relation he bear . ' and who be to look after the horse , eh ? ' 'A man 's life be of more consequence than one evening 's neglect of the horse : somebody must go , ' murmure . Heathcliff , more kindly than I expect . ' not at you command ! ' retort . ' if you set store on he , you would better be quiet . ' ' then I hope he ghost will haunt you ; and I hope will never get another tenant till the Grange be a ruin , ' she answer , sharply . ' Hearken , hearke , shoo be curse on th'ey ! ' mutter , towards whom I have be steer . he sit within earshot , milk the cow by the light of a lantern , which I seize unceremoniously , and , call out that I
I would send it back on the morrow , rush to the nearest postern . ' Maister , maister , he be stal t ' lanthern ! ' shoute the ancient , pursue my retreat . ' hey , ! hey , dog ! hey , holld he , holld he ! ' on opening the little door , two hairy monster flow at my throat , bear I down , and extinguish the light ; while a mingl guffaw from and put the copestone on my rage and humiliation . fortunately , the beasts seem more bent on stretch they paws , and yawn , and flourish they tail , than devour I alive ; but they would suffer no resurrection , and I be force to lie till they malignant master pleased to deliver I : then , hatless and trembl with wrath , I order the miscreant to let I out - on they peril to keep I one minute longer - with several incoherent threat of retaliation that , in they indefinite depth of virulency , smack of . the vehemence of my agitation bring on a copious bleeding at the nose , and still laugh , and still I scold . I do not know what would have conclude the scene , have there not be one person at hand rather more rational than myself , and more benevolent than my entertainer . this be , the stout housewife ; who at length issue forth to inquire into the nature of the uproar . she think that some of they have be lay violent hand on I ; and , not da to attack she master , she turn she vocal artillery against the younger scoundrel . ' well , , ' she cry , ' I wonder what you will have again next ? be we go to murder folk on we very door - stone ? I see this house will never do for I - look at t ' poor lad , he be fair choking ! Wisht , wisht ; you mun ' not go on so . come in , and I will cure that : there now , hold ye still . ' with these word she suddenly splashed a pint of icy water down my neck , and pull I into the kitchen . follow , he accidental merriment expire quickly in he habitual moroseness . I be sick exceedingly , and dizzy , and faint ; and thus compelle perforce to accept lodging under he roof . he tell to give I a glass of brandy , and then pass on to the inner room ; while she condol with I on my sorry predicament , and have obey he order , whereby I be somewhat revive , usher I to bed . chapter III while lead the way upstairs , she recommend that I should hide the candle , and not make a noise ; for she master have a odd notion about the chamber she would put I in , and never let anybody lodge there willingly . I ask the reason . she do not know , she answer : she have only live there a year or two ; and they have so many queer goings on , she could not begin to be curiious . to stupefy to be curiious myself , I fasten my door and glance round for the bed . the whole furniture consist of a chair , a clothes - press , and a large oak case , with square cut out near the top resembling coach window . have approach this structure , I look inside , and perceive it to be a singular sort of old - fashioned couch , very conveniently design to obviate the necessity for every member of the family have a room to himself . in fact , it form a little closet , and the ledge of a window , which it enclose , serve as a table . I slid back the panel side , get in with my light , pull they together again , and feel secure against the vigilance of , and every one else . the ledge , where I place my candle , have a few mildewed book pile up in one corner ; and it be cover with writing scratch on the paint . this writing , however , be nothing but a name repeat in all kind of character , large and small - Catherine , here and there vari to , and then again to . in vapid listlessness I lean my head against the window , and continue spell over - - , till my eye close ; but they have not rest five minute when a glare of white letter start from the dark , as vivid as spectre - the air swarm with ; and rouse myself to dispel the obtrusive name , I discover my candle - wick recline on one of the antique volume , and perfume the place with a odour of roast calf - skin . I snuff it off , and , very ill at ease under the influence of cold and linger nausea , sit up and spread open the injured tome on my knee . it be a testament , in lean type , and smell dreadfully musty : a fly - leaf bear the inscription - ' , she book , ' and a date some quarter of a century back . I shut it , and take up another and another , till I have examine all . 's library be select , and its state of dilapidation prove it to have be well use , though not altogether for a legitimate purpose : scarcely one chapter have escape , a pen -and - ink commentary - at least the appearance of one - cover every morsel of blank that the
the printer have leave . some be detach sentence ; other part take the form of a regular diary , scrawl in a unformed , childish hand . at the top of a extra page ( quite a treasure , probably , when first lighte on ) I be greatly amused to behold a excellent caricature of my friend , - rudely , yet powerfully sketch . a immediate interest kind within I for the unknown Catherine , and I begin forthwith to decipher she faded hieroglyphic . 'An awful , ' commence the paragraph beneath . 'I wish my father be back again . be a detestable substitute - he conduct to be atrocious - and I be go to rebel - we take we initiatory step this evening . ' all day have be flood with rain ; we could not go to church , so must need get up a congregation in the garret ; and , while and he wife bask downstair before a comfortable fire - do anything but read they Bible , I will answer for it - Heathcliff , myself , and the unhappy ploughboy be command to take we prayer - book , and mount : we be range in a row , on a sack of corn , groan and shiver , and hope that would shiver too , so that he might give we a short homily for he own sake . a vain idea ! the service last precisely three hour ; and yet my brother have the face to , when he see we descende , " what , do already ? " on evening we use to be permit to play , if we do not make much noise ; now a mere titter be sufficient to send we into corner . ' " you forget you have a master here , " say the tyrant . " I will demolish the first who put I out of temper ! I insist on perfect sobriety and silence . oh , boy ! be that you ? France darling , pull he hair as you go by : I hear he snap he finger . " France pull he hair heartily , and then go and seat herself on she husband 's knee , and there they be , like two baby , kiss and talk nonsense by the hour - foolish palaver that we should be asham of . we make ourselves as snug as we mean allow in the arch of the dresser . I have just fasten we pinafore together , and hang they up for a curtain , when in come , on a errand from the stable . he tear down my handiwork , box my ear , and croak : ' " t ' maister nobbut just bury , and not o'er , und t ' sound of ' t ' gospel still I ' yer lug , and ye darr be laik ! shame on ye ! sit ye down , ill childer ! there be good book eneugh if ye will read th'ey : sit ye down , and think of ' yer sowl ! " ' say this , he compelle we so to square we position that we might receive from the far - off fire a dull ray to show we the text of the lumber he thrust upon we . I could not bear the employment . I take my dingy volume by the scroop , and hurl it into the dog - kennel , vow I hate a good book . kick he to the same place . then there be a hubbub ! ' " ! " shoute we chaplain . " Maister , coom hither ! 's rive th ' back off 's o' , ' 's pawse he fit into t ' first part of ' ot ' to ! ' it be fair flaysome that ye let them go on this gait . Ech ! th' owd man wad ha ' lace th'ey properly - but he be goan ! " ' Hindley hurry up from he paradise on the hearth , and seize one of we by the collar , and the other by the arm , hurl both into the back - kitchen ; where , asseverate , " owd would fetch we as sure as we be liive : and , so comfort , we each seek a separate nook to await he advent . I reach this book , and a pot of ink from a shelf , and push the house - door ajar to give I light , and I have get the time on with writing for twenty minute ; but my companion be impatient , and propose that we should appropriate the dairywoman 's cloak , and have a scamper on the moor , under its shelter . a pleasant suggestion - and then , if the surly old man come in , he may believe he prophecy verify - we can not be damper , or colder , in the rain than we be here . ' * * * * * * I suppose fulfil she project , for the next sentence take up another subject : she wax lachrymose . ' how little do I dream that Hindley would ever make I cry so ! ' she write . ' my head ach , till I can not keep it on the pillow ; and still I can not give over . poor Heathcliff ! call he a vagabond , and will not let he sit with we , nor eat with we any more ; and , he say , he and I must not play together , and threaten to turn he out of the house if we break he order . he have be blame we father ( how da he ? ) for treat too liberally ;
; and swear he will reduce he to he right place - ' * * * * * * I begin to nod drowsily over the dim page : my eye wander from manuscript to print . I see a red ornamented title - ' , and the first of the - . ' a Pious Discourse deliver by the , in the of . ' and while I be , half - consciously , worry my brain to guess what would make of he subject , I sank back in bed , and fall asleep . Alas , for the effect of bad tea and bad temper ! what else could it be that make I pass such a terrible night ? I do not remember another that I can at all compare with it since I be capable of suffering . I begin to dream , almost before I cease to be sensible of my locality . I think it be morning ; and I have set out on my way home , with for a guide . the snow lay yard deep in we road ; and , as we flounder on , my companion weary I with constant reproach that I have not bring a pilgrim 's staff : tell I that I could never get into the house without one , and boastfully flourish a heavy - head cudgel , which I understand to be so denominate . for a moment I consider it absurd that I should need such a weapon to gain admittance into my own residence . then a new idea flash across I . I be not go there : we be journey to hear the famous preach , from the text - ' ; ' and either , the preacher , or I have commit the ' first of the - , ' and be to be publicly expose and excommunicate . we come to the chapel . I have pass it really in my walk , twice or thrice ; it lie in a hollow , between two hill : a elevate hollow , near a swamp , whose peaty moisture be say to answer all the purpose of embalming on the few corpse deposite there . the roof have be keep whole hitherto ; but as the clergyman 's stipend be only twenty pound per annum , and a house with two room , threaten speedily to determine into one , no clergyman will undertake the duty of pastor : especially as it be currently report that he flock would rather let he starve than increase the living by one penny from they own pocket . however , in my dream , have a full and attentive congregation ; and he preach - good ! what a sermon ; divide into four hundred and Ninety part , each fully equal to a ordinary address from the pulpit , and each discuss a separate sin ! where he search for they , I can not tell . he have he private manner of interpreting the phrase , and it seem necessary the brother should sin different sins on every occasion . they be of the most curious character : odd transgression that I never imagine previously . oh , how weary I grow . how I writh , and yawn , and nod , and revive ! how I pinch and prick myself , and rub my eye , and stand up , and sit down again , and nudge to inform I if he would ever have do . I be condemne to hear all out : finally , he reach the ' first of the - . ' at that crisis , a sudden inspiration descend on I ; I be move to rise and denounce as the sinner of the sin that no Christian need pardon . ' ,' I exclaim , ' sit here within these four wall , at one stretch , I have endure and forgive the four hundred and ninety head of you discourse . time seven time have I pluck up my hat and be about to - time seven time have you preposterously force I to resume my seat . the four hundred and ninety - first be too much . fellow - martyr , have at he ! drag he down , and crush he to atom , that the place which know he may know he no more ! ' 'thou be the man ! ' cry , after a solemn pause , lean over he cushion . ' Seventy time seven time didst thou gapingly contort thy visage - seventy time seven do I take counsel with my soul - lo , this be human weakness : this also may be absolve ! the first of the - be come . Brethren , execute upon he the judgament write . such honou have all his saint ! ' with that conclude word , the whole assembly , exalt they pilgrim 's stave , rush round I in a body ; and I , have no weapon to raise in self - defence , commence grapple with , my nearest and most ferocious assailant , for he . in the confluence of the multitude , several club cross ; blow , aim at I , fell on other sconce . presently the whole chapel resound with rapping and counter rapping : every man 's hand be against he neighbour ; and , unwilling to remain idle , pour forth he zeal in a shower of loud tap on the board of the pulpit , which respond so smartly that , at last , to my unspeakable relief , they wake I . and what be it that have suggest the tremendous tumult ? what have play 's part in the row ? merely the branch of a fir - tree that touch my lattice as the blast wail by
by , and rattle its dry cone against the pane ! I listen doubtingly a instant ; detect the disturber , then turn and doze , and dreamt again : if possible , still more disagreeably than before . this time , I remembe I be lie in the oak closet , and I hear distinctly the gusty wind , and the driving of the snow ; I hear , also , the fir bough repeat its teasing sound , and ascribe it to the right cause : but it annoye I so much , that I resolve to silence it , if possible ; and , I think , I rise and endeavoure to unhasp the casement . the hook be solder into the staple : a circumstance observe by I when awake , but forgote . 'I must stop it , nevertheless ! ' I mutter , knock my knuckle through the glass , and stretch a arm out to seize the importunate branch ; instead of which , my finger close on the finger of a little , ice - cold hand ! the intense horror of nightmare come over I : I try to draw back my arm , but the hand clung to it , and a most melancholy voice sob , ' let I in - let I in ! ' ' who be you ? ' I ask , struggle , meanwhile , to disengage myself . ' , ' it reply , shiveringly ( why do I think of ? I have read Earnshaw twenty time for ) - 'I be come home : I would lose my way on the moor ! ' as it speak , I discern , obscurely , a child 's face look through the window . Terror make I cruel ; and , finde it useless to attempt shak the creature off , I pull it be wrist on to the broken pane , and rub it to and for till the blood run down and soak the bedclothes : still it wail , ' let I in ! ' and maintain its tenacious gripe , almost madden I with fear . ' how can I ! ' I say at length . ' let I go , if you want I to let you in ! ' the finger relaxed , I snatch mine through the hole , hurriedly pile the book up in a pyramid against it , and stop my ear to exclude the lamentable prayer . I seem to keep they close above a quarter of a hour ; yet , the instant I listen again , there be the doleful cry moan on ! ' ! ' I shoute . 'I will never let you in , not if you beg for twenty year . ' ' it be twenty year , ' mourn the voice : ' twenty year . I have be a waif for twenty year ! ' begin a feeble scratching outside , and the pile of book move as if thrust forward . I try to jump up ; but could not stir a limb ; and so yell aloud , in a frenzy of fright . to my confusion , I discover the yell be not ideal : hasty footstep approach my chamber door ; somebody push it open , with a vigorous hand , and a light glimmer through the square at the top of the bed . I sit shuddering yet , and wip the perspiration from my forehead : the intruder appear to hesitate , and mutter to himself . at last , he say , in a half - whisper , plainly not expect a answer , ' be any one here ? ' I consider it best to confess my presence ; for I know 's accent , and fear he might search further , if I keep quiet . with this intention , I turn and open the panel . I shall not soon forget the effect my action produce . stood near the entrance , in he shirt and trousers ; with a candle dripp over he finger , and he face as white as the wall behind he . the first creak of the oak start he like a electric shock : the light leape from he hold to a distance of some foot , and he agitation be so extreme , that he could hardly pick it up . ' it be only you guest , sir ,' I call out , desirous to spare he the humiliation of expose he cowardice further . 'I have the misfortune to scream in my sleep , owe to a frightful nightmare . I be sorry I disturb you . ' ' oh , confound you , ! I wish you be at the - ' commence my host , set the candle on a chair , because he find it impossible to hold it steady . ' and who show you up into this room ? ' he continue , crush he nail into he palm , and grind he tooth to subdue the maxillary convulsion . ' who be it ? I have a good mind to turn they out of the house this moment ? ' ' it be you servant ,' I reply , flinge myself on to the floor , and rapidly resume my garment . 'I should not care if you do , ; she richly deserve it . I suppose that she want to get another proof that the place be haunt , at my expense . well , it be - swarm with ghost and goblin ! you have reason in shutt it up , I assure you . no one will thank you for a doze in such a den ! ' ' what do you mean ? ' ask , ' and what be you do ? lie down and
and finish out the night , since you be here ; but , for heaven 's sake ! do not repeat that horrid noise : nothing could excuse it , unless you be have you throat cut ! ' ' if the little fiend have get in at the window , she probably would have strangle I ! ' I return . 'I be not go to endure the persecution of you hospitable ancestor again . be not the akin to you on the mother 's side ? and that minx , , or , or however she be call - she must have be a changeling - wick little soul ! she tell I she have be walk the earth these twenty year : a just punishment for she mortal transgression , I 've no doubt ! ' Scarcely be these word utter when I recollect the association of 's with 's name in the book , which have completely slipp from my memory , till thus awaken . I blush at my inconsideration : but , without show further consciousness of the offence , I hasten to add - ' the truth be , sir , I pass the first part of the night in - ' here I stop afresh - I be about to say ' peruse those old volume , ' then it would have reveal my knowledge of they written , as well as they print , contents ; so , correcte myself , I go on - 'in spelling over the name scratch on that window - ledge . a monotonous occupation , calculate to set I asleep , like counting , or - ' ' what can you mean by talk in this way to I ! ' thunder with savage vehemence . ' how - how dare you , under my roof ? - ! he be mad to speak so ! ' and he struck he forehead with rage . I do not know whether to resent this language or pursue my explanation ; but he seem so powerfully affect that I take pity and proceed with my dream ; affirme I have never hear the appellation of ' ' before , but read it often over produce a impression which personify itself when I have no longer my imagination under control . Heathcliff gradually fall back into the shelter of the bed , as I speak ; finally sit down almost conceal behind it . I guess , however , by he irregular and intercept breathing , that he struggle to vanquish a excess of violent emotion . not like to show he that I have hear the conflict , I continue my toilette rather noisily , look at my watch , and soliloquise on the length of the night : ' not three o'clock yet ! I could have take oath it have be six . time stagnate here : we must surely have retire to rest at eight ! ' ' always at nine in winter , and rise at four , ' say my host , suppresse a groan : and , as I fancie , by the motion of he arm 's shadow , dash a tear from he eyes . ' ,' he add , ' you may go into my room : you will only be in the way , come down - stair so early : and you childish outcry have send sleep to the for I . ' ' and for I , too ,' I reply . 'I will walk in the yard till daylight , and then I will be off ; and you need not dread a repetition of my intrusion . I be now quite cured of seek pleasure in society , be it country or town . a sensible man ought to find sufficient company in himself . ' ' delightful company ! ' mutter . ' take the candle , and go where you please . I shall join you directly . keep out of the yard , though , the dog be unchained ; and the house - mount sentinel there , and - nay , you can only ramble about the step and passage . but , away with you ! I will come in two minute ! ' I obey , so far as to quit the chamber ; when , ignorant where the narrow lobby lead , I stand still , and be witness , involuntarily , to a piece of superstition on the part of my landlord which bely , oddly , he apparent sense . he get on to the bed , and wrench open the lattice , bursting , as he pull at it , into a uncontrollable passion of tear . ' come in ! come in ! ' he sob . ' , do come . oh , do - Once more ! oh ! my heart 's darling ! hear I this time , , at last ! ' the spectre show a spectre 's ordinary caprice : it give no sign of be ; but the snow and wind whir wildly through , even reach my station , and blow out the light . there be such anguish in the gush of grief that accompany this raving , that my compassion make I overlook its folly , and I draw off , half angry to have listen at all , and vex at have relate my ridiculous nightmare , since it produce that agony ; though why be beyond my comprehension . I descend cautiously to the lower region , and land in the back - kitchen , where a gleam of fire , rak compactly together , enable I to rekindle my candle . nothing be stirr except a brindled , grey cat , which crept from the ash , and salute I with a querulous mew . two bench , sha in section
section of a circle , nearly enclose the hearth ; on one of these I stretch myself , and mount the other . we be both of we nodd ere any one invade we retreat , and then it be , shuffl down a wooden ladder that vanish in the roof , through a trap : the ascent to he garret , I suppose . he cast a sinister look at the little flame which I have entice to play between the rib , sweep the cat from its elevation , and bestow himself in the vacancy , commence the operation of stuff a three - inch pipe with tobacco . my presence in he sanctum be evidently esteem a piece of impudence too shameful for remark : he silently apply the tube to he lip , fold he arm , and puff away . I let he enjoy the luxury unannoy ; and after suck out he last wreath , and heaive a profound sigh , he get up , and depart as solemnly as he come . a more elastic footstep enter next ; and now I open my mouth for a ' good - morning , ' but close it again , the salutation unachieve ; for be perform he orison , in a series of curse direct against every object he touch , while he rummage a corner for a spade or shovel to dig through the drift . he glance over the back of the bench , dilat he nostril , and think as little of exchanging civility with I as with my companion the cat . I guess , by he preparation , that egress be allow , and , leave my hard couch , make a movement to follow he . he notice this , and thrust at a inner door with the end of he spade , intimat by a inarticulate sound that there be the place where I must go , if I change my locality . it open into the house , where the female be already astir ; Zillah urge flake of flame up the chimney with a colossal bellow ; and , knee on the hearth , read a book by the aid of the blaze . she hold she hand interpose between the furnace - heat and she eye , and seem absorb in she occupation ; desiste from it only to chide the servant for cover she with spark , or to push away a dog , now and then , that snoozl it be nose overforwardly into she face . I be surprised to see there also . he stand by the fire , he back towards I , just finish a stormy scene with poor ; who ever and anon interrupt she labour to pluck up the corner of she apron , and heave a indignant groan . ' and you , you worthless - ' he break out as I enter , turn to he daughter - in - law , and employ a epithet as harmless as duck , or sheep , but generally represent by a dash - . ' there you be , at you idle trick again ! the rest of they do earn they bread - you live on my charity ! put you trash away , and find something to do . you shall pay I for the plague of have you eternally in my sight - do you hear , damnable jade ? ' 'I will put my trash away , because you can make I if I refuse , ' answer the young lady , close she book , and throw it on a chair . ' but I will not do anything , though you should swear you tongue out , except what I please ! ' lift he hand , and the speaker spring to a safer distance , obviously acquaint with its weight . have no desire to be entertain by a cat - and - dog combat , I step forward briskly , as if eager to partake the warmth of the hearth , and innocent of any knowledge of the interrupted dispute . each have enough decorum to suspend further hostility : place he fists , out of temptation , in he pocket ; curl she lip , and walk to a seat far off , where she keep she word by play the part of a statue during the remainder of my stay . that be not long . I decline join they breakfast , and , at the first gleam of dawn , take a opportunity of escape into the free air , now clear , and still , and cold as impalpable ice . my landlord hallo for I to stop ere I reach the bottom of the garden , and offer to accompany I across the moor . it be well he do , for the whole hill - back be one billowy , white ocean ; the swell and fall not indicate corresponding rise and depression in the ground : many pit , at least , be fill to a level ; and entire range of mounds , the refuse of the quarry , blot from the chart which my yesterday 's walk leave picture in my mind . I have remark on one side of the road , at interval of six or seven yard , a line of upright stone , continue through the whole length of the bar : these be erect and dau with lime on purpose to serve as guide in the dark , and also when a fall , like the present , confound the deep swamp on either hand with the firmer path : but , except a dirty dot point up here and there , all trace of they existence have vanish : and my companion find it necessary to warn I frequently to steer to the right
right or leave , when I imagine I be follow , correctly , the windings of the road . we exchange little conversation , and he halt at the entrance of , say , I could make no error there . we adieux be limit to a hasty bow , and then I push forward , trust to my own resource ; for the porter 's lodge be untenanted as yet . the distance from the gate to the grange be two miles ; I believe I manage to make it four , what with lose myself among the tree , and sinke up to the neck in snow : a predicament which only those who have experience it can appreciate . at any rate , whatever be my wandering , the clock chim twelve as I enter the house ; and that give exactly a hour for every mile of the usual way from . my human fixture and she satellite rush to welcome I ; exclaim , tumultuously , they have completely give I up : everybody conjecture that I perish last night ; and they be wonder how they must set about the search for my remains . I bid they be quiet , now that they see I return , and , benumb to my very heart , I drag up - stair ; whence , after put on dry clothes , and pace to and for thirty or forty minute , to restore the animal heat , I adjourn to my study , feeble as a kitten : almost too much so to enjoy the cheerful fire and smoke coffee which the servant have prepare for my refreshment . chapter iv what vain weathercock we be ! I , who have determine to hold myself independent of all social intercourse , and thanke my star that , at length , I have light on a spot where it be next to impracticable - I , weak wretch , after maintain till dusk a struggle with low spirit and solitude , be finally compelle to strike my colour ; and under pretence of gain information concern the necessity of my establishment , I desire , when she bring in supper , to sit down while I eat it ; hope sincerely she would prove a regular gossip , and either rouse I to animation or lull I to sleep by she talk . ' you have live here a considerable time ,' I commence ; ' do you not say sixteen year ? ' ' , sir : I come when the mistress be married , to wait on she ; after she die , the master retain I for he housekeeper . ' ' indeed . ' there ensue a pause . she be not a gossip , I fear ; unless about she own affair , and those could hardly interest I . however , have study for a interval , with a fist on either knee , and a cloud of meditation over she ruddy countenance , she ejaculate - 'Ah , time be greatly change since then ! ' ' yes ,' I remarke , ' you have see a good many alteration , I suppose ? ' 'I have : and trouble too , ' she say . ' oh , I will turn the talk on my landlord 's family ! ' I think to myself . 'a good subject to start ! and that pretty girl - widow , I should like to know she history : whether she be a native of the country , or , as be more probable , a exotic that the surly INDIGENAE will not recognise for kin . ' with this intention I ask why let , and prefer live in a situation and residence so much inferior . ' be he not rich enough to keep the estate in good order ? ' I inquire . ' , sir ! ' she return . ' he have nobody know what money , and every year it increase . yes , yes , he be rich enough to live in a finer house than this : but he be very near - close - hand ; and , if he have mean to flit to , as soon as he hear of a good tenant he could not have borne to miss the chance of get a few hundred more . it be strange people should be so greedy , when they be alone in the world ! ' ' he have a son , it seem ? ' ' yes , he have one - he be dead . ' ' and that young lady , , be he widow ? ' 'yes . ' ' where do she come from originally ? ' ' why , sir , she be my late master 's daughter : be she maiden name . I nurse she , poor thing ! I do wish would remove here , and then we might have be together again . ' ' what ! ? ' I exclaim , astonished . but a minute 's reflection convince I it be not my ghostly Catherine . then ,' I continue , 'my predecessor 's name be ? ' ' it be . ' ' and who be that : , who live with ? be they relation ? ' ' no ; he be the late 's nephew . ' ' the young lady 's cousin , then ? ' ' yes ; and she husband be she cousin also : one on the mother 's , the other on the father 's side : marry 's sister . ' 'I see the house at have " Earnshaw " carve over the front door . be they a old family ? ' ' very old , sir ; and be the last of they , as we be
be of we - I mean , of the Linton . have you be to ? I beg pardon for ask ; but I should like to hear how she be ! ' ' . ? she look very well , and very handsome ; yet , I think , not very happy . ' ' oh dear , I do not wonder ! and how do you like the master ? ' 'a rough fellow , rather , . be not that he character ? ' Rough as a see - edge , and hard as whinstone ! the less you meddle with he the better . ' ' he must have have some up and downs in life to make he such a churl . do you know anything of he history ? ' ' it be a cuckoo 's , sir - I know all about it : except where he be bear , and who be he parent , and how he get he money at first . and have be cast out like a unfledged dunnock ! the unfortunate lad be the only one in all this parish that do not guess how he have be cheat . ' ' well , , it will be a charitable deed to tell I something of my neighbour : I feel I shall not rest if I go to bed ; so be good enough to sit and chat a hour . ' 'Oh , certainly , sir ! I will just fetch a little sewing , and then I will sit as long as you please . but you have catch cold : I see you shiver , and you must have some gruel to drive it out . ' the worthy woman bustle off , and I crouch nearer the fire ; my head feel hot , and the rest of I chill : moreover , I be excited , almost to a pitch of foolishness , through my nerve and brain . this cause I to feel , not uncomfortable , but rather fearful ( as I be still ) of serious effect from the incident of to - day and yesterday . she return presently , bring a smoking basin and a basket of work ; and , have place the former on the hob , draw in she seat , evidently pleased to find I so companionable . before I come to live here , she commence - wait no farther invitation to she story - I be almost always at ; because my mother have nurse , that be 's father , and I get used to play with the child : I run errands too , and help to make hay , and hang about the farm ready for anything that anybody would set I to . one fine summer morning - it be the beginning of harvest , I remember - , the old master , come down - stair , dress for a journey ; and , after he have tell what be to be do during the day , he turn to , and , and I - for I sit eat my porridge with they - and he say , speak to he son , ' now , my bonny man , I be go to Liverpool to - day , what shall I bring you ? you may choose what you like : only let it be little , for I shall walk there and back : sixty mile each way , that be a long spell ! ' name a fiddle , and then he ask ; she be hardly six year old , but she could ride any horse in the stable , and she choose a whip . he do not forget I ; for he have a kind heart , though he be rather severe sometimes . he promise to bring I a pocketful of apple and pear , and then he kiss he child , say good - bye , and set off . it seem a long while to we all - the three day of he absence - and often do little ask when he would be home . expect he by supper - time on the third evening , and she put the meal off hour after hour ; there be no sign of he come , however , and at last the child get tired of run down to the gate to look . then it grow dark ; she would have have they to bed , but they beg sadly to be allow to stay up ; and , just about eleven o'clock , the door - latch be raise quietly , and in step the master . he throw himself into a chair , laugh and groan , and bid they all stand off , for he be nearly kill - he would not have such another walk for the three kingdom . ' and at the end of it to be flight to death ! ' he say , open he great - coat , which he hold bundle up in he arm . ' see here , wife ! I be never so beaten with anything in my life : but you must e'en take it as a gift of ; though it be as dark almost as if it come from the devil . ' we crowd round , and over 's head I have a peep at a dirty , ragged , black - haired child ; big enough both to walk and talk : indeed , it be face look older than 's ; yet when it be set on its foot , it only sta round , and repeat over and over again some gibberish that nobody could understand . I be frightene , and be ready to fl it out of door : she do fly up ,
, ask how he could fashion to bring that gipsy brat into the house , when they have they own bairn to feed and fend for ? what he mean to do with it , and whether he be mad ? the master try to explain the matter ; but he be really half dead with fatigue , and all that I could make out , amongst she scolding , be a tale of he see it starve , and houseless , and as good as dumb , in the street of , where he pick it up and inquire for its owner . not a soul know to whom it belong , he say ; and he money and time be both limit , he think it better to take it home with he at once , than run into vain expense there : because he be determine he would not leave it as he find it . well , the conclusion be , that my mistress grumble herself calm ; and tell I to wash it , and give it clean thing , and let it sleep with the child . and contente themselves with look and listen till peace be restore : then , both begin search they father 's pocket for the present he have promise they . the former be a boy of fourteen , but when he draw out what have be a fiddle , crush to morsel in the great - coat , he blubber aloud ; and , when she learn the master have lose she whip in attend on the stranger , show she humour by grinning and spitte at the stupid little thing ; earn for she pain a sound blow from she father , to teach she cleaner manners . they entirely refuse to have it in bed with they , or even in they room ; and I have no more sense , so I put it on the landing of the stair , hope it might he go on the morrow . by chance , or else attract by hear he voice , it crept to 's door , and there he find it on quit he chamber . inquiry be make as to how it get there ; I be oblige to confess , and in recompense for my cowardice and inhumanity be send out of the house . this be 's first introduction to the family . on come back a few day afterwards ( for I do not consider my banishment perpetual ) , I find they have christen he ' Heathcliff ' : it be the name of a son who die in childhood , and it have serve he ever since , both for and surname . and he be now very thick ; but hate he : and to say the truth I do the same ; and we plague and go on with he shamefully : for I be not reasonable enough to feel my injustice , and the mistress never put in a word on he behalf when she see he wronge . he seem a sullen , patient child ; harden , perhaps , to ill - treatment : he would stand 's blow without wink or shed a tear , and my pinch move he only to draw in a breath and open he eye , as if he have hurt himself by accident , and nobody be to blame . this endurance make old Earnshaw furious , when he discover he son persecut the poor fatherless child , as he call he . he take to Heathcliff strangely , believe all he say ( for that matter , he say precious little , and generally the truth ) , and pet he up far above , who be too mischievous and wayward for a favourite . so , from the very begin , he breed bad feeling in the house ; and at 's death , which happen in less than two year after , the young master have learn to regard he father as a oppressor rather than a friend , and as a usurper of he parent 's affection and he privileges ; and he grow bitter with brooding over these injury . I sympathise a while ; but when the child fall ill of the measle , and I have to tend they , and take on I the care of a woman at once , I change my idea . be dangerously sick ; and while he lay at the worst he would have I constantly by he pillow : I suppose he feel I do a good deal for he , and he have not wit to guess that I be compelle to do it . however , I will say this , he be the quietest child that ever nurse watch over . the difference between he and the other force I to be less partial . and she brother harass I terribly : he be as uncomplaining as a lamb ; though hardness , not gentleness , make he give little trouble . he get through , and the doctor affir it be in a great measure owe to I , and praise I for my care . I be vain of he commendation , and soften towards the being by whose mean I earn they , and thus lose he last ally : still I could not dote on , and I wonder often what my master see to admire so much in the sullen boy ; who never , to my recollection , repay he indulgence by any sign of gratitude . he be not insolent to he benefactor , he be simply insensible ; though know perfectly the hold he have on he heart , and conscious he have only to speak and all the house would be oblige to bend to he wish . as a
a instance , I remember once buy a couple of colt at the parish fair , and give the lad each one . take the handsomest , but it soon fall lame , and when he discover it , he say to - ' you must exchange horse with I : I do not like mine ; and if you will not I shall tell you father of the three thrashing you have give I this week , and show he my arm , which be black to the shoulder . ' Hindley put out he tongue , and cuff he over the ear . ' you would better do it at once ,' he persist , escape to the porch ( they be in the stable ) : ' you will have to : and if I speak of these blow , you will get they again with interest . ' ' off , dog ! ' cry , threaten he with a iron weight use for weighing potatoe and hay . ' throw it ,' he reply , stand still , ' and then I will tell how you boast that you would turn I out of door as soon as he die , and see whether he will not turn you out directly . ' throw it , hit he on the breast , and down he fall , but stagger up immediately , breathless and white ; and , have not I prevent it , he would have go just so to the master , and get full revenge by let he condition plead for he , intimat who have cause it . ' take my colt , , then ! ' say young . ' and I pray that he may break you neck : take he , and he damne , you beggarly interloper ! and wheedle my father out of all he have : only afterwards show he what you be , imp of . - and take that , I hope he will kick out you brain ! ' have go to loose the beast , and shift it to he own stall ; he be pass behind it , when finish he speech by knock he under its foot , and without stop to examine whether he hope be fulfil , run away as fast as he could . I be surprised to witness how coolly the child gather himself up , and go on with he intention ; exchange saddle and all , and then sit down on a bundle of hay to overcome the qualm which the violent blow occasion , before he enter the house . I persuade he easily to let I lay the blame of he bruise on the horse : he mind little what tale be tell since he have what he want . he complain so seldom , indeed , of such stir as these , that I really think he not vindictive : I be deceive completely , as you will hear . in the course of time begin to fail . he have be active and healthy , yet he strength leave he suddenly ; and when he be confine to the chimney - corner he grow grievously irritable . a nothing vex he ; and suspect slights of he authority nearly throw he into fit . this be especially to be remark if any one attempt to impose upon , or domineer over , he favourite : he be painfully jealous lest a word should be speak amiss to he ; seem to have get into he head the notion that , because he like Heathcliff , all hat , and long to do he a ill - turn . it be a disadvantage to the lad ; for the kinder among we do not wish to fret the master , so we humoure he partiality ; and that humouring be rich nourishment to the child 's pride and black temper . still it become in a manner necessary ; twice , or thrice , 's manifestation of scorn , while he father be near , rouse the old man to a fury : he seize he stick to strike he , and shake with rage that he could not do it . at last , we curate ( we have a curate then who make the living answer by teach the little Lintons and Earnshaws , and far he bit of land himself ) advise that the young man should be send to college ; and agree , though with a heavy spirit , for he say - ' be nuy , and would never thrive as where he wander . ' I hope heartily we should have peace now . it hurt I to think the master should be make uncomfortable by he own good deed . I fancie the discontent of age and disease arise from he family disagreement ; as he would have it that it do : really , you know , sir , it be in he sinking frame . we might have get on tolerably , notwithstanding , but for two people - , and , the servant : you see he , I daresay , up yonder . he be , and be yet most likely , the wearisomest self - righteous Pharisee that ever ransack a to rake the promise to himself and fl the curse to he neighbour . by he knack of sermonising and pious discoursing , he contrive to make a great impression on ; and the more feeble the master become , the more influence he gai . he be relentless in worrie he about he soul 's concern , and about rule he child rigidly . he encourage he to regard as a reprobate ; and , night after night , he regularly grumble out a long string of tale against and : always mind to flatter 's
's weakness by heap the heaviest blame on the latter . certainly she have way with she such as I never see a child take up before ; and she put all of we past we patience fifty time and oftener in a day : from the hour she come down - stair till the hour she go to bed , we have not a minute 's security that she would not be in mischief . she spirit be always at high - water mark , she tongue always go - singe , laugh , and plague everybody who would not do the same . a wild , wick slip she be - but she have the bonniest eye , the sweetest smile , and lightest foot in the parish : and , after all , I believe she mean no harm ; for when once she make you cry in good earnest , it seldom happen that she would not keep you company , and oblige you to be quiet that you might comfort she . she be much too fond of Heathcliff . the greatest punishment we could invent for she be to keep she separate from he : yet she get chide more than any of we on he account . in play , she like exceedingly to act the little mistress ; use she hand freely , and command she companion : she do so to I , but I would not bear slapping and ordering ; and so I let she know . now , do not understand joke from he child : he have always be strict and grave with they ; and , on she part , have no idea why she father should be crosser and less patient in he ailing condition than he be in he prime . he peevish reproof wake in she a naughty delight to provoke he : she be never so happy as when we be all scold she at once , and she defy we with she bold , saucy look , and she ready word ; turn 's religious curse into ridicule , bait I , and do just what she father hate most - show how she pretend insolence , which he think real , have more power over than he kindness : how the boy would do she bid in anything , and he only when it sui he own inclination . after behave as badly as possible all day , she sometimes come fond to make it up at night . ' Nay , , ' the old man would say , 'I can not love thee , thou 'rt worse than thy brother . go , say thy prayer , child , and ask 's pardon . I doubt thy mother and I must rue that we ever rear thee ! ' that make she cry , at first ; and then be repulse continually harden she , and she laugh if I tell she to say she be sorry for she fault , and beg to be forgive . but the hour come , at last , that end 's trouble on earth . he die quietly in he chair one evening , seat by the fire - side . a high wind bluster round the house , and roar in the chimney : it sound wild and stormy , yet it be not cold , and we be all together - I , a little remove from the hearth , busy at my knitting , and read he near the table ( for the servants generally sit in the house then , after they work be done ) . have be sick , and that make she still ; she lean against she father 's knee , and be lie on the floor with he head in she lap . I remember the master , before he fall into a doze , strok she bonny hair - it please he rarely to see she gentle - and say , ' why canst thou not always be a good lass , ? ' and she turn she face up to he , and laugh , and answer , ' why can not you always be a good man , father ? ' but as soon as she see he vex again , she kiss he hand , and say she would s he to sleep . she begin singe very low , till he finger drop from hers , and he head sank on he breast . then I tell she to hush , and not stir , for fear she should wake he . we all keep as mute as mice a full half - hour , and should have do so longer , only , have finish he chapter , get up and say that he must rouse the master for prayer and bed . he step forward , and call he by name , and touch he shoulder ; but he would not move : so he take the candle and look at he . I think there be something wrong as he set down the light ; and seize the child each by a arm , whisper they to ' frame up - stair , and make little din - they might pray alone that evening - he have summut to do . ' 'I shall bid father good - night first , ' say , put she arm round he neck , before we could hinder she . the poor thing discover she loss directly - she scream out - ' oh , he be dead , ! he be dead ! ' and they both set up a heart - breaking cry . I join my wail to theirs , loud and bitter ; but ask what we could be think of to roar in that way over a saint in heaven . he tell
tell I to put on my cloak and run to for the doctor and the parson . I could not guess the use that either would be of , then . however , I go , through wind and rain , and bring one , the doctor , back with I ; the other say he would come in the morning . leave to explain matter , I run to the child 's room : they door be ajar , I see they have never lain down , though it be past midnight ; but they be calmer , and do not need I to conseal they . the little soul be comfort each other with better thought than I could have hit on : no parson in the world ever picture heaven so beautifully as they do , in they innocent talk ; and , while I sob and listen , I could not help wishing we be all there safe together . come home to the funeral ; and - a thing that amaze we , and set the neighbour gossip right and leave - he bring a wife with he . what she be , and where she be bear , he never inform we : probably , she have neither money nor name to recommend she , or he would scarcely have keep the union from he father . she be not one that would have disturb the house much on she own account . every object she see , the moment she cross the threshold , appear to delight she ; and every circumstance that take place about she : except the preparing for the burial , and the presence of the mourner . I think she be half silly , from she behaviour while that go on : she run into she chamber , and make I come with she , though I should have be dress the child : and there she sit shivering and clasp she hand , and ask repeatedly - ' be they go yet ? ' then she begin describe with hysterical emotion the effect it produce on she to see black ; and start , and tremble , and , at last , fall a -weeping - and when I ask what be the matter , answer , she do not know ; but she feel so afraid of die ! I imagine she as little likely to die as myself . she be rather thin , but young , and fresh - complexion , and she eye sparkle as bright as diamonds . I do remark , to be sure , that mount the stair make she breathe very quick ; that the least sudden noise set she all in a quiver , and that she coughe troublesomely sometimes : but I know nothing of what these symptom portend , and have no impulse to sympathise with she . we do not in general take to foreigner here , , unless they take to we first . yong be alter considerably in the three year of he absence . he have grow sparer , and lose he colour , and spoke and dress quite differently ; and , on the very day of he return , he tell and I we must thenceforth quarter ourselves in the back - kitchen , and leave the house for he . indeed , he would have carpet and papere a small spare room for a parlour ; but he wife express such pleasure at the white floor and huge glow fireplace , at the pewter dish and delf - case , and dog - kennel , and the wide space there be to move about in where they usually sit , that he think it unnecessary to she comfort , and so drop the intention . she express pleasure , too , at find a sister among she new acquaintance ; and she prattle to , and kiss she , and run about with she , and give she quantity of present , at the beginning . she affection ti very soon , however , and when she grow peevish , become tyrannical . a few word from she , evince a dislike to , be enough to rouse in he all he old hatred of the boy . he drive he from they company to the servants , deprive he of the instruction of the curate , and insist that he should labour out of door instead ; compelle he to do so as hard as any other lad on the farm . bear he degradation pretty well at first , because teach he what she learn , and work or play with he in the field . they both promise fair to grow up as rude as savage ; the young master be entirely negligent how they behave , and what they do , so they keep clear of he . he would not even have see after they go to church on , only and the curate reprimand he carelessness when they absent themselves ; and that remind he to order Heathcliff a flogging , and a fast from dinner or supper . but it be one of they chief amusement to run away to the moor in the morning and remain there all day , and the after punishment grow a mere thing to laugh at . the curate might set as many chapter as he pleas for to get by heart , and might thrash till he arm ach ; they forget everything the minute they be together again : at least the minute they have contrive some naughty plan of revenge ; and many a time I have cry to myself to watch they grow more reckless dailly , and I not da to speak a syllable , for fear of lose the small power I still retain over the unfriended creature . one evening
evening , it chance that they be banish from the sitting - room , for make a noise , or a light offence of the kind ; and when I go to call they to supper , I could discover they nowhere . we search the house , above and below , and the yard and stable ; they be invisible : and , at last , in a passion tell we to bolt the door , and swore nobody should let they in that night . the household go to bed ; and I , too , anxious to lie down , open my lattice and put my head out to hearke , though it rain : determined to admit they in spite of the prohibition , should they return . in a while , I distinguished step come up the road , and the light of a lantern glimmer through the gate . I throw a shawl over my head and run to prevent they from wake by knocking . there be Heathcliff , by himself : it give I a start to see he alone . ' where be ? ' I cry hurriedly . ' no accident , I hope ? ' 'At ,' he answer ; ' and I would have be there too , but they have not the manners to ask I to stay . ' ' well , you will catch it ! ' I say : ' you will never be content till you be send about you business . what in the world lead you wander to ? ' ' let I get off my wet clothes , and I will tell you all about it , Nelly , ' he reply . I bid he beware of rouse the master , and while he undress and I wait to put out the candle , he continue - ' and I escape from the wash - house to have a ramble at liberty , and get a glimpse of the light , we think we would just go and see whether the Linton pass they evening stand shivering in corner , while they father and mother sit eat and drink , and singe and laugh , and burn they eye out before the fire . do you think they do ? or read sermon , and be catechise by they manservant , and set to learn a column of Scripture name , if they do not answer properly ? ' ' probably not ,' I respond . ' they be good child , no doubt , and do not deserve the treatment you receive , for you bad conduct . ' ' do not cant , Nelly , ' he say : ' nonsense ! we run from the top of the to the park , without stop - completely beat in the race , because she be barefoot . you will have to seek for she shoe in the bog to - morrow . we crept through a broken hedge , grope we way up the path , and plan ourselves on a flower - plot under the drawing - room window . the light come from thence ; they have not put up the shutter , and the curtain be only half close . both of we be able to look in by stand on the basement , and cling to the ledge , and we see - ah ! it be beautiful - a splendid place carpet with crimson , and crimson - cover chair and table , and a pure white ceiling border by gold , a shower of glass - drop hang in silver chain from the centre , and shimmer with little soft taper . and be not there ; and he sister have it entirely to themselves . should not they have be happy ? we should have think ourselves in heaven ! and now , guess what you good child be do ? - I believe she be eleven , a year younger than - lay screaming at the farther end of the room , shriek as if witch be run red - hot needle into she . stand on the hearth weep silently , and in the middle of the table sit a little dog , shak its paw and yelp ; which , from they mutual accusation , we understand they have nearly pull in two between they . the idiot ! that be they pleasure ! to quarrel who should hold a heap of warm hair , and each begin to cry because both , after struggle to get it , refuse to take it . we laugh outright at the pet thing ; we do despise they ! when would you catch I wish to have what want ? or find we by ourselves , seek entertainment in yelling , and sobb , and roll on the ground , divide by the whole room ? I have not exchange , for a thousand life , my condition here , for 's at - not if I might have the privilege of flinge off the highest gable , and paint the house - front with 's blood ! ' ' Hush , hush ! ' I interrupt . ' still you have not tell I , , how be leave behind ? ' 'I tell you we laugh , ' he answer . ' the Lintons hear we , and with one accord they shoot like arrow to the door ; there be silence , and then a cry , " oh , mamma , mamma ! oh , papa ! oh , mamma , come here . oh , papa , oh ! " they really do howl out something in that way . we make frightful noise to terrify they still more , and then we drop off the ledge , because somebody be draw the bar ,
, and we feel we have better flee . I have by the hand , and be urge she on , when all at once she fall down . " , , run ! " she whisper . " they have let the bull - dog loose , and he hold I ! " the have seize she ankle , Nelly : I hear he abominable snorting . she do not yell out - no ! she would have scorne to do it , if she have be spit on the horn of a mad cow . I do , though : I vociferate curse enough to annihilate any fiend in ; and I get a stone and thrust it between he jaw , and try with all my might to crbe it down he throat . a beast of a servant come up with a lantern , at last , shouting - " keep fast , , keep fast ! " he change he note , however , when he see 's game . the dog be throttle off ; he huge , purple tongue hang half a foot out of he mouth , and he pendent lip streame with bloody slaver . the man take up ; she be sick : not from fear , I be certain , but from pain . he carry she in ; I follow , grumbl execration and vengeance . " what prey , ? " halloo from the entrance . " have catch a little girl , sir , " he reply ; " and there be a lad here , " he add , make a clutch at I , " who look a out - and - outer ! very like the robber be for put they through the window to open the door to the gang after all be asleep , that they might murder we at they ease . hold you tongue , you foul - mouthe thief , you ! you shall go to the gallow for this . , sir , do not lay by you gun . " " no , no , , " say the old fool . " the rascal know that yesterday be my rent - day : they think to have I cleverly . come in ; I will furnish they a reception . there , , fasten the chain . give Skulker some water , . to bear a magistrate in he stronghold , and on the Sabbath , too ! where will they insolence stop ? oh , my dear Mary , look here ! do not be afraid , it be but a boy - yet the villain scowl so plainly in he face ; would it not be a kindness to the country to hang he at once , before he show he nature in acts as well as feature ? " he pull I under the chandelier , and place she spectacle on she nose and raise she hand in horror . the cowardly child creep nearer also , lisp - " Frightful thing ! put he in the cellar , papa . he be exactly like the son of the fortune - teller that steal my tame pheasant . be not he , ? " ' while they examine I , come round ; she hear the last speech , and laugh . , after a inquisitive stare , collect sufficient wit to recognise she . they see we at church , you know , though we seldom meet they elsewhere . " that be ? " he whisper to he mother , " and look how have bite she - how she foot bleed ! " ' " ? Nonsense ! " cry the dame ; " scour the country with a gipsy ! and yet , my dear , the child be in mourning - surely it be - and she may be lam for life ! " ' " what culpable carelessness in she brother ! " exclaim , turn from I to . " I have understand from Shielders " ' ( that be the curate , sir ) ' " that he let she grow up in absolute heathenism . but who be this ? where do she pick up this companion ? Oho ! I declare he be that strange acquisition my late neighbour make , in he journey to - a little , or a american or spanish castaway . " ' " a wicked boy , at all event , " remark the old lady , " and quite unfit for a decent house ! do you notice he language , ? I be shocke that my child should have hear it . " 'I recommence cursing - do not be angry , Nelly - and so be order to take I off . I refuse to go without ; he drag I into the garden , push the lantern into my hand , assure I that Earnshaw should be inform of my behaviour , and , bid I march directly , secure the door again . the curtain be still loope up at one corner , and I resume my station as spy ; because , if have wish to return , I intend shatter they great glass pane to a million of fragment , unless they let she out . she sit on the sofa quietly . take off the grey cloak of the dairy -maid which we have borrowed for we excursion , shak she head and expostulat with she , I suppose : she be a young lady , and they make a distinction between she treatment and mine . then the woman - servant bring a basin of warm water , and wash she foot ; and mix a tumbler of negus , and empty a plateful of cake into she lap , and stood gap at a distance . afterwards
afterwards , they dry and comb she beautiful hair , and give she a pair of enormous slipper , and wheel she to the fire ; and I leave she , as merry as she could be , divide she food between the little dog and Skulker , whose nose she pinch as he eat ; and kindl a spark of spirit in the vacant blue eye of the Lintons - a dim reflection from she own enchanting face . I see they be full of stupid admiration ; she be so immeasurably superior to they - to everybody on earth , be she not , Nelly ? ' ' there will more come of this business than you reckon on ,' I answer , cover he up and extinguish the light . ' you be incurable , Heathcliff ; and will have to proceed to extremity , see if he will not . ' my word come truer than I desire . the luckless adventure make Earnshaw furious . and then , to mmend matter , pay we a visit himself on the morrow , and read the young master such a lecture on the road he guide he family , that he be stir to look about he , in earnest . receive no flogging , but he be tell that the first word he speak to should ensure a dismissal ; and undertake to keep she sister - in - law in due restraint when she return home ; employ art , not force : with force she would have find it impossible . stay at five week : till . by that time she ankle be thoroughly cure , and she manners much improve . the mistress visit she often in the interval , and commence she plan of reform by try to raise she self - respect with fine clothes and flattery , which she take readily ; so that , instead of a wild , hatless little savage jump into the house , and rush to squeeze we all breathless , there ' light from a handsome black pony a very dignified person , with brown ringlet fall from the cover of a feathered beaver , and a long cloth habit , which she be oblige to hold up with both hand that she might sail in . lift she from she horse , exclaim delightedly , ' why , , you be quite a beauty ! I should scarcely have know you : you look like a lady now . be not to be compare with she , be she , ? ' ' have not she natural advantage , ' reply he wife : ' but she must mind and not grow wild again here . Ellen , help off with she thing - stay , dear , you will disarrange you curl - let I untie you hat . ' I remove the habit , and there shine forth beneath a grand plaid silk frock , white trousers , and burnish shoe ; and , while she eye sparkle joyfully when the dog come bounde up to welcome she , she da hardly touch they lest they should fawn upon she splendid garment . she kiss I gently : I be all flour make the cake , and it would not have do to give I a hug ; and then she look round for . and watch anxiously they meeting ; think it would enable they to judge , in some measure , what ground they have for hoping to succeed in separa the two friend . Heathcliff be hard to discover , at first . if he be careless , and uncared for , before 's absence , he have be ten time more so since . nobody but I even do he the kindness to call he a dirty boy , and bid he wash himself , once a week ; and child of he age seldom have a natural pleasure in soap and water . therefore , not to mention he clothes , which have see three month 's service in mire and dust , and he thick uncombed hair , the surface of he face and hand be dismally becloude . he might well skulk behind the settle , on beholding such a bright , graceful damsel enter the house , instead of a rough - head counterpart of himself , as he expect . t'is not here ? ' she demand , pull off she glove , and display finger wonderfully whiten with do nothing and stay indoors . ' Heathcliff , you may come forward , ' cry , enjoy he discomfiture , and gratify to see what a forbid young blackguard he would be compelle to present himself . ' you may come and wish welcome , like the other servants . ' , catch a glimpse of she friend in he concealment , fly to embrace he ; she bestow seven or eight kiss on he cheek within the second , and then stop , and draw back , burst into a laugh , exclaim , ' why , how very black and cross you look ! and how - how funny and grim ! but that be because I be use to and . well , , have you forget I ? ' she have some reason to put the question , for shame and pride throw double gloom over he countenance , and keep he immovable . ' shake hand , , ' say , condescendingly ; ' once in a way , that be permit . ' 'I shall not , ' reply the boy , finde he tongue at last ; 'I shall not stand to be laugh at . I shall not bear it ! ' and he would have break from the circle , but seize he again . 'I do not mean to laugh at you
you ,' she say ; 'I could not hinder myself : Heathcliff , shake hand at least ! what be you sulky for ? it be only that you look odd . if you wash you face and brush you hair , it will be all right : but you be so dirty ! ' she gaze concernedly at the dusky finger she hold in she own , and also at she dress ; which she fear have gain no embellishment from its contact with he . ' you need not have touch I ! ' he answer , follow she eye and snatch away he hand . 'I shall be as dirty as I please : and I like to be dirty , and I will be dirty . ' with that he dash headforemost out of the room , amid the merriment of the master and mistress , and to the serious disturbance of ; who could not comprehend how she remark should have produce such a exhibition of bad temper . after play lady 's - maid to the new - comer , and put my cake in the oven , and make the house and kitchen cheerful with great fire , befitt - , I prepare to sit down and amuse myself by singing carol , all alone ; regardless of 's affirmation that he consider the merry tune I choose as next door to song . he have retire to private prayer in he chamber , and and . be engage 's attention by sundry gay trifle buy for she to present to the little Linton , as a acknowledgment of they kindness . they have invite they to spend the morrow at , and the invitation have be accept , on one condition : beg that she darling might be keep carefully apart from that ' naughty swear boy . ' under these circumstance I remain solitary . I smelt the rich scent of the heating spice ; and admire the shining kitchen utensil , the polished clock , deck in holly , the silver mug range on a tray ready to be fill with mulled ale for supper ; and above all , the speckless purity of my particular care - the scoured and well - sweep floor . I give due inward applause to every object , and then I remember how old use to come in when all be tidy , and call I a cant lass , and slip a shilling into my hand as a - box ; and from that I go on to think of he fondness for , and he dread lest he should suffer neglect after death have remove he : and that naturally lead I to consider the poor lad 's situation now , and from singing I change my mind to cry . it struck I soon , however , there would be more sense in endeavouring to repair some of he wrongs than shedding tear over they : I get up and walk into the court to seek he . he be not far ; I find he smooth the glossy coat of the new pony in the stable , and feed the other beasts , accord to custom . ' make haste , ! ' I say , ' the kitchen be so comfortable ; and be up - stair : make haste , and let I dress you smart before come out , and then you can sit together , with the whole hearth to yourselves , and have a long chatter till bedtime . ' he proceed with he task , and never turn he head towards I . ' come - be you come ? ' I continue . ' there be a little cake for each of you , nearly enough ; and you will need half - a - hour 's donning . ' I wait five minute , but get no answer leave he . sup with she brother and sister - in - law : and I join at a unsociable meal , seaso with reproof on one side and sauciness on the other . he cake and cheese remain on the table all night for the fairy . he manage to continue work till nine o'clock , and then march dumb and dour to he chamber . sit up late , have a world of thing to order for the reception of she new friend : she come into the kitchen once to speak to she old one ; but he be go , and she only stay to ask what be the matter with he , and then go back . in the morning he rise early ; and , as it be a holiday , carry he ill - humour on to the moor ; not re-appear till the family be depart for church . Fasting and reflection seem to have bring he to a better spirit . he hang about I for a while , and have screw up he courage , exclaim abruptly - ' Nelly , make I decent , I be go to be good . ' ' high time , ,' I say ; ' you have grieve : she be sorry she ever come home , I daresay ! it look as if you envy she , because she be more thought of than you . ' the notion of be incomprehensible to he , but the notion of grieve she he understand clearly enough . ' do she say she be grieve ? ' he inquire , look very serious . ' she cry when I tell she you be off again this morning . ' ' well , I cry last night , ' he return , ' and I have more reason to cry than she . ' ' yes : you have the reason of go to be with a proud heart
heart and a empty stomach , ' say I . ' proud people breed sad sorrow for themselves . but , if you be asham of you touchiness , you must ask pardon , mind , when she come in . you must go up and offer to kiss she , and say - you know best what to say ; only do it heartily , and not as if you think she convert into a stranger by she grand dress . and now , though I have dinner to get ready , I will steal time to arrange you so that shall look quite a doll beside you : and that he do . you be younger , and yet , I will be bound , you be taller and twice as broad across the shoulder ; you could knock he down in a twinkling ; do not you feel that you could ? ' 's face brighten a moment ; then it be overcast afresh , and he sigh . ' but , Nelly , if I knock he down twenty time , that would not make he less handsome or I more so . I wish I have light hair and a fair skin , and be dress and behave as well , and have a chance of be as rich as he will be ! ' ' and cry for mamma at every turn ,' I add , ' and tremble if a country lad heav he fist against you , and sit at home all day for a shower of rain . oh , , you be show a poor spirit ! come to the glass , and I will let you see what you should wish . do you mark those two line between you eye ; and those thick brows , that , instead of rising arch , sink in the middle ; and that couple of black fiend , so deeply bury , who never open they window boldly , but lurk glint under they , like 's spy ? wish and learn to smooth away the surly wrinkle , to raise you lid frankly , and change the fiend to confident , innocent angels , suspect and doubt nothing , and always see friend where they be not sure of foe . do not get the expression of a vicious cur that appear to know the kick it get be its desert , and yet hate all the world , as well as the kicker , for what it suffer . ' ' in other word , I must wish for 's great blue eye and even forehead , ' he reply . 'I do - and that will not help I to they . ' 'a good heart will help you to a bonny face , my lad ,' I continue , ' if you be a regular black ; and a bad one will turn the bonniest into something worse than ugly . and now that we have do wash , and comb , and sulk - tell I whether you do not think yourself rather handsome ? I will tell you , I do . you be fit for a prince in disguise . who know but you father be of , and you mother a indian queen , each of they able to buy up , with one week 's income , Wuthering and together ? and you be kidnap by wicked sailor and bring to . be I in you place , I would frame high notion of my birth ; and the thought of what I be should give I courage and dignity to support the oppression of a little farmer ! ' so I chatter on ; and gradually lose he frown and begin to look quite pleasant , when all at once we conversation be interrupt by a rumbling sound move up the road and enter the court . he run to the window and I to the door , just in time to behold the two Linton descmend from the family carriage , smother in cloak and fur , and the Earnshaw dismount from they horse : they often ride to church in winter . take a hand of each of the child , and bring they into the house and set they before the fire , which quickly put colour into they white face . I urge my companion to hasten now and show he amiable humour , and he willingly obey ; but ill luck would have it that , as he open the door lead from the kitchen on one side , open it on the other . they meet , and the master , irritate at see he clean and cheerful , or , perhaps , eager to keep he promise to , shove he back with a sudden thrust , and angrily bay ' keep the fellow out of the room - send he into the garret till dinner be over . he will be cramm he finger in the tart and steal the fruit , if leave alone with they a minute . ' ' Nay , sir ,' I could not avoid answering , 'he will touch nothing , not he : and I suppose he must have he share of the dainty as well as we . ' ' he shall have he share of my hand , if I catch he downstairs till dark , ' cry . ' , you vagabond ! what ! you be attempt the coxcomb , be you ? wait till I get hold of those elegant lock - see if I will not pull they a bit longer ! ' ' they be long enough already , ' observ , pee from the doorway ; 'I wonder they do not make he head ache . it be like a colt 's mane over he eyes ! ' he
he venture this remark without any intention to insult ; but 's violent nature be not prepare to endure the appearance of impertinence from one whom he seem to hate , even then , as a rival . he seize a tureen of hot apple sauce ( the first thing that come under he gripe ) and dash it full against the speaker 's face and neck ; who instantly commence a lament that bring and hurrie to the place . snatch up the culprit directly and convey he to he chamber ; where , doubtless , he administer a rough remedy to cool the fit of passion , for he appear red and breathless . I get the dishcloth , and rather spitefully scrub 's nose and mouth , affirme it serve he right for meddling . he sister begin weeping to go home , and stand by confound , blush for all . ' you should not have speak to he ! ' she expostulate with . ' he be in a bad temper , and now you have spoild you visit ; and he will be flog : I hate he to be flog ! I can not eat my dinner . why do you speak to he , ? ' 'I do not , ' sob the youth , escape from my hand , and finish the remainder of the purification with he cambric pocket - handkerchief . 'I promise mamma that I would not say one word to he , and I do not . ' ' well , do not cry , ' reply , contemptuously ; ' you be not kill . do not make more mischief ; my brother be come : be quiet ! Hush , ! have anybody hurt you ? ' ' there , there , child - to you seat ! ' cry , bust in . ' that brute of a lad have war I nicely . next time , , take the law into you own fist - it will give you a appetite ! ' the little party recover its equanimity at sight of the fragrant feast . they be hungry after they ride , and easily consol , since no real harm have befall they . carve bountiful plateful , and the mistress make they merry with lively talk . I wait behind she chair , and be pain to behold , with dry eye and a indifferent air , commence cut up the wing of a goose before she . 'An unfeeling child ,' I think to myself ; ' how lightly she dismiss she old playmate 's trouble . I could not have imagine she to be so selfish . ' she lift a mouthful to she lip : then she set it down again : she cheek flush , and the tear gush over they . she slip she fork to the floor , and hastily div under the cloth to conceal she emotion . I do not call she unfeeling long ; for I perceive she be in purgatory throughout the day , and weary to find a opportunity of get by herself , or pay a visit to , who have be lock up by the master : as I discover , on endeavouring to introduce to he a private mess of victual . in the evening we have a dance . beg that he might be liberate then , as have no partner : she entreaty be vain , and I be appoint to supply the deficiency . we get rid of all gloom in the excitement of the exercise , and we pleasure be increase by the arrival of the band , muster fifteen strong : a trumpet , a trombone , clarionet , bassoon , french horns , and a bass viol , besides singer . they go the round of all the respectable house , and receive contribution every , and we esteem it a first - rate treat to hear they . after the usual carol have be sung , we set they to song and glee . love the music , and so they give we plenty . love it too : but she say it sound sweetest at the top of the step , and she go up in the dark : I follow . they shut the house door below , never note we absence , it be so full of people . she make no stay at the stair '- head , but mount farther , to the garret where be confine , and call he . he stubbornly decline answer for a while : she persever , and finally persuade he to hold communion with she through the board . I let the poor thing converse unmolested , till I suppose the song be go to cease , and the singer to get some refreshment : then I clamber up the ladder to warn she . instead of find she outside , I hear she voice within . the little monkey have crept by the skylight of one garret , along the roof , into the skylight of the other , and it be with the utmost difficulty I could coax she out again . when she do come , come with she , and she insist that I should take he into the kitchen , as my fellow - servant have go to a neighbour 's , to be remove from the sound of we ' 's psalmody , ' as it please he to call it . I tell they I intend by no means to encourage they tricks : but as the prisoner have never break he fast since yesterday 's dinner , I would wink at he cheating that once . he go down : I set he a stool by the fire , and offer he a quantity of good thing : but he be
be sick and could eat little , and my attempt to entertain he be throw away . he lean he two elbow on he knee , and he ching on he hand and remain rapt in dumb meditation . on my inquire the subject of he thought , he answer gravely - 'I be try to settle how I shall pay back . I do not care how long I wait , if I can only do it at last . I hope he will not die before I do ! ' ' for shame , ! ' say I . ' it be for to punish wick people ; we should learn to forgive . ' ' no , will not have the satisfaction that I shall , ' he return . 'I only wish I know the best way ! let I alone , and I will plan it out : while I be think of that I do not feel pain . ' ' but , , I forget these tale can not divert you . I be annoye how I should dream of chattering on at such a rate ; and you gruel cold , and you nodd for bed ! I could have tell 's history , all that you need hear , in half a dozen word . ' thus interrupt herself , the housekeeper rose , and proceed to lay aside she sew ; but I feel incapable of move from the hearth , and I be very far from nodding . ' sit still , ,' I cry ; 'do sit still another half - hour . you have do just right to tell the story leisurely . that be the method I like ; and you must finish it in the same style . I be interested in every character you have mention , more or less . ' ' the clock be on the stroke of eleven , sir . ' ' no matter - I be not accustom to go to be in the long hour . one or two be early enough for a person who lie till ten . ' ' you should not lie till ten . there be the very prime of the morning go long before that time . a person who have not do one - half he day 's work by ten o'clock , run a chance of leave the other half undone . ' ' Nevertheless , , resume you chair ; because to - morrow I intend lengthen the night till afternoon . I prognosticate for myself a obstinate cold , at least . ' 'I hope not , sir . well , you must allow I to leap over some three year ; during that space - ' ' no , no , I will allow nothing of the sort ! be you acquaint with the mood of mind in which , if you be seat alone , and the cat lick its kitten on the rug before you , you would watch the operation so intently that puss 's neglect of one ear would put you seriously out of temper ? ' 'a terribly lazy mood , I should say . ' 'On the contrary , a tiresomely active one . it be mine , at present ; and , therefore , continue minutely . I perceive that people in these region acquire over people in town the value that a spider in a dungeon do over a spider in a cottage , to they various occupant ; and yet the deepened attraction be not entirely owe to the situation of the looker - on . they do live more in earnest , more in themselves , and less in surface , change , and frivolous external thing . I could fancy a love for life here almost possible ; and I be a fix unbeliever in any love of a year 's standing . one state resemble set a hungry man down to a single dish , on which he may concentrate he entire appetite and do it justice ; the other , introduce he to a table lay out by french cook : he can perhaps extract as much enjoyment from the whole ; but each part be a mere atom in he regard and remembrance . ' 'Oh ! here we be the same as anywhere else , when you get to know we , ' observe , somewhat puzzl at my speech . ' excuse I ,' I respond ; ' you , my good friend , be a striking evidence against that assertion . Except a few provincialism of slight consequence , you have no mark of the manners which I be habituate to consider as peculiar to you class . I be sure you have think a great deal more than the generality of servants think . you have be compelle to cultivate you reflective faculty for want of occasion for fritter you life away in silly trifle . ' laugh . 'I certainly esteem myself a steady , reasonable kind of body , ' she say ; ' not exactly from live among the hill and see one set of face , and one series of action , from year 's end to year 's end ; but I have undergone sharp discipline , which have teach I wisdom ; and then , I have read more than you would fancy , . you could not open a book in this library that I have not look into , and get something out of also : unless it be that range of and , and that of french ; and those I know one from another : it be as much as you can expect of a poor man 's daughter . however , if I be to follow my story in true gossip 's fashion , I have better go on
on ; and instead of leape three year , I will be content to pass to the next summer - the summer of 1778 , that be nearly twenty - three year ago . ' on the morning of a fine day my first bonny little nursling , and the last of the ancient Earnshaw stock , be bear . we be busy with the hay in a far - away field , when the girl that usually bring we breakfast come run a hour too soon across the meadow and up the lane , call I as she run . 'Oh , such a grand bairn ! ' she pante out . ' the finest lad that ever breathe ! but the doctor say missis must go : he say she be be in a consumption these many month . I hear he tell : and now she have nothing to keep she , and she will be dead before winter . you must come home directly . you be to nurse it , Nelly : to feed it with sugar and milk , and take care of it day and night . I wish I be you , because it will be all yours when there be no missis ! ' ' but be she very ill ? ' I ask , flinge down my rake and tie my bonnet . 'I guess she be ; yet she look bravely , ' reply the girl , ' and she talk as if she think of living to see it grow a man . she be out of she head for , it be such a beauty ! if I be she I be certain I should not die : I should get better at the bare sight of it , in spite of . I be fairly mad at he . bring the cherub down to master , in the house , and he face just begin to light up , when the old croaker step forward , and say he - " Earnshaw , it be a bless you wife have be spare to leave you this son . when she come , I feel convinced we should not keep she long ; and now , I must tell you , the winter will probably finish she . do not take on , and fret about it too much : it can not be help . and besides , you should have know better than to choose such a rush of a lass ! " ' ' and what do the master answer ? ' I inquire . ' I think he swore : but I do not mind he , I be strain to see the bairn , ' and she begin again to describe it rapturously . I , as zealous as herself , hurry eagerly home to admire , on my part ; though I be very sad for 's sake . he have room in he heart only for two idol - he wife and himself : he do on both , and adore one , and I could not conceive how he would bear the loss . when we get to , there he stand at the front door ; and , as I pass in , I ask , ' how be the baby ? ' ' nearly ready to run about , ! ' he reply , put on a cheerful smile . ' and the mistress ? ' I venture to inquire ; ' the doctor say she be - ' ' the doctor ! ' he interrupt , redden . ' France be quite right : she will be perfectly well by this time next week . be you go up - stair ? will you tell she that I will come , if she will promise not to talk . I leave she because she would not hold she tongue ; and she must - tell she say she must be quiet . ' I deliver this message to ; she see in flighty spirit , and reply merrily , ' I hardly speak a word , , and there he have go out twice , cry . well , say I promise I will not speak : but that do not bind I not to laugh at he ! ' poor soul ! till within a week of she death that gay heart never fail she ; and she husband persist doggedly , nay , furiously , in affirme she health improve every day . when warn he that he medicine be useless at that stage of the malady , and he need not put he to further expense by attend she , he retort , 'I know you need not - she be well - she do not want any more attendance from you ! she never be in a consumption . it be a fever ; and it be go : she pulse be as slow as mine now , and she cheek as cool . ' he tell he wife the same story , and she seem to believe he ; but one night , while lean on he shoulder , in the act of saying she think she should be able to get up to - morrow , a fit of coughing take she - a very slight one - he raise she in he arm ; she put she two hand about he neck , she face change , and she be dead . as the girl have anticipate , the child fall wholly into my hand . , provide he see he healthy and never hear he cry , be contente , as far as regard he . for himself , he grow desperate : he sorrow be of that kind that will not lament . he neither weep nor pray ; he curse and defy : execrate and man ,
, and give himself up to reckless dissipation . the servant could not bear he tyrannical and evil conduct long : and I be the only two that would stay . I have not the heart to leave my charge ; and beside , you know , I have be he foster- sister , and excuse he behaviour more readily than a stranger would . remain to hector over tenant and labourer ; and because it be he vocation to be where he have plenty of wickedness to reprove . the master 's bad way and bad companion for a pretty example for and . he treatment of the latter be enough to make a fiend of a saint . and , truly , it appear as if the lad be possess of something diabolical at that period . he delighte to witness degrad himself past redemption ; and become daily more notable for savage sullenness and ferocity . I could not half tell what a infernal house we have . the curate drop call , and nobody decent come near we , at last ; unless 's visit to might be a exception . at fifteen she be the queen of the country - side ; she have no peer ; and she do turn out a haughty , headstrong creature ! I own I do not like she , after infancy be past ; and I vex she frequently by try to bring down she arrogance : she never take a aversion to I , though . she have a wondrous constancy to old attachment : even keep he hold on she affections unalterably ; and young , with all he superiority , find it difficult to make a equally deep impression . he be my late master : that be he portrait over the fireplace . it use to hang on one side , and he wife 's on the other ; but hers have be remove , or else you might see something of what she be . can you make that out ? raise the candle , and I discern a soft - featured face , exceedingly resembl the young lady at the , but more pensive and amiable in expression . it form a sweet picture . the long light hair curl slightly on the temple ; the eye be large and serious ; the figure almost too graceful . I do not marvel how could forget she first friend for such a individual . I marvell much how he , with a mind to correspond with he person , could fancy my idea of . 'a very agreeable portrait ,' I observ to the house - keeper . ' be it like ? ' ' yes , ' she answer ; ' but he look better when he be animate ; that be he every day countenance : he want spirit in general . ' have keep up she acquaintance with the Linton since she five - week ' residence among they ; and as she have no temptation to show she rough side in they company , and have the sense to be asham of be rude where she experience such invariable courtesy , she impos unwittingly on the old lady and gentleman by she ingenious cordiality ; gain the admiration of , and the heart and soul of she brother : acquisition that flatter she from the first - for she be full of ambition - and lead she to adopt a double character without exactly intend to deceive any one . in the place where she hear term a ' vulgar young ruffian , ' and ' worse than a brute , ' she take care not to act like he ; but at home she have small inclination to practise politeness that would only be laugh at , and restrain a unruly nature when it would bring she neither credit nor praise . seldom muster courage to visit openly . he have a terror of 's reputation , and shrunk from encounter he ; and yet he be always receive with we best attempt at civility : the master himself avoid offend he , know why he come ; and if he could not be gracious , keep out of the way . I rather think he appearance there be distasteful to Catherine ; she be not artful , never play the coquette , and have evidently a objection to she two friend meeting at all ; for when Heathcliff express contempt of in he presence , she could not half coincide , as she do in he absence ; and when evinced disgust and antipathy to , she da not treat he sentiment with indifference , as if depreciation of she playmate be of scarcely any consequence to she . I have have many a laugh at she perplexity and untold trouble , which she vainly strove to hide from my mockery . that sound ill - nature : but she be so proud it become really impossible to pity she distress , till she should be chasten into more humility . she do bring herself , finally , to confess , and to confide in I : there be not a soul else that she might fashion into a adviser . have go from home one afternoon , and presume to give himself a holiday on the strength of it . he have reach the age of sixteen then , I think , and without have bad feature , or be deficient in intellect , he contrive to convey a impression of inward and outward repulsiveness that he present aspect retain no trace of . in the first place , he have by that time lose the benefit of he early education : continual hard work , begin soon and conclude late , have extinguish any curiosity he once possess in pursuit of knowledge , and any love
love for book or learn . he childhood 's sense of superiority , instil into he by the favour of old , be fad away . he struggle long to keep up a equality with in she study , and yield with poignant though silent regret : but he yield completely ; and there be no prevailing on he to take a step in the way of move upward , when he find he must , necessarily , sink beneath he former level . then personal appearance sympathise with mental deterioration : he acquire a slouching gait and ignoble look ; he naturally reserve disposition be exaggerate into a almost idiotic excess of unsociable moroseness ; and he take a grim pleasure , apparently , in excite the aversion rather than the esteem of he few acquaintance . and he be constant companion still at he season of respite from labour ; but he have cease to express he fondness for she in word , and recoil with angry suspicion from she girlish caress , as if conscious there could be no gratification in lavishing such mark of affection on he . on the before - name occasion he come into the house to announce he intention of do nothing , while I be assist to arrange she dress : she have not reckon on he take it into he head to be idle ; and imagine she would have the whole place to herself , she manage , by some means , to inform of she brother 's absence , and be then prepare to receive he . ' , be you busy this afternoon ? ' ask . ' be you go anywhere ? ' ' no , it be raine , ' she answer . ' why have you that silk frock on , then ? ' he say . ' nobody come here , I hope ? ' ' not that I know of , ' stammer : ' but you should be in the field now , . it be a hour past dinnertime : I think you be go . ' ' do not often free we from he accurse presence , ' observe the boy . 'I will not work any more to - day : I will stay with you . ' 'Oh , but will tell , ' she suggest ; ' you would better go ! ' ' be load lime on the further side of ; it will take he till dark , and he will never know . ' so , say , he lounge to the fire , and sit down . reflect a instant , with knit brows - she find it needful to smooth the way for a intrusion . ' and talk of call this afternoon , ' she say , at the conclusion of a minute 's silence . ' as it rain , I hardly expect they ; but they may come , and if they do , you run the risk of be scold for no good . ' ' to say you be engage , , ' he persist ; ' do not turn I out for those pitiful , silly friend of yours ! I be on the point , sometimes , of complain that they - but I will not - ' ' that they what ? ' cry , ga at he with a troubled countenance . 'Oh , Nelly ! ' she add petulantly , jerk she head away from my hand , ' you have comb my hair quite out of curl ! that be enough ; let I alone . what be you on the point of complain about , ? ' ' nothing - only look at the almanack on that wall ;' he point to a framed sheet hang near the window , and continue , ' the cross be for the evening you have spend with the Lintons , the dot for those spend with I . do you see ? I have mark every day . ' ' yes - very foolish : as if I take notice ! ' reply , in a peevish tone . ' and where be the sense of that ? ' 'To show that I do take notice , ' say . ' and should I always be sit with you ? ' she demand , grow more irritated . ' what good do I get ? what do you talk about ? you might be dumb , or a baby , for anything you say to amuse I , or for anything you do , either ! ' ' you never tell I before that I talk too little , or that you dislike my company , ! ' exclaim , in much agitation . ' it be no company at all , when people know nothing and say nothing , ' she mutter . she companion rise up , but he have not time to express he feeling further , for a horse 's foot be hear on the flag , and have knock gently , young enter , he face brilliant with delight at the unexpected summon she have receive . doubtless mark the difference between she friend , as one come in and the other go out . the contrast resemble what you see in exchange a bleak , hilly , coal country for a beautiful fertile valley ; and he voice and greeting be as opposite as he aspect . he have a sweet , low manner of speaking , and pronounce he word as you do : that be less gruff than we talk here , and softer . 'I be not come too soon , be I ? ' he say , cast a look at I : I have begin to wipe the plate , and tidy some drawer at the far end in the dresser .
. ' no ,' answer . ' what be you do there , Nelly ? ' 'My work , ,' I reply . ( have give I direction to make a third party in any private visit choose to pay . ) she step behind I and whisper crossly , ' take yourself and you duster off ; when company be in the house , servants do not commence scouring and clean in the room where they be ! ' ' it be a good opportunity , now that master be away ,' I answer aloud : 'he hate I to be fidget over these thing in he presence . I be sure will excuse I . ' 'I hate you to be fidget in my presence , ' exclaim the young lady imperiously , not allow she guest time to speak : she have fail to recover she equanimity since the little dispute with . 'I be sorry for it , , ' be my response ; and I proceed assiduously with my occupation . she , suppose could not see she , snatch the cloth from my hand , and pinch I , with a prolonge wrench , very spitefully on the arm . I have say I do not love she , and rather relish mortify she vanity now and then : besides , she hurt I extremely ; so I start up from my knee , and scream out , , , that be a nasty trick ! you have no right to nip I , and I be not go to bear it . ' 'I do not touch you , you lie creature ! ' cry she , she finger tingl to repeat the act , and she ear red with rage . she never have power to conceal she passion , it always set she whole complexion in a blaze . ' what be that , then ? ' I retort , show a decide purple witness to refute she . she stamp she foot , wave a moment , and then , irresistibly impell by the naughty spirit within she , slap I on the cheek : a stinge blow that fill both eye with water . ' Catherine , love ! ! ' interpose , greatly shock at the double fault of falsehood and violence which he idol have commit . ' leave the room , ! ' she repeat , trembl all over . , who follow I everywhere , and be sit near I on the floor , at see my tear commence cry himself , and sob out complaint against ' wick aunt , ' which draw she fury on to he unlucky head : she seize he shoulders , and shake he till the poor child wax livid , and thoughtlessly laid hold of she hand to deliver he . in a instant one be wrng free , and the astonished young man feel it apply over he own ear in a way that could not be mistaken for jest . he draw back in consternation . I lift in my arm , and walk off to the kitchen with he , leave the door of communication open , for I be curiious to watch how they would settle they disagreement . the insult visitor move to the spot where he have lay he hat , pale and with a quivering lip . ' that be right ! ' I say to myself . ' take warning and begone ! it be a kindness to let you have a glimpse of she genuine disposition . ' ' where be you go ? ' demand , advanc to the door . he swerve aside , and attempt to pass . ' you must not go ! ' she exclaim , energetically . 'i must and shall ! ' he reply in a subdued voice . ' no ,' she persist , grasp the handle ; ' not yet , : sit down ; you shall not leave I in that temper . I should be miserable all night , and I will not be miserable for you ! ' ' can I stay after you have strike I ? ' ask . be mute . ' you have make I afraid and asham of you ,' he continue ; 'I will not come here again ! ' she eye begin to glisten and she lid to twinkle . ' and you tell a deliberate untruth ! ' he say . 'I do not ! ' she cry , recover she speech ; 'I do nothing deliberately . well , go , if you please - get away ! and now I will cry - I will cry myself sick ! ' she drop down on she knee by a chair , and set to weep in serious earnest . persever in he resolution as far as the court ; there he linger . I resolve to encourage he . ' miss be dreadfully wayward , sir ,' I call out . ' as bad as any marred child : you would better be ride home , or else she will be sick , only to grieve we . ' the soft thing look askance through the window : he possess the power to depart as much as a cat possess the power to leave a mouse half kill , or a bird half eat . ah , I think , there will be no save he : he be doom , and fly to he fate ! and so it be : he turn abruptly , hasten into the house again , shut the door behind he ; and when I go in a while after to inform they that have come home rabid drunk , ready to pull the whole place about we ear ( he ordinary frame of mind in that condition ) , I see the
the quarrel have merely effect a closer intimacy - have break the outwork of youthful timidity , and enable they to forsake the disguise of friendship , and confess themselves lover . intelligence of 's arrival drive speedily to he horse , and to she chamber . I go to hide little , and to take the shot out of the master 's fowling - piece , which he be fond of play with in he insane excitement , to the hazard of the life of any who provoke , or even attract he notice too much ; and I have hit upon the plan of remove it , that he might do less mischief if he do go the length of fire the gun . he enter , vociferat oath dreadful to hear ; and catch I in the act of stow he son sway in the kitchen cupboard . be impressed with a wholesome terror of encounter either he wild 's fondness or he madman 's rage ; for in one he run a chance of be squeeze and kiss to death , and in the other of be fling into the fire , or dash against the wall ; and the poor thing remain perfectly quiet wherever I choose to put he . ' there , I have find it out at last ! ' cry , pull I back by the skin of my neck , like a dog . ' by heaven and hell , you have swear between you to murder that child ! I know how it be , now , that he be always out of my way . but , with the help of , I shall make you swallow the carving - knife , Nelly ! you need not laugh ; for I have just cramm , head - downmost , in the Black - horse marsh ; and two be the same as one - and I want to kill some of you : I shall have no rest till I do ! ' ' but I do not like the carving - knife , ,' I answer ; ' it have be cut red herring . I would rather be shot , if you please . ' ' you would rather be damn ! ' he say ; ' and so you shall . no law in can hinder a man from keep he house decent , and mine be abominable ! open you mouth . ' he hold the knife in he hand , and push its point between my tooth : but , for my part , I be never much afraid of he vagary . I spat out , and affir it taste detestably - I would not take it on any account . 'Oh ! ' say he , release I , 'I see that hideous little villain be not : I beg you pardon , . if it be , he deserve flay alive for not run to welcome I , and for screaming as if I be a goblin . Unnatural cub , come hither ! I will teach thee to impose on a good - hear , delude father . now , do not you think the lad would be handsomer crop ? it make a dog fiercer , and I love something fierce - get I a scissors - something fierce and trim ! besides , it be infernal affectation - devilish conceit it be , to cherish we ear - we be ass enough without they . Hush , child , hush ! well then , it be my darling ! wisht , dry thy eye - there be a joy ; kiss I . what ! it will not ? kiss I , ! thee , kiss I ! by , as if I would rear such a monster ! as sure as I be live , I will break the brat 's neck . ' poor be squall and kick in he father 's arm with all he might , and redouble he yell when he carry he up - stair and lifte he over the banister . I cry out that he would frighten the child into fit , and run to rescue he . as I reach they , Hindley lean forward on the rail to listen to a noise below ; almost forget what he have in he hand . ' who be that ? ' he ask , hear some one approach the stair ' - foot . I lean forward also , for the purpose of signing to , whose step I recognise , not to come further ; and , at the instant when my eye quit , he give a sudden spring , deliver himself from the careless grasp that hold he , and fell . there be scarcely time to experience a thrill of horror before we see that the little wretch be safe . arrive underneath just at the critical moment ; by a natural impulse he arrest he descent , and set he on he foot , look up to discover the author of the accident . a miser who have part with a lucky lottery ticket for five shilling , and find next day he have lose in the bargain five thousand pound , could not show a blanker countenance than he do on behold the figure of above . it express , plainer than word could do , the intensest anguish at have make himself the instrument of thwart he own revenge . have it be dark , I daresay he would have try to remedy the mistake by smashe 's skull on the step ; but , we witness he salvation ; and I be presently below with my precious charge press to my heart . Hindley descend more leisurely , sober and abash . ' it be you fault , ,' he say ;
; ' you should have keep he out of sight : you should have take he from I ! be he injur anywhere ? ' ' injur ! ' I cry angrily ; ' if he be not kill , he will be a idiot ! oh ! I wonder he mother do not rise from she grave to see how you use he . you be worse than a heathen - treat you own flesh and blood in that manner ! ' he attempt to touch the child , who , on find himself with I , sob off he terror directly . at the first finger he father lay on he , however , he shriek again louder than before , and struggle as if he would go into convulsion . ' you shall not meddle with he ! ' I continue . ' he hate you - they all hate you - that be the truth ! a happy family you have ; and a pretty state you be come to ! ' 'I shall come to a prettier , yet , Nelly , ' laugh the misguided man , recovere he hardness . ' at present , convey yourself and he away . and hark you , ! clear you too quite from my reach and hearing . I would not murder you to - night ; unless , perhaps , I set the house on fire : but that be as my fancy go . ' while say this he take a pint bottle of brandy from the dresser , and pour some into a tumbler . ' Nay , do not ! ' I entreate . ' , do take warning . have mercy on this unfortunate boy , if you care nothing for yourself ! ' ' any one will do better for he than I shall , ' he answer . ' have mercy on you own soul ! ' I say , endeavour to snatch the glass from he hand . ' not I ! on the contrary , I shall have great pleasure in send it to perdition to punish its maker , ' exclaim the blasphemer . ' here be to its hearty damnation ! ' he drank the spirits and impatiently bay we go ; terminate he command with a sequel of horrid imprecation too bad to repeat or remember . ' it be a pity he can not kill himself with drink , ' observe , mutter a echo of curse back when the door be shut . 'he be do he very utmost ; but he constitution defy he . say he would wager he mare that he will outlive any man on this side , and go to the grave a hoary sinner ; unless some happy chance out of the common course befall he . ' I go into the kitchen , and sit down to lull my little lamb to sleep . Heathcliff , as I think , walk through to the barn . it turn out afterwards that he only get as far as the other side the settle , when he fling himself on a bench by the wall , remove from the fire and remain silent . I be rock on my knee , and hum a song that begin , - it be far in the night , and the bairny grat , the mither beneath the mool hear that , when , who have listen to the hubbub from she room , put she head in , and whisper , - ' be you alone , Nelly ? ' ' yes , ,' I reply . she enter and approach the hearth . I , suppose she be go to say something , look up . the expression of she face seem disturbed and anxious . she lip be half asunder , as if she mean to speak , and she draw a breath ; but it escape in a sigh instead of a sentence . I resume my song ; not have forget she recent behaviour . ' be ? ' she say , interrupt I . ' about he work in the stable , ' be my answer . he do not contradict I ; perhaps he have fall into a doze . there follow another long pause , during which I perceive a drop or two trickle from 's cheek to the flag . be she sorry for she shameful conduct ? - I ask myself . that will be a novelty : but she may come to the point - as she will - I sha ' not help she ! no , she feel small trouble regard any subject , save she own concern . 'Oh , dear ! ' she cry at last . 'I be very unhappy ! ' 'A pity , ' observ I . ' you be hard to please ; so many friend and so few care , and can not make yourself content ! ' ' Nelly , will you keep a secret for I ? ' she pursue , knee down by I , and lift she winsome eye to my face with that sort of look which turn off bad temper , even when one have all the right in the world to indulge it . ' be it worth keep ? ' I inquire , less sulkily . ' yes , and it worry I , and I must let it out ! I want to know what I should do . to -day , have ask I to marry he , and I have give he a answer . now , before I tell you whether it be a consent or denial , you tell I which it ought to have been . ' 'Really , , how can I know ? ' I reply . 'To be sure , consider the exhibition you
you perform in he presence this afternoon , I might say it would be wise to refuse he : since he ask you after that , he must either be hopelessly stupid or a venturesome fool . ' ' if you talk so , I will not tell you any more , ' she return , peevishly rise to she foot . 'I accept he , Nelly . be quick , and say whether I be wrong ! ' ' you accept he ! then what good be it discuss the matter ? you have pledge you word , and can not retract . ' ' but say whether I should have do so - do ! ' she exclaim in a irritate tone ; chaf she hand together , and frown . ' there be many thing to be consider before that question can be answer properly ,' I say , sententiously . ' first and foremost , do you love ? ' ' who can help it ? of course I do , ' she answer . then I put she through the follow catechism : for a girl of twenty - two it be not injudicious . ' why do you love he , ? ' ' Nonsense , I do - that be sufficient . ' ' by no means ; you must say why ? ' ' well , because he be handsome , and pleasant to be with . ' ' bad ! ' be my commentary . ' and because he be young and cheerful . ' ' bad , still . ' ' and because he love I . ' ' indifferent , come there . ' ' and he will be rich , and I shall like to be the greatest woman of the neighbourhood , and I shall be proud of have such a husband . ' ' worst of all . and now , say how you love he ? ' 'as everybody love - you be silly , Nelly . ' ' not at all - . ' 'I love the ground under he foot , and the air over he head , and everything he touch , and every word he say . I love all he look , and all he action , and he entirely and altogether . there now ! ' ' and why ? ' ' Nay ; you be make a jest of it : it be exceedingly ill - natured ! it be no jest to I ! ' say the young lady , scowling , and turn she face to the fire . 'I be very far from , ,' I reply . ' you love because he be handsome , and young , and cheerful , and rich , and love you . the last , however , go for nothing : you would love he without that , probably ; and with it you would not , unless he possess the four former attraction . ' ' no , to be sure not : I should only pity he - hate he , perhaps , if he be ugly , and a clown . ' ' but there be several other handsome , rich young man in the world : handsomer , possibly , and richer than he be . what should hinder you from love they ? ' ' if there be any , they be out of my way : I have see none like . ' ' you may see some ; and he will not always be handsome , and young , and may not always be rich . ' ' he be now ; and I have only to do with the present . I wish you would speak rationally . ' ' well , that settle it : if you have only to do with the present , marry . ' 'I do not want you permission for that - I shall marry he : and yet you have not tell I whether I be right . ' ' perfectly right ; if people be right to marry only for the present . and now , let we hear what you be unhappy about . you brother will be pleased ; the old lady and gentleman will not object , I think ; you will escape from a disorderly , comfortless home into a wealthy , respectable one ; and you love , and love you . all seem smooth and easy : where be the obstacle ? ' 'here ! and here ! ' reply , strike one hand on she forehead , and the other on she breast : 'in whichever place the soul life . in my soul and in my heart , I be convinced I be wrong ! ' ' that be very strange ! I can not make it out . ' ' it be my secret . but if you will not mock at I , I will explain it : I can not do it distinctly ; but I will give you a feeling of how I feel . ' she seat herself by I again : she countenance grow sadder and graver , and she clasp hand tremble . ' Nelly , do you never dream queer dream ? ' she say , suddenly , after some minute ' reflection . ' yes , now and then ,' I answer . ' and so do I . I have dreamt in my life dream that have stay with I ever after , and change my idea : they have go through and through I , like wine through water , and alte the colour of my mind . and this be one : I be go to tell it - but take care not to smile at any part of it . ' 'Oh ! do not , ! ' I cry . '
' we be dismal enough without conjur up ghost and vision to perplex we . come , come , be merry and like yourself ! look at little ! he be dream nothing dreary . how sweetly he smile in he sleep ! ' ' yes ; and how sweetly he father curse in he solitude ! you remember he , I daresay , when he be just such another as that chubby thing : nearly as young and innocent . however , Nelly , I shall oblige you to listen : it be not long ; and I have no power to be merry to - night . ' 'I will not hear it , I will not hear it ! ' I repeat , hastily . I be superstitious about dreams then , and be still ; and have a unusual gloom in she aspect , that make I dread something from which I might shape a prophecy , and foresee a fearful catastrophe . she be vex , but she do not proceed . apparently take up another subject , she recommence in a short time . ' if I be in heaven , Nelly , I should be extremely miserable . ' ' because you be not fit to go there ,' I answer . ' all sinner would be miserable in heaven . ' ' but it be not for that . I dreamt once that I be there . ' 'I tell you I will not hearke to you dream , ! I will go to bed ,' I interrupt again . she laugh , and hold I down ; for I make a motion to leave my chair . ' this be nothing , ' cry she : 'I be only go to say that heaven do not seem to be my home ; and I break my heart with weeping to come back to earth ; and the angels be so angry that they fling I out into the middle of the heath on the top of ; where I wake sobb for joy . that will do to explain my secret , as well as the other . I have no more business to marry than I have to be in heaven ; and if the wicked man in there have not bring Heathcliff so low , I should not have thought of it . it would degrade I to marry Heathcliff now ; so he shall never know how I love he : and that , not because he be handsome , Nelly , but because he be more myself than I be . whatever we soul be make of , he and mine be the same ; and 's be as different as a moonbeam from lightning , or frost from fire . ' Ere this speech end I become sensible of 's presence . have notice a slight movement , I turn my head , and see he rise from the bench , and steal out noiselessly . he have listen till he hear say it would degrade she to marry he , and then he stay to hear no further . my companion , sit on the ground , be prevent by the back of the settle from remark he presence or departure ; but I start , and bade she hush ! ' why ? ' she ask , gaze nervously round . ' be here ,' I answer , catche opportunely the roll of he cartwheel up the road ; 'and Heathcliff will come in with he . I be not sure whether he be not at the door this moment . ' 'Oh , he could not overhear I at the door ! ' say she . ' give I , while you get the supper , and when it be ready as I to sup with you . I want to cheat my uncomfortable conscience , and be convinced that have no notion of these thing . he have not , have he ? he do not know what be in love be ! ' 'I see no reason that he should not know , as well as you ,' I return ; ' and if you be he choice , he will be the most unfortunate creature that ever be bear ! as soon as you become , he lose friend , and love , and all ! have you consider how you will bear the separation , and how he will bear to be quite desert in the world ? because , - ' ' he quite desert ! we separate ! ' she exclaim , with a accent of indignation . ' who be to separate we , pray ? they will meet the fate of ! not as long as I live , : for no mortal creature . every on the face of the earth might melt into nothing before I could consent to forsake . oh , that be not what I intend - that be not what I mean ! I should not be be such a price demand ! he will be as much to I as he have be all he lifetime . must shake off he antipathy , and tolerate he , at least . he will , when he learn my true feeling towards he . Nelly , I see now you think I a selfish wretch ; but do it never strike you that if and I marry , we should be beggar ? whereas , if I marry I can aid to rise , and place he out of my brother 's power . ' ' with you husband 's money , ? ' I ask . ' you will find he not so pliable as you calculate upon : and , though I be hardly a judge , I think that be the worst motive you have give yet for
for be the wife of young . ' ' it be not , ' retort she ; ' it be the best ! the other be the satisfaction of my whim : and for 's sake , too , to satisfy he . this be for the sake of one who comprehend in he person my feeling to and myself . I can not express it ; but surely you and everybody have a notion that there be or should be a existence of yours beyond you . what be the use of my creation , if I be entirely contain here ? my great misery in this world have be 's misery , and I watch and feel each from the begin : my great thought in living be himself . if all else perish , and he remain , I should still continue to be ; and if all else remain , and he be annihilate , the universe would turn to a mighty stranger : I should not seem a part of it . - my love for be like the foliage in the woods : time will change it , I be well aware , as winter change the tree . my love for resemble the eternal rock beneath : a source of little visible delight , but necessary . Nelly , I be ! he be always , always in my mind : not as a pleasure , any more than I be always a pleasure to myself , but as my own being . so do not talk of we separation again : it be impracticable ; and - ' she pause , and hide she face in the fold of my gown ; but I jerk it forcibly away . I be out of patience with she folly ! ' if I can make any sense of you nonsense , ,' I say , ' it only go to convince I that you be ignorant of the duty you undertake in marrying ; or else that you be a wicked , unprincipled girl . but trouble I with no more secret : I will not promise to keep they . ' ' you will keep that ? ' she ask , eagerly . ' no , I will not promise ,' I repeat . she be about to insist , when the entrance of finish we conversation ; and remove she seat to a corner , and nurse , while I make the supper . after it be cook , my fellow - servant and I begin to quarrel who should carry some to ; and we do not settle it till all be nearly cold . then we come to the agreement that we would let he ask , if he want any ; for we fear particularly to go into he presence when he have be some time alone . ' and how be not that nowt come in fro' th ' field , be this time ? what be he about ? girt idle seeght ! ' demand the old man , look round for . 'I will call he ,' I reply . 'he be in the barn , I have no doubt . ' I go and call , but get no answer . on return , I whisper to Catherine that he have hear a good part of what she say , I be sure ; and tell how I see he quit the kitchen just as she complain of she brother 's conduct regard he . she jump up in a fine fright , flng on to the settle , and run to seek for she friend herself ; not take leisure to consider why she be so flurried , or how she talk would have affect he . she be absent such a while that propose we should wait no longer . he cunningly conjecture they be stay away in order to avoid hearing he protract blessing . they be 's ill eneugh for ony fahl manners ,' he affirm . and on they behalf he add that night a special prayer to the usual quarter - of - a - hour 's supplication before meat , and would have tacke another to the end of the , have not he young mistress break in upon he with a hurried command that he must run down the road , and , wherever Heathcliff have ramble , find and make he re-enter directly ! 'I want to speak to he , and I Must , before I go upstairs , ' she say . ' and the gate be open : he be somewhere out of hearing ; for he would not reply , though I shoute at the top of the fold as loud as I could . ' object at first ; she be too much in earnest , however , to suffer contradiction ; and at last he place he hat on he head , and walk grumbl forth . , pace up and down the floor , exclaim - ' I wonder where he be - I wonder where he can be ! what do I say , Nelly ? I have forget . be he vex at my bad humour this afternoon ? dear ! tell I what I have say to grieve he ? I do wish he would come . I do wish he would ! ' ' what a noise for nothing ! ' I cry , though rather uneasy myself . ' what a trifle scare you ! it be surely no great cause of alarm that should take a moonlight saunter on the moor , or even lie too sulky to speak to we in the hay - loft . I will engage he be lurk there . see if I do not ferret he out ! ' I depart to renew my search ; its result
result be disappointment , and 's quest end in the same . ' Yon lad get war und war ! ' observe he on re-entering . 'he be leave th ' gate at t ' full swing , and 's pony have trode dahn two rig of ' corn , and plotter through , raight of 'er into t ' meadow ! Hahsomdiver , t ' maister ' ull play t ' devil to - morn , and he will do weel . he be patience itsseln wi' sich careless , offald crater - patience itsseln he be ! he will not be soa allus - yah 's see , all on ye ! Yah mun ' not drive he out of he heead for nowt ! ' ' have you find , you ass ? ' interrupt . ' have you be look for he , as I order ? ' 'I sud more likker look for th ' horse , ' he reply . ' it 'uld be to more sense . I can look for norther horse nur man of a neeght loike this - as black as t ' chimbley ! und 's noan t ' chap to coom at my whistle - happen he will be less hard o's hear wi' ye ! ' it be a very dark evening for summer : the cloud appear inclin to thunder , and I say we have better all sit down ; the approaching rain would be certain to bring he home without further trouble . however , would hot be persuade into tranquillity . she keep wander to and , from the gate to the door , in a state of agitation which permit no repose ; and at length take up a permanent situation on one side of the wall , near the road : where , heedless of my expostulation and the grow thunder , and the great drop that begin to plash around she , she remain , call at interval , and then listen , and then cry outright . she beat , or any child , at a good passionate fit of crying . about midnight , while we still sit up , the storm come rattling over the in full fury . there be a violent wind , as well as thunder , and either one or the other split a tree off at the corner of the building : a huge bough fall across the roof , and knock down a portion of the east chimney - stack , send a clatter of stone and soot into the kitchen - fire . we think a bolt have fall in the middle of we ; and swing on to he knee , beseech the to remember the patriarch and , and , as in former time , spare the righteous , though he smote the ungodly . I feel some sentiment that it must be a judgment on we also . the , in my mind , be ; and I shook the handle of he den that I might ascertain if he be yet liive . he reply audibly enough , in a fashion which make my companion vociferate , more clamorously than before , that a wide distinction might be draw between saint like himself and sinner like he master . but the uproar pass away in twenty minute , leave we all unharmed ; except , who get thoroughly drench for she obstinacy in refuse to take shelter , and stand bonnetless and shawl - less to catch as much water as she could with she hair and clothes . she come in and lay down on the settle , all soak as she be , turn she face to the back , and put she hand before it . ' well , ! ' I exclaim , touch she shoulder ; ' you be not bent on get you death , be you ? do you know what o'clock it be ? half - past twelve . come , come to bed ! there be no use wait any longer on that foolish boy : he will be go to , and he will stay there now . he guess we should not wait for he till this late hour : at least , he guesse that only would be up ; and he would rather avoid have the door open by the master . ' ' Nay , nay , he be noan at , ' say . 'I be niver wonder but he be at t ' bothom of a bog - hoile . this visitation wor not for nowt , and I wod hev' ye to look out , - yah muh be t ' next . thank Hivin for all ! all wark togither for gooid to they as be chozzen , and pike out fro' th ' rubbidge ! Yah knee whet t ' Scripture s . ' and he begin quote several text , refer we to chapter and verse where we might find they . I , have vainly beg the wilful girl to rise and remove she wet thing , leave he preach and she shiver , and betake myself to be with little , who sleep as fast as if everyone have be sleep round he . I hear read on a while afterwards ; then I distinguished he slow step on the ladder , and then I drop asleep . come down somewhat later than usual , I see , by the sunbeam pierce the chink of the shutter , still seate near the fireplace . the house - door be ajar , too ; light enter from its unclosed window ; have come out , and stand on the kitchen hearth , haggard and drowsy . ' what ail you , ? ' he be say when I enter : ' you look as dismal as
as a drown whelp . why be you so damp and pale , child ? ' 'I have be wet , ' she answer reluctantly , ' and I be cold , that be all . ' 'Oh , she be naughty ! ' I cry , perceive the master to be tolerably sober . ' she get steep in the shower of yesterday evening , and there she have sit the night through , and I could not prevail on she to stir . ' star at we in surprise . ' the night through , ' he repeat . ' what keep she up ? not fear of the thunder , surely ? that be over hour since . ' neither of we wish to mention 's absence , as long as we could conceal it ; so I reply , I do not know how she take it into she head to sit up ; and she say nothing . the morning be fresh and cool ; I throw back the lattice , and presently the room fill with sweet scent from the garden ; but call peevishly to I , ' Ellen , shut the window . I be starve ! ' and she tooth chatter as she shrank closer to the almost extinguished ember . ' she be ill , ' say , take she wrist ; 'I suppose that be the reason she would not go to bed . damn it ! I do not want to be trouble with more sickness here . what take you into the rain ? ' ' run after t ' lad , as usuald ! ' croak , catch a opportunity from we hesitation to thrust in he evil tongue . ' if I war yah , maister , I would just slam t ' board I ' they face all on th'ey , gentle and simple ! never a day ut yah be off , but yon cat o' come sneak hither ; and , shoo be a fine lass ! shoo sit watch for ye I ' t ' kitchen ; and as yah be in at one door , he be out at t'other ; and , then , wer grand lady go a - courting of she side ! it be bonny behaviour , lurk amang t ' field , after twelve of ' t ' night , wi' that fahl , flaysome divil of a gipsy , ! they think I be blind ; but I be noan : nowt ut t ' soart ! - I see young boath come and go , and I see ( direct he discourse to I ) , ' yah gooid fur nowt , slattenly witch ! nip up and bolt into th ' house , t ' minute yah hear t ' maister 's horse - fit clatter up t ' road . ' ' Silence , eavesdropper ! ' cry ; ' none of you insolence before I ! come yesterday by chance , ; and it be I who tell he to be off : because I know you would not like to have meet he as you be . ' ' you lie , , no doubt , ' answer she brother , ' and you be a confounded simpleton ! but never mind at present : tell I , be you not with Heathcliff last night ? speak the truth , now . you need not he afraid of harm he : though I hate he as much as ever , he do I a good turn a short time since that will make my conscience tender of break he neck . to prevent it , I shall send he about he business this very morning ; and after he be go , I would advise you all to look sharp : I shall only have the more humour for you . ' 'I never see Heathcliff last night , ' answer , begin to sob bitterly : ' and if you do turn he out of door , I will go with he . but , perhaps , you will never have a opportunity : perhaps , he be gone . ' here she burst into uncontrollable grief , and the remainder of she word be inarticulate . lavish on she a torrent of scornful abuse , and bade she get to she room immediately , or she should not cry for nothing ! I oblige she to obey ; and I shall never forget what a scene she act when we reach she chamber : it terrify I . I think she be go mad , and I beg to run for the doctor . it prove the commencement of delirium : , as soon as he see she , pronounce she dangerously ill ; she have a fever . he b she , and he tell I to let she live on whey and water - gruel , and take care she do not throw herself downstair or out of the window ; and then he leave : for he have enough to do in the parish , where two or three mile be the ordinary distance between cottage and cottage . though I can not say i make a gentle nurse , and and the master be no better , and though we patient be as wearisome and headstrong as a patient could be , she weathere it through . pay we several visit , to be sure , and set thing to rights , and scold and order we all ; and when be convalescent , she insist on convey she to : for which deliverance we be very grateful . but the poor dame have reason to repent of she kindness : she and she husband both take the fever , and die within a few day of each other . we young lady return
return to we saucier and more passionate , and haughtier than ever . Heathcliff have never be hear of since the evening of the thunder - storm ; and , one day , I have the misfortune , when she have provoke I exceedingly , to lay the blame of he disappearance on she : where indeed it belong , as she well know . from that period , for several month , she cease to hold any communication with I , save in the relation of a mere servant . fall under a ban also : he would speak he mind , and lecture she all the same as if she be a little girl ; and she esteem herself a woman , and we mistress , and think that she recent illness give she a claim to be treat with consideration . then the doctor have say that she would not bear cross much ; she ought to have she own way ; and it be nothing less than murder in she eye for any one to presume to stand up and contradict she . from and he companion she keep aloon ; and tutor by , and serious threat of a fit that often attend she rage , she brother allow she whatever she pleas to demand , and generally avoid aggravate she fiery temper . he be rather too indulgent in humour she caprice ; not from affection , but from pride : he wish earnestly to see she bring honou to the family by a alliance with the Linton , and as long as she let he alone she might trample on we like slave , for atch he car ! , as multitude have be before and will be after he , be infatuate : and believe himself the happiest man alive on the day he lead she to , three year subsequent to he father 's death . much against my inclination , I be persuade to leave Wuthering Heights and accompany she here , be nearly five year old , and I have just begin to teach he he letter . we make a sad parting ; but 's tear be more powerful than ours . when I refuse to go , and when she find she entreaty do not move I , she go lament to she husband and brother . the former offer I munificent wage ; the latter order I to pack up : he want no woman in the house , he say , now that there be no mistress ; and as to , the curate should take he in hand , by - and - by . and so I have but one choice leave : to do as I be order . I tell the master he get rid of all decent people only to run to ruin a little faster ; I kiss , say good - by ; and since then he have be a stranger : and it be very queer to think it , but I 've no doubt he have completely forget all about , and that he be ever more than all the world to she and she to he ! at this point of the housekeeper 's story she chance to glance towards the time - piece over the chimney ; and be in amazement on see the minute - hand measure half - past one . she would not hear of stay a second longer : in truth , I feel rather disposed to defer the sequel of she narrative myself . and now that she be vanish to she rest , and I have meditate for another hour or two , I shall summon courage to go also , in spite of ach laziness of head and limb . chapter x a charming introduction to a hermit 's life ! four week ' torture , toss , and sickness ! oh , these bleak wind and bitter northern sky , and impassable roads , and dilatory country surgeon ! and oh , this dearth of the human physiognomy ! and , worse than all , the terrible intimation of that I need not expect to be out of door till spring ! have just honoure I with a call . about seven day ago he send I a brace of grouse - the last of the season . ! he be not altogether guiltless in this illness of mine ; and that I have a great mind to tell he . but , alas ! how could I offend a man who be charitable enough to sit at my bedside a good hour , and talk on some other subject than pill and draught , blister and leech ? this be quite a easy interval . I be too weak to read ; yet I feel as if I could enjoy something interesting . why not have up Dean to finish she tale ? I can recollect its chief incidents , as far as she have go . yes : I remember she hero have run off , and never be hear of for three year ; and the heroine be marry . I will ring : she will be delighted to find I capable of talk cheerfully . come . ' it want twenty minute , sir , to take the medicine , ' she commence . 'Away , away with it ! ' I reply ; 'i desire to have - ' ' the doctor say you must drop the powder . ' ' with all my heart ! do not interrupt I . come and take you seat here . keep you finger from that bitter phalanx of vial . draw you knitt out of you pocket - that will do - now continue the history of , from where you leave off , to the present day . do he finish he education
education on the continent , and come back a gentleman ? or do he get a sizar 's place at college , or escape to , and earn honour by draw blood from he foster - country ? or make a fortune more promptly on the english highway ? ' ' he may have do a little in all these vocation , ; but I could not give my word for any . I state before that I do not know how he gain he money ; neither be I aware of the means he take to raise he mind from the savage ignorance into which it be sink : but , with you leave , I will proceed in my own fashion , if you think it will amuse and not weary you . be you feel better this morning ? ' ' Much . ' ' that be good news . ' I get and myself to ; and , to my agreeable disappointment , she behave infinitely better than I da to expect . she seem almost over -fond of ; and even to he sister she show plenty of affection . they be both very attentive to she comfort , certainly . it be not the thorn bend to the honeysuckle , but the honeysuckle embrace the thorn . there be no mutual concession : one stood erect , and the other yield : and who can be ill - natured and bad - tempere when they encounter neither opposition nor indifference ? I observ that have a deep - root fear of ruffl she humour . he conceal it from she ; but if ever he hear I answer sharply , or see any other servant grow cloudy at some imperious order of hers , he would show he trouble by a frown of displeasure that never darken on he own account . he many a time speak sternly to I about my pertness ; and averr that the stab of a knife could not inflict a worse pang than he suffer at see he lady vex . not to grieve a kind master , I learn to be less touchy ; and , for the space of half a year , the gunpowder lay as harmless as sand , because no fire come near to explode it . have seasons of gloom and silence now and then : they be respecte with sympathising silence by she husband , who ascribe they to a alteration in she constitution , produce by she perilous illness ; as she be never subject to depression of spirit before . the return of sunshine be welcome by answer sunshine from he . I believe I may assert that they be really in possession of deep and grow happiness . it end . well , we must be for ourselves in the long run ; the mild and generous be only more justly selfish than the domineering ; and it end when circumstance cause each to feel that the one 's interest be not the chief consideration in the other 's thought . on a mellow evening in , I be come from the garden with a heavy basket of apple which I have be gather . it have get dusk , and the moon look over the high wall of the court , cause undefined shadow to lurk in the corner of the numerous project portion of the building . I set my burden on the house - step by the kitchen - door , and linger to rest , and draw in a few more breath of the soft , sweet air ; my eye be on the moon , and my back to the entrance , when I hear a voice behind I say , - ' Nelly , be that you ? ' it be a deep voice , and foreign in tone ; yet there be something in the manner of pronounce my name which make it sound familiar . I turn about to discover who speak , fearfully ; for the door be shut , and I have see nobody on approach the step . something stir in the porch ; and , move nearer , I distinguished a tall man dress in dark clothes , with dark face and hair . he lean against the side , and hold he finger on the latch as if intend to open for himself . ' who can it be ? ' I think . ' ? oh , no ! the voice have no resemblance to he . ' 'I have wait here a hour ,' he resume , while I continue sta ; ' and the whole of that time all round have be as still as death . I da not enter . you do not know I ? look , I be not a stranger ! ' a ray fall on he feature ; the cheek be sallow , and half cover with black whisker ; the brows lower , the eye deep - set and singular . I remember the eye . ' what ! ' I cry , uncertain whether to regard he as a worldly visitor , and I raise my hand in amazement . ' what ! you come back ? be it really you ? be it ? ' ' yes , , ' he reply , glance from I up to the window , which reflect a score of glittering moons , but show no light from withing . ' be they at home ? where be she ? Nelly , you be not glad ! you need not be so disturbed . be she here ? ! I want to have one word with she - you mistress . go , and say some person from desire to see she . ' ' how will she take it ? ' I exclaim . ' what will
will she do ? the surprise bewilder I - it will put she out of she head ! and you be ! but alter ! Nay , there be no comprehending it . have you be for a soldier ? ' ' go and carry my message , ' he interrupt , impatiently . 'I be in hell till you do ! ' he lift the latch , and I enter ; but when I get to the parlour where and were , I could not persuade myself to proceed . at length I resolve on make a excuse to ask if they would have the candle light , and I open the door . they sit together in a window whose lattice lay back against the wall , and display , beyond the garden tree , and the wild green park , the valley of , with a long line of mist win nearly to its top ( for very soon after you pass the chapel , as you may have noticed , the sough that run from the marsh join a beck which follow the bend of the glen ) . Wuther rise above this silvery vapour ; but we old house be invisible ; it rather dip down on the other side . both the room and its occupant , and the scene they gaze on , look wondrously peaceful . I shrank reluctantly from perform my errand ; and be actually go away leave it unsaid , after have put my question about the candle , when a sense of my folly compelle I to return , and mutter , 'a person from wish to see you ma'am . ' ' what do he want ? ' ask . 'I do not question he ,' I answer . ' well , close the curtain , Nelly , ' she say ; ' and bring up tea . I will be back again directly . ' she quit the apartment ; inquire , carelessly , who it be . ' some one mistress do not expect ,' I reply . ' that Heathcliff - you recollect he , sir - who use to live at 's . ' ' what ! the gipsy - the ploughboy ? ' he cry . ' why do you not say so to ? ' ' Hush ! you must not call he by those name , master ,' I say . ' she would be sadly grieve to hear you . she be nearly heartbroken when he run off . I guess he return will make a jubilee to she . ' walk to a window on the other side of the room that overlook the court . he unfasten it , and lean out . I suppose they be below , for he exclaim quickly : ' do not stand there , love ! bring the person in , if it be anyone particular . ' Ere long , I hear the click of the latch , and fly up - stair , breathless and wild ; too excited to show gladness : indeed , by she face , you would rather have surmise a awful calamity . 'Oh , , ! ' she pante , flinge she arm round he neck . 'Oh , darling ! 's come back - he be ! ' and she tighten she embrace to a squeeze . ' well , well , ' cry she husband , crossly , 'do not strangle I for that ! he never struck I as such a marvellous treasure . there be no need to be frantic ! ' 'I know you do not like he , ' she answer , repress a little the intensity of she delight . ' yet , for my sake , you must be friend now . shall I tell he to come up ? ' ' here , ' he say , ' into the parlour ? ' ' where else ? ' she ask . he look vexed , and suggest the kitchen as a more suitable place for he . ey he with a droll expression - half angry , half laugh at he fastidiousness . ' no , ' she add , after a while ; 'I can not sit in the kitchen . set two table here , : one for you master and , be gentry ; the other for and myself , be of the lower order . will that please you , dear ? or must I have a fire light elsewhere ? if so , give direction . I will run down and secure my guest . I be afraid the joy be too great to be real ! ' she be about to dart off again ; but arrest she . ' you bid he step up ,' he say , address I ; ' and , , try to be glad , without be absurd . the whole household need not witness the sight of you welcome a runaway servant as a brother . ' I descend , and find wait under the porch , evidently anticipate a invitation to enter . he follow my guidance without waste of word , and I usher he into the presence of the master and mistress , whose flush cheek betrayed sign of warm talking . but the lady 's glow with another feeling when she friend appear at the door : she spring forward , take both he hand , and lead he to ; and then she seize 's reluctant finger and crush they into he . now , fully revealead by the fire and candlelight , I be amaze , more than ever , to behold the transformation of . he have grow a tall , athletic , well - form man ; beside whom my master see quite slender and youth - like . he upright carriage suggest the
the idea of he have be in the army . he countenance be much older in expression and decision of feature than 's ; it look intelligent , and retain no mark of former degradation . a half - civilise ferocity lurk yet in the depressed brows and eye full of black fire , but it be subdue ; and he manner be even dignify : quite divest of roughness , though stern for . my master 's surprise equal or exceed mine : he remain for a minute at a loss how to address the ploughboy , as he have call he . drop he slight hand , and stand look at he coolly till he choose to speak . ' sit down , sir , ' he say , at length . ' . , recall old time , would have I give you a cordial reception ; and , of course , I be gratify when anything occur to please she . ' ' and I also , ' answer , ' especially if it be anything in which I have a part . I shall stay a hour or two willingly . ' he take a seat opposite , who keep she gaze fix on he as if she fear he would vanish be she to remove it . he do not raise he to she often : a quick glance now and then suffice ; but it flash back , each time more confidently , the undisguised delight he drank from hers . they be too much absorb in they mutual joy to suffer embarrassment . not so : he grow pale with pure annoyance : a feeling that reach its climax when he lady rose , and step across the rug , seize 's hand again , and laugh like one beside herself . 'I shall think it a dream to - morrow ! ' she cry . 'I shall not be able to believe that I have see , and touch , and speak to you once more . and yet , cruel Heathcliff ! you do not deserve this welcome . to be absent and silent for three year , and never to think of I ! ' 'a little more than you have think of I ,' he murmure . 'i heard of you marriage , , not long since ; and , while wait in the yard below , I meditate this plan - just to have one glimpse of you face , a stare of surprise , perhaps , and pretend pleasure ; afterwards settle my score with ; and then prevent the law by do execution on myself . you welcome have put these idea out of my mind ; but beware of meet I with another aspect next time ! Nay , you will not drive I off again . you be really sorry for I , be you ? well , there be cause . I have fight through a bitter life since I last hear you voice ; and you must forgive I , for I struggle only for you ! ' ' Catherine , unless we be to have cold tea , please to come to the table , ' interrupt , strive to preserve he ordinary tone , and a due measure of politeness . ' . will have a long walk , wherever he may lodge to - night ; and I be thirsty . ' she take she post before the urn ; and come , summon by the bell ; then , have hand they chair forward , I leave the room . the meal hardly endure ten minute . 's cup be never fill : she could neither eat nor drink . have make a slop in he saucer , and scarcely swallow a mouthful . they guest do not protract he stay that even above a hour longer . I ask , as he depart , if he go to ? 'no , to ,' he answer : ' invite I , when I call this morning . ' invite he ! and he call on ! I ponder this sentence painfully , after he be gone . be he turn out a bit of a hypocrite , and come into the country to work mischief under a cloak ? I muse : I have a presentiment in the bottom of my heart that he have better have remain away . about the middle of the night , I be wake from my first nap by glid into my chamber , take a seat on my bedside , and pull I by the hair to rouse I . 'I can not rest , , ' she say , by way of apology . ' and I want some liive creature to keep I company in my happiness ! be sulky , because I be glad of a thing that do not interest he : he refuse to open he mouth , except to utter pettish , silly speech ; and he affir I be cruel and selfish for wishing to talk when he be so sick and sleepy . he always contrive to be sick at the least cross ! I give a few sentence of commendation to , and he , either for a headache or a pang of envy , begin to cry : so I get up and leave he . ' ' what use be it praise to he ? ' I answer . ' as lads they have a aversion to each other , and would hate just as much to hear he praise : it be human nature . let alone about he , unless you would like a open quarrel between they . ' ' but do it not show great weakness ? ' pursue she . 'I be not envious : I never feel hurt at the brightness of 's yellow
yellow hair and the whiteness of she skin , at she dainty elegance , and the fondness all the family exhibit for she . even you , Nelly , if we have a dispute sometimes , you back at once ; and I yield like a foolish mother : I call she a darling , and flatter she into a good temper . it please she brother to see we cordial , and that please I . but they be very much alike : they be spoilead child , and fancy the world be make for they accommodation ; and though I humour both , I think a smart chastisement might improve they all the same . ' ' you be mistaken , , ' say I . ' they humour you : I know what there would be to do if they do not . you can well afford to indulge they passing whim as long as they business be to anticipate all you desire . you may , however , fall out , at last , over something of equal consequence to both side ; and then those you term weak be very capable of be as obstinate as you . ' ' and then we shall fight to the death , sha ' not we , Nelly ? ' she return , laugh . ' no ! I tell you , I have such faith in 's love , that I believe I might kill he , and he would not wish to retaliate . ' I advise she to value he the more for he affection . 'I do , ' she answer , ' but he need not resort to whin for trifle . it be childish and , instead of melt into tear because I say that be now worthy of anyone 's regard , and it would honour the first gentleman in the country to be he friend , he ought to have say it for I , and be delighte from sympathy . he must get accustom to he , and he may as well like he : consider how have reason to object to he , I be sure he behave excellently ! ' ' what do you think of he go to ? ' I inquire . ' he be reform in every respect , apparently : quite a : offer the right hand of fellowship to he enemy all around ! ' ' he explain it , ' she reply . 'I wonder as much as you . he say he call to gather information concern I from you , suppose you reside there still ; and tell , who come out and fall to question he of what he have be do , and how he have be live ; and finally , desire he to walk in . there be some person sit at card ; join they ; my brother lose some money to he , and , finde he plentifully supply , he request that he would come again in the evening : to which he consent . be too reckless to select he acquaintance prudently : he do not trouble himself to reflect on the cause he might have for mistrusting one whom he have basely injured . but affirm he principal reason for resum a connection with he ancient persecutor be a wish to instal himself in quarter at walking distance from the , and a attachment to the house where we live together ; and likewise a hope that I shall have more opportunity of see he there than I could have if he settle in . he mean to offer liberal payment for permission to lodge at the ; and doubtless my brother 's covetousness will prompt he to accept the term : he be always greedy ; though what he grasp with one hand he fling away with the other . ' ' it be a nice place for a young man to fix he dwelling in ! ' say I . ' have you no fear of the consequence , ? ' ' none for my friend , ' she reply : ' he strong head will keep he from danger ; a little for : but he can not be make morally worse than he be ; and I stand between he and bodily harm . the event of this evening have reconcile I to and humanity ! I have risen in angry rebellion against . oh , I have endure very , very bitter misery , Nelly ! if that creature know how bitter , he would be asham to cloud its removal with idle petulance . it be kindness for he which induce I to bear it alone : have I express the agony I frequently feel , he would have be teach to long for its alleviation as ardently as I . however , it be over , and I will take no revenge on he folly ; I can afford to suffer anything hereafter ! should the meanest thing alive slap I on the cheek , I would not only turn the other , but I would ask pardon for provoke it ; and , as a proof , I will go make my peace with instantly . good - night ! I be a angel ! ' in this self - complacent conviction she depart ; and the success of she fulfilled resolution be obvious on the morrow : have not only abjure he peevishness ( though he spirit see still subdue by 's exuberance of vivacity ) , but he venture no objection to she take with she to in the afternoon ; and she reward he with such a summer of sweetness and affection in return as make the house a paradise for several day ; both master and servants profit from the perpetual sunshine . - I should say in future
future - use the liberty of visiting at cautiously , at first : he seem estimate how far its owner would bear he intrusion . , also , deem it judicious to moderate she expression of pleasure in receive he ; and he gradually establish he right to be expect . he retain a great deal of the reserve for which he boyhood be remarkable ; and that serve to repress all start demonstration of feeling . my master 's uneasiness experience a lull , and further circumstance diverte it into another channel for a space . he new source of trouble sprang from the not anticipate misfortune of evince a sudden and irresistible attraction towards the tolerate guest . she be at that time a charme young lady of eighteen ; infantile in manners , though possess of keen wit , keen feeling , and a keen temper , too , if irritate . she brother , who love she tenderly , be appal at this fantastic preference . leave aside the degradation of a alliance with a nameless man , and the possible fact that he property , in default of heir male , might pass into such a one 's power , he have sense to comprehend 's disposition : to know that , though he exterior be alte , he mind be unchangeable and unchanged . and he dread that mind : it revolt he : he shrank forebodingly from the idea of commit to its keeping . he would have recoil still more have he be aware that she attachment rise unsolicited , and be bestow where it awaken no reciprocation of sentiment ; for the minute he discover its existence he lay the blame on 's deliberate designing . we have all remark , during some time , that fret and pin over something . she grow cross and wearisome ; snapping at and tease continually , at the imminent risk of exhausting she limit patience . we excuse she , to a certain extent , on the plea of ill - health : she be dwindl and fad before we eye . but one day , when she have be peculiarly wayward , reject she breakfast , complain that the servants do not do what she tell they ; that the mistress would allow she to be nothing in the house , and neglect she ; that she have catch a cold with the door be leave open , and we let the parlour fire go out on purpose to vex she , with a hundred yet more frivolous accusation , peremptorily insist that she should get to be ; and , have scold she heartily , threaten to send for the doctor . mention of cause she to exclaim , instantly , that she health be perfect , and it be only 's harshness which make she unhappy . ' how can you say I be harsh , you naughty fond ? ' cry the mistress , amaze at the unreasonable assertion . ' you be surely lose you reason . when have I be hash , tell I ? ' ' yesterday , ' sob , ' and now ! ' ' yesterday ! ' say she sister - in - law . 'On what occasion ? ' ' in we walk along the moor : you tell I to ramble where I please , while you saunter on with ? ' ' and that be you notion of harshness ? ' say , laugh . ' it be no hint that you company be superfluous ? we do not care whether you keep with we or not ; I merely think 's talk would have nothing entertaine for you ear . ' 'Oh , no ,' weep the young lady ; ' you wish I away , because you know I like to be there ! ' ' be she sane ? ' ask , appeal to I . 'I will repeat we conversation , word for word , ; and you point out any charm it could have have for you . ' 'I do not mind the conversation , ' she answer : 'I want to be with - ' " well ? ' say , perceive she hesitate to complete the sentence . ' with he : and I will not be always send off ! ' she continue , kind up . ' you be a dog in the manger , , and desire no one to be love but yourself ! ' ' you be a impertinent little monkey ! ' exclaim , in surprise . ' but I will not believe this idiotcy ! it be impossible that you can covet the admiration of - that you consider he a agreeable person ! I hope I have misunderstand you , ? ' ' no , you have not , ' say the infatuated girl . 'I love he more than ever you love , and he might love I , if you would let he ! ' 'I would not be you for a kingdom , then ! ' declare , emphatically : and she seem to speak sincerely . ' Nelly , help I to convince she of she madness . tell she what be : a unreclaimed creature , without refinement , without cultivation ; a arid wilderness of furze and whinstone . I ' as soon put that little canary into the park on a winter 's day , as recommend you to bestow you heart on he ! it be deplorable ignorance of he character , child , and nothing else , which make that dream enter you head . pray , do not imagine that he conceal dept of benevolence and affection beneath a stern exterior ! he be not a rough diamond - a pearl - contain oyster of a rustic : he be a fierce , pitiless ,
, wolfish man . I never say to he , " let this or that enemy alone , because it would be ungenerous or cruel to harm they ; " I say , " let they alone , because I should hate they to be wronge : " and he would crush you like a sparrow 's egg , , if he find you a troublesome charge . I know he could not love a ; and yet he would be quite capable of marry you fortune and expectation : avarice be grow with he a besetting sin . there be my picture : and I be he friend - so much so , that have he think seriously to catch you , I should , perhaps , have hold my tongue , and let you fall into he trap . ' regard she sister - in - law with indignation . ' for shame ! for shame ! ' she repeat , angrily . ' you be worse than twenty foe , you poisonous friend ! ' 'Ah ! you will not believe I , then ? ' say . ' you think I speak from wick selfishness ? ' 'I be certain you do , ' retort ; ' and I shudder at you ! ' ' good ! ' cry the other . ' try for yourself , if that be you spirit : I have do , and yield the argument to you saucy insolence . ' - ' and I must suffer for she egotism ! ' she sob , as leave the room . ' all , all be against I : she have blight my single consolation . but she utter falsehood , do not she ? be not a fiend : he have a honourable soul , and a true one , or how could he remember she ? ' ' Banish he from you thought , ,' I say . 'he be a bird of bad oman : no mate for you . speak strongly , and yet I can not contradict she . she be better acquainted with he heart than I , or any one beside ; and she never would represent he as worse than he be . Honest people do not hide they deed . how have he be live ? how have he get rich ? why be he stay at , the house of a man whom he abhor ? they say be worse and worse since he come . they sit up all night together continually , and have be borrowe money on he land , and do nothing but play and drink : I hear only a week ago - it be who tell I - I meet he at : " Nelly , " he say , " we be hae a crowner 's ' quest enow , at ahr folk ' . one on th'ey be a'most gete he finger cut off wi' haud t ' other fro' stickin ' hisseln loike a cawlf . that be maister , yeah knaw , 's soa up og go tuh t ' grand ' size . he be noan fear of ' t ' bench of ' judge , norther , , , , nor noan on th'ey , not he ! he fair like - he lang to set he brazen face agean 'em ! and yon bonny lad Heathcliff , yah mind , he be a rare 'un . he can girn a laugh as well 's onybody at a raight divil 's jest . do he niver say nowt of he fine living amang we , when he go to t ' ? this be t ' way on ot :- up at sun -down : dice , brandy , cloise shutter , und can 'le - light till next day at noon : then , t'fooil gangs ban und raving to he cham 'er , makk dacent fowk dig yothu finger I ' thur lug yofu varry shame ; un ' the knave , why he can caint he brass , un ' ate , un ' sleep , un ' off to he neighbour 's to gossip wi' t ' wife . I ' course , he tell how she fathur 's goold run into he pocket , and she fathur 's son gallop down t ' broad road , while he flee afore to oppen t ' pike ! " now , , be a old rascal , but no liar ; and , if he account of 's conduct be true , you would never think of desire such a husband , would you ? ' ' you be leagu with the rest , ! ' she reply . 'I will not listen to you slander . what malevolence you must have to wish to convince I that there be no happiness in the world ! ' whether she would have get over this fancy if leave to herself , or persever in nurse it perpetually , I can not say : she have little time to reflect . the day after , there be a justice - meet at the next town ; my master be obliged to attend ; and , aware of he absence , call rather earlier than usual . and be sit in the library , on hostile term , but silent : the latter alarme at she recent indiscretion , and the disclosure she have make of she secret feeling in a transient fit of passion ; the former , on mature consideration , really offended with she companion ; and , if she laugh again at she pertness , inclin to make it no laughing matter to she . she do laugh as she see pass the window . I be sweep the hearth , and I notice a mischievous smile on she lip . , absorb in she meditations
meditations , or a book , remain till the door open ; and it be too late to attempt a escape , which she would gladly have do have it be practicable . ' come in , that be right ! ' exclaim the mistress , gaily , pull a chair to the fire . ' here be two people sadly in need of a third to thaw the ice between they ; and you be the very one we should both of we choose . Heathcliff , I be proud to show you , at last , somebody that dote on you more than myself . I expect you to feel flattered . Nay , it be not Nelly ; do not look at she ! my poor little sister - in - law be break she heart by mere contemplation of you physical and moral beauty . it lie in you own power to be 's brother ! no , no , , you sha ' not run off , ' she continue , arrest , with feign playfulness , the confounded girl , who have risen indignantly . ' we be quarrell like cat about you , Heathcliff ; and I be fairly beat in protestation of devotion and admiration : and , moreover , I be inform that if I would but have the manners to stand aside , my rival , as she will have herself to be , would shoot a shaft into you soul that would fix you for ever , and send my image into eternal oblivion ! ' ' ! ' say , call up she dignity , and disdain to struggle from the tight grasp that hold she , 'I would thank you to adhere to the truth and not slander I , even in joke ! , be kind enough to bid this friend of yours release I : she forget that you and I be not intimate acquaintance ; and what amuse she be painful to I beyond expression . ' as the guest answer nothing , but take he seat , and look thoroughly indifferent what sentiment she cherish concern he , she turn and whisper a earnest appeal for liberty to she tormentor . ' by no means ! ' cry in answer . 'I will not be name a dog in the manger again . you shall stay : now then ! Heathcliff , why do not you evince satisfaction at my pleasant news ? swear that the love have for I be nothing to that she entertain for you . I be sure she make some speech of the kind ; do she not , ? and she have faste ever since the day before yesterday 's walk , from sorrow and rage that I despatch she out of you society under the idea of its be unacceptable . ' 'I think you belie she , ' say , twiste he chair to face they . ' she wish to be out of my society now , at any rate ! ' and he star hard at the object of discourse , as one might do at a strange repulsive animal : a centipede from the , for instance , which curiosity lead one to examine in spite of the aversion it raise . the poor thing could not bear that ; she grow white and red in rapid succession , and , while tear bead she lash , bend the strength of she small finger to loosen the firm clutch of ; and perceive that as fast as she raise one finger off she arm another close down , and she could not remove the whole together , she begin to make use of she nails ; and they sharpness presently ornament the detainer 's with crescent of red . ' there be a tigress ! ' exclaim , set she free , and shake she hand with pain . ' , for 's sake , and hide you vixen face ! how foolish to reveal those talon to he . can not you fancy the conclusion he will draw ? look , ! they be instrument that will do execution - you must beware of you eye . ' 'I would wrench they off she finger , if they ever menace I ,' he answer , brutally , when the door have close after she . ' but what do you mean by tease the creature in that manner , ? you be not speak the truth , be you ? ' 'I assure you I be , ' she return . ' she have be die for you sake several week , and rave about you this morning , and pour forth a deluge of abuse , because I represent you failings in a plain light , for the purpose of mitigate she adoration . but do not notice it further : I wish to punish she sauciness , that be all . I like she too well , my dear Heathcliff , to let you absolutely seize and deavor she up . ' ' and I like she too ill to attempt it , ' say he , ' except in a very ghoulish fashion . you would hear of odd thing if I liv alone with that mawkish , waxen face : the most ordinary would be paint on its white the colour of the rainbow , and turn the blue eye black , every day or two : they detestably resemble 's . ' ' Delectably ! ' observ . ' they be dove 's eye - angel 's ! ' ' she be she brother 's heir , be she not ? ' he ask , after a brief silence . 'I should be sorry to think so , ' return he companion . ' half a dozen nephew shall erase she title , please heave ! Abstract
Abstract you mind from the subject at present : you be too prone to covet you neighbour 's goods ; remember this neighbour 's goods be mine . ' ' if they be , they would be no the less that , ' say ; ' but though may be silly , she be scarcely mad ; and , in short , we will dismiss the matter , as you advise . ' from they tongue they do dismiss it ; and , probably , from she thought . the other , I feel certain , recall it often in the course of the evening . I see he smile to himself - grin rather - and lapse into ominous musing whenever have occasion to be absent from the apartment . I determine to watch he movement . my heart invariably cleave to the master 's , in preference to 's side : with reason I imagine , for he be kind , and trustful , and honourable ; and she - she could not be call , yet she seem to allow herself such wide latitude , that I have little faith in she principle , and still less sympathy for she feeling . I want something to happen which might have the effect of freeing both and the of quietly ; leave we as we have be prior to he advent . he visit be a continual nightmare to I ; and , I suspect , to my master also . he abode at the be a oppression past explain . I feel that have forsake the stray sheep there to its own wicked wandering , and a evil beast prowl between it and the fold , wait he time to spre and destroy . , while meditat on these thing in solitude , I have get up in a sudden terror , and put on my bonnet to go see how all be at the farm . I have persuade my conscience that it be a duty to warn he how people talk regard he way ; and then I have recollect he confirm bad habit , and , hopeless of benefit he , have flinch from re-enter the dismal house , doubt if I could bear to be take at my word . one time I pass the old gate , go out of my way , on a journey to . it be about the period that my narrative have reach : a bright frosty afternoon ; the ground bare , and the road hard and dry . I come to a stone where the highway branch off on to the moor at you left hand ; a rough sand - pillar , with the letter cut on its north side , on the east , , and on the south - west , . . it serve as a guide - post to the , the Heights , and village . the sun shone yellow on its grey head , remind I of summer ; and I can not say why , but all at once a gush of child 's sensation flow into my heart . and I hold it a favourite spot twenty year before . I gaze long at the weather - wear block ; and , stoop down , perceive a hole near the bottom still full of snail - shell and pebble , which we be fond of store there with more perishable thing ; and , as fresh as reality , it appear that I beheld my early playmate seate on the withered turf : he dark , square head bent forward , and he little hand scoope out the earth with a piece of slate . ' poor ! ' I exclaim , involuntarily . I start : my bodily eye be cheat into a momentary belief that the child lift its face and stare straight into mine ! it vanish in a twinkling ; but immediately I feel a irresistible yearning to be at the . urge I to comply with this impulse : suppose he should be dead ! I think - or should die soon ! - suppose it be a sign of death ! the nearer I get to the house the more agitated I grow ; and on catching sight of it I tremble in every limb . the apparition have outstrip I : it stand look through the gate . that be my first idea on obserive a elf - lock , brown - eyed boy set he ruddy countenance against the bar . further reflection suggest this must be , my , not alte greatly since I leave he , ten month since . ' bless thee , darl ! ' I cry , forgett instantaneously my foolish fear . ' , it be Nelly ! Nelly , thy nurse . ' he retreat out of arm 's length , and pick up a large flint . 'I be come to see thy father , ,' I add , guess from the action that Nelly , if she live in he memory at all , be not recognise as one with I . he raise he missile to hurl it ; I commence a soothing speech , but could not stay he hand : the stone strike my bonnet ; and then ensue , from the stammering lip of the little fellow , a string of curse , which , whether he comprehend they or not , be deliver with practise emphasis , and distort he baby feature into a shocking expression of malignity . you may be certain this grieve more than anger I . fit to cry , I take a orange from my pocket , and offer it to propitiate he . he hesitate , and then snatch it from my hold ; as if he fancie I only intend to tempt and disappoint he . I show
show another , keep it out of he reach . ' who have teach you those fine word , my bairn ? ' I inquire . ' the curate ? ' ' the curate , and thee ! Gie I that ,' he reply . ' tell we where you get you lesson , and you shall have it , ' say I . ' who be you master ? ' ' daddy , ' be he answer . ' and what do you learn from daddy ? ' I continue . he jump at the fruit ; I raise it higher . ' what do he teach you ? ' I ask . ' naught , ' say he , ' but to keep out of he gait . daddy can not bide I , because I swear at he . ' 'Ah ! and the devil teach you to swear at daddy ? ' I observ . 'Ay - nay ,' he drawl . ' who , then ? ' ' . ' 'I ask if he like . ' 'Ay ! ' he answer again . Desir to have he reason for like he , I could only gather the sentence - 'I know not : he pay dad back what he gy to I - he curse daddy for curse I . he say I mun do as I will . ' ' and the curate do not teach you to read and write , then ? ' I pursue . ' no , I be tell the curate should have he - tooth dash down he - throat , if he step over the threshold - Heathcliff have promise that ! ' I put the orange in he hand , and bay he tell he father that a woman call be wait to speak with he , by the garden gate . he go up the walk , and enter the house ; but , instead of , appear on the door - stone ; and I turn directly and run down the road as hard as ever I could race , make no halt till I gain the guide - post , and feel as scared as if I have raise a goblin . this be not much connect with 's affair : except that it urge I to resolve further on mount vigilant guard , and do my utmost to cheek the spread of such bad influence at the : even though I should wake a domestic storm , by thwart 's pleasure . the next time come my young lady chance to be feed some pigeon in the court . she have never speak a word to she sister - in - law for three day ; but she have likewise drop she fretful complain , and we find it a great comfort . Heathcliff have not the habit of bestow a single unnecessary civility on , I know . now , as soon as he beheld she , he first precaution be to take a sweeping survey of the house - front . I be stand by the kitchen - window , but I draw out of sight . he then step across the pavement to she , and say something : she seem embarrassed , and desirous of get away ; to prevent it , he lay he hand on she arm . she avert she face : he apparently put some question which she have no mind to answer . there be another rapid glance at the house , and suppose himself unseen , the scoundrel have the impudence to embrace she . ' ! ! ' I ejaculate . ' you be a hypocrite , too , be you ? a deliberate deceiver . ' ' who be , Nelly ? ' say 's voice at my elbow : I have be over-intent on watch the pair outside to mark she entrance . ' you worthless friend ! ' I answer , warmly : ' the sneak rascal yonder . ah , he have catch a glimpse of we - he be come in ! I wonder will he have the heart to find a plausible excuse for make love to , when he tell you he hate she ? ' see tear herself free , and run into the garden ; and a minute after , open the door . I could not withhold give some loose to my indignation ; but angrily insist on silence , and threaten to order I out of the kitchen , if I da to be so presumptuous as to put in my insolent tongue . 'to hear you , people might think you be the mistress ! ' she cry . ' you want set down in you right place ! , what be you about , raise this stir ? I say you must let alone ! - I beg you will , unless you be tired of be receive here , and wish to draw the bolt against you ! ' ' forbid that he should try ! ' answer the black villain . I detest he just then . ' keep he meek and patient ! every day I grow madder after send he to heave ! ' ' Hush ! ' say , shutt the inner door ! ' do not vex I . why have you disregarde my request ? do she come across you on purpose ? ' ' what be it to you ? ' he grow . 'I have a right to kiss she , if she choose ; and you have no right to object . I be not you husband : you need not be jealous of I ! ' 'I be not jealous of you , ' reply the mistress ; 'I be jealous for you . clear you face : you sha ' not scowl at I ! if
if you like , you shall marry she . but do you like she ? tell the truth , ! there , you will not answer . I be certain you do not . ' ' and would approve of he sister marry that man ? ' I inquire . ' should approve , ' return my lady , decisively . ' he might spare himself the trouble , ' say : 'I could do as well without he approbation . and as to you , , I have a mind to speak a few word now , while we be at it . I want you to be aware that I know you have treat I infernally - infernally ! do you hear ? and if you flatter yourself that I do not perceive it , you be a fool ; and if you think I can be consol by sweet word , you be a idiot : and if you fancy I will suffer unrevenged , I will convince you of the contrary , in a very little while ! meantime , thank you for tell I you sister - in - law 's secret : I swear I will make the most of it . and stand you aside ! ' ' what new phase of he character be this ? ' exclaim , in amazement . 'I have treat you infernally - and you will take you revenge ! how will you take it , ungrateful brute ? how have I treat you infernally ? ' 'I seek no revenge on you , ' reply , less vehemently . ' that be not the plan . the tyrant grind down he slave and they do not turn against he ; they crush those beneath they . you be welcome to torture I to death for you amusement , only allow I to amuse myself a little in the same style , and refrain from insult as much as you be able . have levell my palace , do not erect a hovel and complacently admire you own charity in give I that for a home . if I imagine you really wish I to marry , I would cut my throat ! ' 'Oh , the evil be that I be not jealous , be it ? ' cry . ' well , I will not repeat my offer of a wife : it be as bad as offer a lost soul . you bliss lie , like he , in inflicting misery . you prove it . be restore from the ill - temper he give way to at you come ; I begin to be secure and tranquil ; and you , restless to know we at peace , appear resolve on excite a quarrel . Quarrel with , if you please , , and deceive he sister : you will hit on exactly the most efficient method of revenge yourself on I . ' the conversation cease . sit down by the fire , flushed and gloomy . the spirit which serve she be grow intractable : she could neither lay nor control it . he stand on the hearth with fold arm , brood on he evil thought ; and in this position I leave they to seek the master , who be wonder what keep below so long . ' , ' say he , when I enter , ' have you see you mistress ? ' ' yes ; she be in the kitchen , sir ,' I answer . ' she be sadly put out by 's behaviour : and , indeed , I do think it be time to arrange he visit on another footing . there be harm in be too soft , and now it be come to this - . ' and I relate the scene in the court , and , as near as I da , the whole subsequent dispute . I fancie it could not be very prejudicial to ; unless she make it so afterwards , by assume the defensive for she guest . have difficulty in hear I to the close . he first word reveal that he do not clear he wife of blame . ' this be insufferable ! ' he exclaim . ' it be disgraceful that she should own he for a friend , and force he company on I ! call I two man out of the hall , . Catherine shall linger no longer to argue with the low ruffian - I have humoure she enough . ' he descend , and bid the servants wait in the passage , go , follow by I , to the kitchen . its occupant have recommence they angry discussion : , at least , be scolde with renew vigour ; have move to the window , and hang he head , somewhat cow by she violent rating apparently . he see the master first , and make a hasty motion that she should be silent ; which she obey , abruptly , on discover the reason of he intimation . ' how be this ? ' say , address she ; ' what notion of propriety must you have to remain here , after the language which have be hold to you by that blackguard ? I suppose , because it be he ordinary talk you think nothing of it : you be habituate to he baseness , and , perhaps , imagine I can get used to it too ! ' ' have you be listen at the door , ? ' ask the mistress , in a tone particularly calculate to provoke she husband , imply both carelessness and contempt of he irritation . , who have raise he eye at the former speech , give a sneering laugh at the latter ; on purpose , it seem , to draw 's attention to he
he . he succeed ; but do not mean to entertain he with any high flights of passion . 'I have be so far forbear with you , sir ,' he say quietly ; ' not that I be ignorant of you miserable , degrad character , but I feel you be only partly responsible for that ; and wish to keep up you acquaintance , I acquiesce - foolishly . you presence be a moral poison that would contaminate the most virtuous : for that cause , and to prevent worse consequence , I shall deny you hereafter admission into this house , and give notice now that I require you instant departure . three minute ' delay will render it involuntary and ignominious . measure the height and breadth of the speaker with a eye full of derision . ' , this lamb of yours threaten like a bull ! ' he say . ' it be in danger of split it be skull against my knuckle . by ! , I be mortally sorry that you be not worth knock down ! ' my master glance towards the passage , and sign I to fetch the man : he have no intention of hazard a personal encounter . I obey the hint ; but , suspect something , follow ; and when I attempt to call they , she pull I back , slam the door to , and lock it . ' fair mean ! ' she say , in answer to she husband 's look of angry surprise . ' if you have not courage to attack he , make a apology , or allow yourself to be beat . it will correct you of feign more valour than you possess . no , I will swallow the key before you shall get it ! I be delightfully reward for my kindness to each ! after constant indulgence of one 's weak nature , and the other 's bad one , I earn for thanks two sample of blind ingratitude , stupid to absurdity ! , I be defend you and yours ; and I wish may flog you sick , for daring to think a evil think of I ! ' it do not need the medium of a flogging to produce that effect on the master . he try to wrest the key from 's grasp , and for safety she fling it into the hottest part of the fire ; whereupon be take with a nervous trembling , and he countenance grow deadly pale . for he life he could not avert that excess of emotion : mingl anguish and humiliation overcome he completely . he lean on the back of a chair , and cover he face . 'Oh , heaven ! in old day this would win you knighthood ! ' exclaim . ' we be vanquish ! we be vanquish ! Heathcliff would as soon lift a finger at you as the king would march he army against a colony of mouse . Cheer up ! you sha 's not be hurt ! you type be not a lamb , it be a suck leveret . ' 'I wish you joy of the milk - blood coward , ! ' say she friend . 'I compliment you on you taste . and that be the slavering , shiver thing you prefer to I ! I would not strike he with my fist , but I would kick he with my foot , and experience considerable satisfaction . be he weep , or be he go to faint for fear ? ' the fellow approach and give the chair on which rest a push . he would better have keep he distance : my master quickly spring erect , and strike he full on the throat a blow that would have level a slighter man . it take he breath for a minute ; and while he chok , walk out by the back door into the yard , and from thence to the front entrance . ' there ! you have do with come here , ' cry . ' get away , now ; he will return with a brace of pistol and half - a - dozen assistant . if he do overhear we , of course he would never forgive you . you have play I a ill turn , ! but go - make haste ! I would rather see at than you . ' ' do you suppose I be go with that blow burn in my gullet ? ' he thunder . ' by hell , no ! I will crush he rib in like a rotten hazel - nut before I cross the threshold ! if I do not floor he now , I shall murder he some time ; so , as you value he existence , let I get at he ! ' ' he be not come ,' I interpose , fram a bit of a lie . ' there be the coachman and the two gardener ; you will surely not wait to be thrust into the road by they ! have a bludgeon ; and master will , very likely , be watch from the parlour -window to see that they fulfil he order . ' the gardener and coachman be there : but be with they . they have already enter the court . , on the second thought , resolve to avoid a struggle against three underling : he seize the poker , smashed the lock from the inner door , and make he escape as they tramp in . , who be very much excited , bay I accompany she up - stair . she do not know my share in contribute to the disturbance , and I be anxious to keep she in ignorance . 'I be nearly distract , Nelly ! ' she
she exclaim , throw herself on the sofa . 'a thousand smith ' hammer be beate in my head ! to shin I ; this uproar be owe to she ; and should she or any one else aggravate my anger at present , I shall get wild . and , Nelly , say to , if you see he again to - night , that I be in danger of be seriously ill . I wish it may prove true . he have start and distress I shockingly ! I want to frighten he . besides , he might come and begin a string of abuse or complainings ; I be certain I should recriminate , and know where we should end ! will you do so , my good Nelly ? you be aware that I be no way blamable in this matter . what possess he to turn listener ? 's talk be outrageous , after you leave we ; but I could soon have divert he from , and the rest mean nothing . now all be dash wrong ; by the fool 's craving to hear evil of self , that haunt some people like a demon ! have never gather we conversation , he would never have be the worse for it . really , when he open on I in that unreasonable tone of displeasure after I have scold Heathcliff till I be hoarse for he , I do not care hardly what they do to each other ; especially as I feel that , however the scene close , we should all be driven asunder for nobody know how long ! well , if I can not keep Heathcliff for my friend - if will be mean and jealous , I will try to break they heart by break my own . that will be a prompt way of finish all , when I be push to extremity ! but it be a deed to be reserve for a forlorn hope ; I have not take by surprise with it . to this point he have be discreet in dreading to provoke I ; you must represent the peril of quit that policy , and remind he of my passionate temper , verge , when kindle , on frenzy . I wish you could dismiss that apathy out of that countenance , and look rather more anxious about I . ' the stolidity with which I receive these instruction be , no doubt , rather exasperat : for they be deliver in perfect sincerity ; but I believe a person who could plan the turning of she fit of passion to account , beforehand , might , by exert she will , manage to control herself tolerably , even while under they influence ; and I do not wish to ' frighten ' she husband , as she say , and multiply he annoyance for the purpose of serve she selfishness . therefore I say nothing when I meet the master come towards the parlour ; but I take the liberty of turn back to listen whether they would resume they quarrel together . he begin to speak first . ' remain where you be , , ' he say ; without any anger in he voice , but with much sorrowful despondency . 'I shall not stay . I be neither come to wrangle nor be reconcile ; but I wish just to learn whether , after this evening 's event , you intend to continue you intimacy with - ' 'Oh , for mercy 's sake , ' interrupt the mistress , stamp she foot , ' for mercy 's sake , let we hear no more of it now ! you cold blood can not be work into a fever : you vein be full of ice - water ; but mine be boil , and the sight of such chillness make they dance . ' 'To get rid of I , answer my question , ' persever . ' you must answer it ; and that violence do not alarm I . I have find that you can be as stoical as anyone , when you please . will you give up hereafter , or will you give up I ? it be impossible for you to be my friend and he at the same time ; and I absolutely require to know which you choose . ' 'I require to be let alone ? ' exclaim , furiously . 'I demand it ! do not you see I can scarcely stand ? , you - you leave I ! ' she ring the bell till it break with a twang ; I enter leisurely . it be enough to try the temper of a saint , such senseless , wick rage ! there she lay dash she head against the arm of the sofa , and grind she tooth , so that you might fancy she would crash they to splinter ! stand look at she in sudden compunction and fear . he tell I to fetch some water . she have no breath for speaking . I bring a glass full ; and as she would not drink , I sprinkle it on she face . in a few seconds she stretch herself out stiff , and turn up she eye , while she cheek , at once blanched and livid , assume the aspect of death . look terrified . ' there be nothing in the world the matter ,' I whisper . I do not want he to yield , though I could not help be afraid in my heart . ' she have blood on she lip ! ' he say , shudder . ' never mind ! ' I answer , tartly . and I tell he how she have resolve , previous to he come , on exhibit a fit of frenzy
frenzy . I incautiously give the account aloud , and she hear I ; for she start up - she hair fly over she shoulders , she eye flash , the muscle of she neck and arm stand out preternaturally . I make up my mind for broken bone , at least ; but she only glar about she for a instant , and then rush from the room . the master direct I to follow ; I do , to she chamber - door : she hinder I from go further by secure it against I . as she never offer to descmend to breakfast next morning , I go to ask whether she would have some carry up . ' no ! ' she reply , peremptorily . the same question be repeat at dinner and tea ; and again on the morrow after , and receive the same answer . , on he part , spend he time in the library , and do not inquire concern he wife 's occupations . and he have have a hour 's interview , during which he try to elicit from she some sentiment of proper horror for 's advance : but he could make nothing of she evasive reply , and be obliged to close the examination unsatisfactorily ; add , however , a solemn warning , that if she be so insane as to encourage that worthless suitor , it would dissolve all bond of relationship between herself and he . mo about the park and garden , always silent , and almost always in tear ; and she brother shut himself up among book that he never open - weary , I guess , with a continual vague expectation that , repent she conduct , would come of she own accord to ask pardon , and seek a reconciliation - and she fast pertinaciously , under the idea , probably , that at every meal be ready to choke for she absence , and pride alone hold he from run to cast himself at she foot ; I go about my household duty , convince that the have but one sensible soul in its wall , and that lod in my body . I waste no condolence on , nor any expostulation on my mistress ; nor do I pay much attention to the sigh of my master , who year to hear he lady 's name , since he might not hear she voice . I determine they should come about as they pleas for I ; and though it be a tiresomely slow process , I begin to rejoice at length in a faint dawn of its progress : as I think at first . , on the third day , unbar she door , and have finish the water in she pitcher and decanter , desire a renew supply , and a basin of gruel , for she believe she be die . that I set down as a speech mean for 's ear ; I believe no such thing , so I keep it to myself and bring she some tea and dry toast . she eat and drank eagerly , and sank back on she pillow again , clench she hand and groaning . ' oh , I will die , ' she exclaim , ' since no one care anything about I . I wish I have not take that . ' then a good while after I hear she murmur , ' no , I will not die - he would be glad - he do not love I at all - he would never miss I ! ' ' do you want anything , ma 'am ? ' I inquire , still preserve my external composure , in spite of she ghastly countenance and strange , exaggerate manner . ' what be that apathetic be do ? ' she demand , push the thick entangle lock from she waste face . ' have he fall into a lethargy , or be he dead ? ' ' neither , ' reply I ; ' if you mean . he be tolerably well , I think , though he study occupy he rather more than they ink : he be continually among he book , since he have no other society . ' I should not have speak so if I have know she true condition , but I could not get rid of the notion that she act a part of she disorder . ' among he book ! ' she cry , confound . ' and I die ! I on the brink of the grave ! my ! do he know how I be altered ? ' continue she , star at she reflection in a mirror hang against the opposite wall . ' be that ? he imagine I in a pet - in play , perhaps . can not you inform he that it be frightful earnest ? Nelly , if it be not too late , as soon as I learn how he feel , I will choose between these two : either to starve at once - that would be no punishment unless he have a heart - or to recover , and leave the country . be you speak the truth about he now ? take care . be he actually so utterly indifferent for my life ? ' ' why , ma 'am ,' I answer , ' the master have no idea of you be derange ; and of course he do not fear that you will let yourself die of hunger . ' ' you think not ? can not you tell he I will ? ' she return . ' persuade he ! speak of you own mind : say you be certain I will ! ' ' no , you forget , ,' I suggest , ' that you
you have eat some food with a relish this evening , and to - morrow you will perceive it be good effect . ' ' if I be only sure it would kill he , ' she interrupt , 'I would kill myself directly ! these three awful night I have never close my lid - and oh , I have be torment ! I have be haunt , Nelly ! but I begin to fancy you do not like I . how strange ! I think , though everybody hate and despise each other , they could not avoid love I . and they have all turn to enemy in a few hour : they have , I be positive ; the people here . how dreary to meet death , surround by they cold face ! , terrify and repell , afraid to enter the room , it would be so dreadful to watch go . and stand solemnly by to see it over ; then offer prayer of thanks to for restore peace to he house , and go back to he book ! what in the name of all that feel have he to do with , when I be die ? ' she could not bear the notion which I have put into she head of 's philosophical resignation . Tosse about , she increase she feverish bewilderment to madness , and tore the pillow with she tooth ; then raise herself up all burn , desire that I would open the window . we be in the middle of winter , the wind blow strong from the north - east , and I object . both the expressions flitt over she face , and the change of she mood , begin to alarm I terribly ; and bring to my recollection she former illness , and the doctor 's injunction that she should not be cross . a minute previously she be violent ; now , support on one arm , and not notice my refusal to obey she , she seem to find childish diversion in pull the feather from the rent she have just make , and range they on the sheet accord to they different species : she mind have stray to other associations . ' that be a turkey 's , ' she murmure to herself ; 'and this be a wild duck 's ; and this be a pigeon 's . ah , they put pigeon ' feather in the pillow - no wonder I could not die ! let I take care to throw it on the floor when I lie down . and here be a moor - cock 's ; and this - I should know it among a thousand - it be a lapwing 's . Bonny bird ; wheel over we head in the middle of the moor . it want to get to its nest , for the cloud have touch the swell , and it feel rain come . this feather be pick up from the heath , the bird be not shoot : we see it be nest in the winter , full of little skeleton . Heathcliff set a trap over it , and the old one da not come . I make he promise he would never shoot a lapwing after that , and he do not . yes , here be more ! do he shoot my lapwing , Nelly ? be they red , any of they ? let I look . ' ' give over with that baby - work ! ' I interrupt , drag the pillow away , and turn the hole towards the mattress , for she be remove its contents by handfuls . ' lie down and shut you eye : you be wander . there be a mess ! the down be flie about like snow . ' I go here and there collect it . 'I see in you , Nelly , ' she continue dreamily , 'an aged woman : you have grey hair and bent shoulders . this bed be the fairy cave under crag , and you be gather elf - bolt to hurt we heifer ; pretend , while I be near , that they be only lock of wool . that be what you will come to fifty year hence : I know you be not so now . I be not wander : you be mistaken , or else I should believe you really be that wither hag , and I should think I be under ; and I be conscious it be night , and there be two candle on the table make the black press shine like jet . ' ' the black press ? where be that ? ' I ask . ' you be talk in you sleep ! ' ' it be against the wall , as it always be , ' she reply . ' it do appear odd - I see a face in it ! ' ' there be no press in the room , and never be , ' say I , resume my seat , and loo up the curtain that I might watch she . ' do not you see that face ? ' she inquire , gaze earnestly at the mirror . and say what I could , I be incapable of make she comprehend it to be she own ; so I rise and cover it with a shawl . ' it be behind there still ! ' she pursue , anxiously . ' and it stir . who be it ? I hope it will not come out when you be gone ! oh ! Nelly , the room be haunt ! I be afraid of be alone ! ' I take she hand in mine , and bid she be compose ; for a succession of shudder convulse she frame
frame , and she would keep strain she gaze towards the glass . ' there be nobody here ! ' I insist . ' it be yourself , : you know it a while since . ' ' myself ! ' she gas , ' and the clock be strike twelve ! it be true , then ! that be dreadful ! ' she finger clutch the clothes , and gather they over she eye . I attempt to steal to the door with a intention of call she husband ; but I be summon back by a piercing shriek - the shawl have drop from the frame . ' why , what be the matter ? ' cry I . ' who be coward now ? wake up ! that be the glass - the mirror , ; and you see yourself in it , and there be I too by you side . ' Trembl and bewilder , she hold I fast , but the horror gradually pass from she countenance ; its paleness give place to a glow of shame . 'Oh , dear ! I think I be at home , ' she sigh . 'I think I be lie in my chamber at . because I be weak , my brain get confused , and I scream unconsciously . do not say anything ; but stay with I . I dread sleep : my dream appal I . ' 'A sound sleep would do you good , ma 'am ,' I answer : ' and I hope this suffering will prevent you try starve again . ' 'Oh , if I be but in my own bed in the old house ! ' she go on bitterly , wringe she hand . ' and that wind sound in the fir by the lattice . do let I feel it - it come straight down the moor - do let I have one breath ! ' to pacify she I hold the casement ajar a few seconds . a cold blast rush through ; I close it , and return to my post . she lay still now , she face bath in tear . exhaustion of body have entirely subdue she spirit : we fiery be no better than a wailing child . ' how long be it since I shut myself in here ? ' she ask , suddenly revive . ' it be evening ,' I reply , ' and this be night , or rather morning , at present . ' ' what ! of the same week ? ' she exclaim . ' only that brief time ? ' ' Long enough to live on nothing but cold water and ill - temper , ' observe I . ' well , it seem a weary number of hour , ' she mutter doubtfully : ' it must be more . I remember be in the parlour after they have quarrell , and be cruelly provoke , and I run into this room desperate . as soon as ever I have bar the door , utter blackness overwhelme I , and I fall on the floor . I could not explain to how certain I feel of have a fit , or go rage mad , if he persist in tease I ! I have no command of tongue , or brain , and he do not guess my agony , perhaps : it barely leave I sense to try to escape from he and he voice . before I recovere sufficiently to see and hear , it begin to be dawn , and , Nelly , I will tell you what I think , and what have keep recurr and recurr till I fear for my reason . I think as I lay there , with my head against that table leg , and my eye dimly discern the grey square of the window , that I be enclose in the oak - panel bed at home ; and my heart ach with some great grief which , just wake , I could not recollect . I ponder , and worry myself to discover what it could be , and , most strangely , the whole last seven year of my life grow a blank ! I do not recall that they have be at all . I be a child ; my father be just bury , and my misery arise from the separation that have order between I and . I be laid alone , for the first time ; and , rouse from a dismal doze after a night of weeping , I lift my hand to push the panel aside : it strike the table - top ! I sweep it along the carpet , and then memory burst in : my late anguish be swallow in a paroxysm of despair . I can not say why I feel so wildly wretch : it must have be temporary derangement ; for there be scarcely cause . but , suppose at twelve year old I have be wrench from the , and every early association , and my all in all , as be at that time , and be convert at a stroke into , the lady of , and the wife of a stranger : a exile , and outcast , thenceforth , from what have be my world . you may fancy a glimpse of the abyss where I grovell ! shake you head as you will , Nelly , you have help to unsettle I ! you should have speak to , indeed you should , and compelle he to leave I quiet ! oh , I be burn ! I wish I be out of door ! I wish I be a girl again , half savage and hardy , and free ; and laugh at injury , not madden under they ! why
why be I so change ? why do my blood rush into a hell of tumult at a few word ? I be sure I should be myself be I once among the heather on those hill . open the window again wide : fasten it open ! quick , why do not you move ? ' ' because I will not give you you death of cold ,' I answer . ' you will not give I a chance of life , you mean , ' she say , sullenly . ' however , I be not helpless yet ; I will open it myself . ' and slide from the bed before I could hinder she , she cross the room , walk very uncertainly , throw it back , and bend out , careless of the frosty air that cut about she shoulders as keen as a knife . I entreate , and finally attempt to force she to retire . but I soon find she delirious strength much surpass mine ( she be delirious , I become convinced by she subsequent action and raving ) . there be no moon , and everything beneath lay in misty darkness : not a light gleam from any house , far or near all have be extinguish long ago : and those at be never visible - still she assert she catch they shining . ' look ! ' she cry eagerly , ' that be my room with the candle in it , and the tree sway before it ; and the other candle be in 's garret . sit up late , do not he ? he be wait till I come home that he may lock the gate . well , he will wait a while yet . it be a rough journey , and a sad heart to travel it ; and we must pass by to go that journey ! we have brave its ghost often together , and da each other to stand among the grave and ask they to come . but , , if I dare you now , will you venture ? if you do , I will keep you . I will not lie there by myself : they may bury I twelve foot deep , and throw the church down over I , but I will not rest till you be with I . I never will ! ' she pause , and resume with a strange smile . 'he be consider - he ' rather I would come to he ! find a way , then ! not through that kirkyard . you be slow ! be content , you always follow I ! ' perceive it vain to argue against she insanity , I be plan how I could reach something to wrap about she , without quit my hold of herself ( for I could not trust she alone by the gaping lattice ) , when , to my consternation , I hear the rattle of the door - handle , and enter . he have only then come from the library ; and , in passing through the lobby , have notice we talking and be attract by curiosity , or fear , to examine what it signify , at that late hour . 'Oh , sir ! ' I cry , check the exclamation risen to he lip at the sight which meet he , and the bleak atmosphere of the chamber . ' my poor mistress be ill , and she quite master I : I can not manage she at all ; pray , come and persuade she to go to bed . forget you anger , for she be hard to guide any way but she own . ' ' Catherine ill ? ' he say , haste to we . ' shut the window , ! ! why - ' he be silent . the haggardness of 's appearance smote he speechless , and he could only glance from she to I in horrified astonishment . ' she be be frett here ,' I continue , ' and eat scarcely anything , and never complain : she would admit none of we till this evening , and so we could not inform you of she state , as we be not aware of it ourselves ; but it be nothing . ' I feel I utter my explanations awkwardly ; the master frown . ' it be nothing , be it , ? ' he say sternly . ' you shall account more clearly for keep I ignorant of this ! ' and he take he wife in he arm , and look at she with anguish . at first she give he no glance of recognition : he be invisible to she abstract gaze . the delirium be not fix , however ; have wean she eye from contemplate the outer darkness , by degree she cent she attention on he , and discover who it be that hold she . 'Ah ! you be come , be you , ? ' she say , with angry animation . ' you be one of those thing that be ever find when least want , and when you be want , never ! I suppose we shall have plenty of lamentation now - I see we shall - but they can not keep I from my narrow home out yonder : my resting - place , where I be bound before spring be over ! there it be : not among the Linton , mind , under the chapel - roof , but in the open air , with a head - stone ; and you may please yourself whether you go to they or come to I ! ' ' , what have you do ? ' commence the master . ' be I nothe to you any more
more ? do you love that wretch Heath - ' ' Hush ! ' cry . ' Hush , this moment ! you mention that name and I end the matter instantly by a spring from the window ! what you touch at present you may have ; but my soul will be on that hill - top before you lay hand on I again . I do not want you , : I be past want you . return to you book . I be glad you possess a consolation , for all you have in I be gone . ' 'her mind wander , sir ,' I interpose . ' she have be talk nonsense the whole evening ; but let she have quiet , and proper attendance , and she will rally . Hereafter , we must be cautious how we vex she . ' 'I desire no further advice from you , ' answer . ' you know you mistress 's nature , and you encourage I to harass she . and not to give I one hint of how she have be these three day ! it be heartless ! month of sickness could not cause such a change ! ' I begin to defend myself , think it too bad to be blame for another 's wicked waywardness . 'I know 's nature to be headstrong and domineer , ' cry I : ' but I do not know that you wish to foster she fierce temper ! I do not know that , to humour she , I should wink at . I perform the duty of a faithful servant in tell you , and I have get a faithful servant 's wage ! well , it will teach I to be careful next time . next time you may gather intelligence for yourself ! ' ' the next time you bring a tale to I you shall quit my service , ,' he reply . ' you would rather hear nothing about it , I suppose , then , ? ' say I . ' Heathcliff have you permission to come a - courting to , and to drop in at every opportunity you absence offer , on purpose to poison the mistress against you ? ' Confuse as be , she wits be alert at apply we conversation . 'Ah ! Nelly have play traitor , ' she exclaim , passionately . ' Nelly be my hidden enemy . you witch ! so you do seek elf - bolt to hurt we ! let I go , and I will make she rue ! I will make she howl a recantation ! ' a maniac 's fury kind under she brows ; she struggle desperately to disengage herself from 's arm . I feel no inclination to tarry the event ; and , resolve to seek medical aid on my own responsibility , I quit the chamber . in pass the garden to reach the road , at a place where a bridle hook be drive into the wall , I see something white move irregularly , evidently by another agent than the wind . Notwithstand my hurry , I stay to examine it , lest ever after I should have the conviction impress on my imagination that it be a creature of the other world . my surprise and perplexity be great on discovering , by touch more than vision , 's , , suspend by a handkerchief , and nearly at it be last gasp . I quickly release the animal , and lift it into the garden . I have see it follow its mistress up - stair when she go to be ; and wonder much how it could have get out there , and what mischievous person have treat it so . while unty the knot round the hook , it seem to I that I repeatedly catch the beat of horse 's foot gallop at some distance ; but there be such a number of thing to occupy my reflection that I hardly give the circumstance a think : though it be a strange sound , in that place , at two o'clock in the morning . be fortunately just issue from he house to see a patient in the village as I come up the street ; and my account of 's malady induce he to accompany I back immediately . he be a plain rough man ; and he make no scruple to speak he doubt of she survive this second attack ; unless she be more submissive to he direction than she have show herself before . ' Nelly Dean , ' say he , 'I can not help fancie there be a extra cause for this . what have there be to do at the Grange ? we have od report up here . a stout , hearty lass like do not fall ill for a trifle ; and that sort of people should not either . it be hard work bring they through fevers , and such thing . how do it begin ? ' ' the master will inform you ,' I answer ; ' but you be acquaint with the 's violent disposition , and cap they all . I may say this ; it commence in a quarrel . she be strike during a tempest of passion with a kind of fit . that be she account , at least : for she fly off in the height of it , and lock herself up . afterwards , she refuse to eat , and now she alternately rave and remain in a half dream ; know those about she , but have she mind fill with all sort of strange idea and illusion . ' ' will be sorry ? ' observ , interrogatively . ' sorry ? he will break he heart should anything happen ! '
' I reply . ' do not alarm he more than necessary . ' ' well , I tell he to beware , ' say my companion ; ' and he must bide the consequence of neglect my warning ! have not he be intimate with lately ? ' ' Heathcliff frequently visit at the , ' answer I , ' though more on the strength of the mistress have know he when a boy , than because the master like he company . at present he have dischar from the trouble of call ; owe to some presumptuous aspiration after which he manifest . I hardly think he will be take in again . ' ' and do turn a cold shoulder on he ? ' be the doctor 's next question . 'I be not in she confidence , ' return I , reluctant to continue the subject . ' no , she be a sly one ,' he remark , shak he head . ' she keep she own counsel ! but she be a real little fool . I have it from good authority that last night ( and a pretty night it be ! ) she and Heathcliff be walk in the plantation at the back of you house above two hour ; and he press she not to go in again , but just mount he horse and away with he ! my informant say she could only put he off by pledge she word of honour to be prepare on they first meeting after that : when it be to be he do not hear ; but you urge to look sharp ! ' this news fill I with fresh fear ; I outstrip , and run most of the way back . the little dog be yelp in the garden yet . I spa a minute to open the gate for it , but instead of go to the house door , it course up and down snuff the grass , and would have escape to the road , have I not seize it and convey it in with I . on ascending to 's room , my suspicion be confirm : it be empty . have I be a few hour sooner 's illness might have arrest she rash step . but what could be do now ? there be a bare possibility of overtak they if pursue instantly . I could not pursue they , however ; and I da not rouse the family , and fill the place with confusion ; still less unfold the business to my master , absorb as he be in he present calamity , and have no heart to spare for a second grief ! I see nothing for it but to hold my tongue , and suffer matter to take they course ; and be arrive , I go with a badly composed countenance to announce he . lay in a troubled sleep : she husband have succeed in soothe the excess of frenzy ; he now hang over she pillow , watch every shade and every change of she painfully expressive featur . the doctor , on examine the case for himself , speak hopefully to he of it be have a favourable termination , if we could only preserve around she perfect and constant tranquillity . to I , he signify the threatening danger be not so much death , as permanent alienation of intellect . I do not close my eye that night , nor do : indeed , we never go to bed ; and the servants be all up long before the usual hour , move through the house with stealthy tread , and exchange whisper as they encounter each other in they vocation . every one be active but ; and they begin to remark how sound she sleep : she brother , too , ask if she have risen , and seem impatient for she presence , and hurt that she show so little anxiety for she sister - in - law . I tremble lest he should send I to call she ; but I be spare the pain of be the first proclaimant of she flight . one of the maid , a thoughtless girl , who have be on a early errand to , come pante up - stair , open - mouthed , and dash into the chamber , cry : 'Oh , dear , dear ! what mun we have next ? master , master , we young lady - ' ' hold you noise ! ' cry , I hastily , enrage at she clamorous manner . ' , - what be the matter ? ' say . ' what ail you young lady ? ' ' she have go , she be gone ! Yon ' have run off wi' she ! ' gas the girl . ' that be not true ! ' exclaim , rise in agitation . ' it can not be : how have the idea enter you head ? , go and seek she . it be incredible : it can not be . ' as he speak he take the servant to the door , and then repeat he demand to know she reason for such a assertion . ' why , I meet on the road a lad that fetch milk here , ' she stammer , ' and he ask whether we be not in trouble at the . I think he mean for 's sickness , so I answer , yes . then say he , " there be somebody go after th'ey , I guess ? " I stare . he see I know nuy about it , and he tell how a gentleman and lady have stop to have a horse 's shoe fasten at a blacksmith 's shop , two mile out of , not very long after
after midnight ! and how the blacksmith 's lass have get up to spy who they be : she know they both directly . and she notice the man - Heathcliff it be , she feel certain : nob 'dy could mistake he , besides - put a sovereign in she father 's hand for payment . the lady have a cloak about she face ; but have desire a sup of water , while she drank it fall back , and she see she very aplain . hold both bridle as they ride on , and they set they face from the village , and go as fast as the rough road would let they . the lass say nothing to she father , but she tell it all over Gimmerton this morning . ' I run and pee , for form 's sake , into 's room ; confirm , when I return , the servant 's statement . have resume he seat by the bed ; on my re-entrance , he raise he eye , read the meaning of my blank aspect , and drop they without give a order , or utter a word . ' be we to try any measure for overtak and bring she back ,' I inquire . ' how should we do ? ' ' she go of she own accord ,' answer the master ; ' she have a right to go if she please . trouble I no more about she . Hereafter she be only my sister in name : not because I disow she , but because she have disown I . ' and that be all he say on the subject : he do not make single inquiry further , or mention she in any way , except direct I to send what property she have in the house to she fresh home , wherever it be , when I know it . chapter xiii for two month the fugitive remain absent ; in those two month , encounter and conquer the worst shock of what be denominate a brain fever . no mother could have nurse a only child more devotedly than ten she . day and night he be watch , and patiently endure all the annoyance that irritable nerve and a shaken reason could inflict ; and , though remark that what he save from the grave would only recompense he care by form the source of constant future anxiety - in fact , that he health and strength be be sacrificed to preserve a mere ruin of humanity - he know no limit in gratitude and joy when 's life be declare out of danger ; and hour after hour he would sit beside she , trace the gradual return to bodily health , and flatter he too sanguine hope with the illusion that she mind would settle back to its right balance also , and she would soon be entirely she former self . the first time she leave she chamber be at the commencement of the follow . have put on she pillow , in the morning , a handful of golden crocuse ; she eye , long stranger to any gleam of pleasure , catch they in waking , and shone delight as she gather they eagerly together . ' these be the earliest flower at the , ' she exclaim . ' they remind I of soft thaw wind , and warm sunshine , and nearly melte snow . , be there not a south wind , and be not the snow almost gone ? ' ' the snow be quite go down here , darling , ' reply she husband ; ' and I only see two white spot on the whole range of moor : the sky be blue , and the lark be singe , and the beck and brook be all brim full . , last spring at this time , I be longe to have you under this roof ; now , I wish you be a mile or two up those hill : the air blow so sweetly , I feel that it would cure you . ' 'I shall never be there but once more , ' say the invalid ; 'and then you will leave I , and I shall remain for ever . next spring you will long again to have I under this roof , and you will look back and think you be happy to - day . ' lavish on she the kindest caress , and try to cheer she by the fondest word ; but , vaguly regard the flower , she let the tear collect on she lash and stream down she cheek unheeding . we know she be really better , and , therefore , decide that long confinement to a single place produce much of this despondency , and it might be partially remove by a change of scene . the master tell I to light a fire in the many - week ' desert parlour , and to set a easy - chair in the sunshine by the window ; and then he bring she down , and she sit a long while enjoy the genial heat , and , as we expect , revive by the object round she : which , though familiar , be free from the dreary associations invest she hate sick chamber . by evening she seem greatly exhaust ; yet no argument could persuade she to return to that apartment , and I have to arrange the parlour sofa for she bed , till another room could be prepare . to obviate the fatigue of mounting and descende the stair , we fit up this , where you lie at present - on the same floor with the parlour ; and she be soon strong enough to move from one to the other , lean on
on 's arm . ah , I think myself , she might recover , so wait on as she be . and there be double cause to desire it , for on she existence depend that of another : we cherish the hope that in a little while 's heart would be gladden , and he lands secure from a stranger 's gripe , by the birth of a heir . I should mention that send to she brother , some six week from she departure , a short note , announce she marriage with . it appear dry and cold ; but at the bottom be dot in with pencil a obscure apology , and a entreaty for kind remembrance and reconciliation , if she proceeding have offend he : assert that she could not help it then , and be do , she have now no power to repeal it . do not reply to this , I believe ; and , in a fortnight more , I get a long letter , which I consider odd , come from the pen of a bride just out of the honeymoon . I will read it : for i keep it yet . any relic of the dead be precious , if they be value living . , it begin , - I come last night to , and hear , for the first time , that have be , and be yet , very ill . I must not write to she , I suppose , and my brother be either too angry or too distressed to answer what I send he . still , I must write to somebody , and the only choice leave I be you . that I would give the world to see he face again - that my heart return to in twenty - four hour after I leave it , and be there at this moment , full of warm feeling for he , and ! I can not follow it though - ( these word be underlin ) - they need not expect I , and they may draw what conclusion they please ; take care , however , to lay nothing at the door of my weak will or deficient affection . the remainder of the letter be for yourself alone . I want to ask you two question : the first be , - how do you contrive to preserve the common sympathy of human nature when you reside here ? I can not recognise any sentiment which those around share with I . the second question I have great interest in ; it be this - Is a man ? if so , be he mad ? and if not , be he a devil ? I sha ' not tell my reason for make this inquiry ; but I beseech you to explain , if you can , what I have marry : that be , when you call to see I ; and you must call , , very soon . do not write , but come , and bring I something from . now , you shall hear how I have be receive in my new home , as I be lead to imagine the Heights will be . it be to amuse myself that I dwell on such subject as the lack of external comforts : they never occupy my thought , except at the moment when I miss they . I should laugh and dance for joy , if I find they absence be the total of my misery , and the rest be a unnatural dream ! the sun set behind the as we turn on to the moor ; by that , I judge it to be six o'clock ; and my companion halt half a hour , to inspect the park , and the garden , and , probably , the place itself , as well as he could ; so it be dark when we dismount in the pave yard of the farm - house , and you old fellow - servant , , issue out to receive we by the light of a dip candle . he do it with a courtesy that redound to he credit . he first act be to elevate he torch to a level with my face , squint malignantly , project he under - lip , and turn away . then he take the two horse , and lead they into the stable ; reappear for the purpose of lock the outer gate , as if we live in a ancient castle . stay to speak to he , and I enter the kitchen - a dingy , untidy hole ; I daresay you would not know it , it be so change since it be in you charge . by the fire stand a ruffianly child , strong in limb and dirty in garb , with a look of in he eye and about he mouth . ' this be 's legal nephew ,' I reflect - ' mine in a manner ; I must shake hand , and - yes - I must kiss he . it be right to establish a good understanding at the beginning . ' I approach , and , attempt to take he chubby fist , say - ' how do you do , my dear ? ' he reply in a jargon I do not comprehend . ' shall you and I be friend , ? ' be my next essay at conversation . a oath , and a threat to set Throttler on I if I do not ' frame off ' reward my perseverance . ' hey , , lad ! ' whisper the little wretch , rouse a half - breed bull - dog from its lair in a corner . ' now , will thou be gange ? ' he
he ask authoritatively . love for my life urge a compliance ; I step over the threshold to wait till the other should enter . be nowhere visible ; and , whom I follow to the stable , and request to accompany I in , after star and mutter to himself , screw up he nose and reply - ' ! mim! me ! do iver body hear atch like it ? Mincing un ' munching ! how can I tell whet ye say ? ' 'I say , I wish you to come with I into the house ! ' I cry , think he deaf , yet highly disgust at he rudeness . ' none of ' I ! I gete summut else to do ,' he answer , and continue he work ; move he lantern jaw meanwhile , and survey my dress and countenance ( the former a great deal too fine , but the latter , I be sure , as sad as he could desire ) with sovereign contempt . I walk round the yard , and through a wicket , to another door , at which I take the liberty of knocking , in hope some more civil servant might show himself . after a short suspense , it be open by a tall , gaunt man , without neckerchief , and otherwise extremely slovenly ; he feature be lose in mass of shaggy hair that hang on he shoulders ; and this eye , too , be like a ghostly 's with all they beauty annihilate . ' what be you business here ? ' he demand , grimly . ' who be you ? ' ' my name be ,' I reply . ' you have see I before , sir . I be lately marry to , and he have bring I here - I suppose , by you permission . ' ' be he come back , then ? ' ask the hermit , glar like a hungry wolf . ' yes - we come just now ,' I say ; ' but he leave I by the kitchen door ; and when I would have go in , you little boy play sentinel over the place , and frightene I off by the help of a bull - dog . ' ' it be well the hellish villain have keep he word ! ' grow my future host , search the darkness beyond I in expectation of discovering ; and then he indulge in a soliloquy of execration , and threat of what he would have do have the ' fiend ' deceive he . I repent have try this second entrance , and be almost inclin to slip away before he finish cursing , but ere I could execute that intention , he order I in , and shut and re-fasten the door . there be a great fire , and that be all the light in the huge apartment , whose floor have grow a uniform grey ; and the once brilliant pewter - dish , which use to attract my gaze when I be a girl , partook of a similar obscurity , create by tarnish and dust . I inquire whether I might call the maid , and be conduct to a bedroom ! vouchsaf no answer . he walk up and down , with he hand in he pocket , apparently quite forget my presence ; and he abstraction be evidently so deep , and he whole aspect so misanthropical , that I shrank from disturb he again . you will not be surprised , , at my feeling particularly cheerless , seat in worse than solitude on that inhospitable hearth , and remember that four mile distant lay my delightful home , contain the only people I love on earth ; and there might as well be the to part we , instead of those four mile : I could not overpass they ! I question with myself - where must I turn for comfort ? and - mind you do not tell , or - above every sorrow beside , this rise pre-eminent : despair at find nobody who could or would be my ally against ! I have seek shelter at , almost gladly , because I be secure by that arrangement from live alone with he ; but he know the people we be come amongst , and he do not fear they intermeddling . I sit and think a doleful time : the clock struck eight , and nine , and still my companion pace to and fro , he head bend on he breast , and perfectly silent , unless a groan or a bitter ejaculation force itself out at interval . I listen to detect a woman 's voice in the house , and fill the interim with wild regret and dismal anticipation , which , at last , speak audibly in irrepressible sighing and weeping . I be not aware how openly I grieve , till halt opposite , in he measure walk , and give I a stare of newly - awakened surprise . take advantage of he recover attention , I exclaim - 'I be tired with my journey , and I want to go to bed ! where be the maid - servant ? direct I to she , as she will not come to I ! ' ' we have none ,' he answer ; ' you must wait on yourself ! ' ' where must I sleep , then ? ' I sob ; I be beyond regard self - respect , weigh down by fatigue and wretchedness . ' will show you 's chamber , ' say he ; ' open that door - he be in there . ' I be go to obey , but he suddenly arrest I , and add in the strangest tone - '
' be so good as to turn you lock , and draw you bolt - do not omit it ! ' ' well ! ' I say . ' but why , ? ' I do not relish the notion of deliberately fasten myself in with . ' look here ! ' he reply , pull from he waistcoat a curiously - construct pistol , have a double - ed spring knife attach to the barrel . ' that be a great tempter to a desperate man , be it not ? I can not resist go up with this every night , and try he door . if once I find it open he be do for ; I do it invariably , even though the minute before I have be recalle a hundred reason that should make I refrain : it be some devil that urge I to thwart my own scheme by kill he . you fight against that devil for love as long as you may ; when the time come , not all the angels in heaven shall save he ! ' I survey the weapon inquisitively . a hideous notion struck I : how powerful I should be possesse such a instrument ! I take it from he hand , and touch the blade . he look astonished at the expression my face assume during a brief second : it be not horror , it be covetousness . he snatch the pistol back , jealously ; shut the knife , and return it to its concealment . 'I do not care if you tell he , ' say he . ' put he on he guard , and watch for he . you know the term we be on , I see : he danger do not shock you . ' ' what have do to you ? ' I ask . ' in what have he wrong you , to warrant this appalling hatre ? would not it be wiser to bid he quit the house ? ' ' no ! ' thunder ; ' should he offer to leave I , he be a dead man : persuade he to attempt it , and you be a murderess ! be I to lose all , without a chance of retrieval ? be to be a beggar ? oh , damnation ! I will have it back ; and I will have he gold too ; and then he blood ; and hell shall have he soul ! it will be ten time blacker with that guest than ever it be before ! ' you have acquaint I , , with you old master 's habit . he be clearly on the verge of madness : he be so last night at least . I shudder to be near he , and think on the servant 's ill - breed moroseness as comparatively agreeable . he now recommence he moody walk , and I raise the latch , and escape into the kitchen . be bend over the fire , pee into a large pan that swing above it ; and a wooden bowl of oatmeal stood on the settle close by . the contents of the pan begin to boil , and he turn to plunge he hand into the bowl ; I conjecture that this preparation be probably for we supper , and , be hungry , I resolve it should be eatable ; so , cry out sharply , 'I will make the porridge ! ' I remove the vessel out of he reach , and proceed to take off my hat and riding - habit . ' ,' I continue , ' direct I to wait on myself : I will . I be not go to act the lady among you , for fear I should starve . ' ' ! ' he mutter , sit down , and strok he rib stocking from the knee to the ankle . ' if there be to be fresh orthering - just when I gete use to two maister , if I mun he v' a MISTRESS set of 'er my heead , it be like time to be flitt . I niver do think to see t ' day that I muld lave th ' owld place - but I doubt it be nigh at hand ! ' this lamentation draw no notice from I : I go briskly to work , sigh to remember a period when it would have be all merry fun ; but compelle speedily to drive off the remembrance . it rack I to recall past happiness and the greater peril there be of conjur up its apparition , the quicker the thible run round , and the faster the handfuls of meal fall into the water . beheld my style of cookery with grow indignation . ' Thear ! ' he ejaculate . ' , thou will not sup thy porridge to - neeght ; they will be natch but lumps as big as my neive . Thear , agean ! I would fl in bowl un ' all , if I wer ye ! there , pale t ' guilp off , un ' then ye will hae do wi's 't . bang , bang . it be a mercy t ' bothom be not deave out ! ' it be rather a rough mess , I own , when pour into the basin ; four have be provide , and a gallon pitcher of new milk be bring from the dairy , which seize and commence drinking and spill from the expansive lip . I expostulate , and desire that he should have he in a mug ; affirme that I could not taste the liquid treat so dirtily . the old cynic choose to be vastly offended at this nicety ; assure I , repeatedly , that ' the barn be
be every bit as good ' as I , ' and every bit as wollsome , ' and wonder how I could fashion to be so conceited . meanwhile , the infant ruffian continue suck ; and glower up at I defyingly , as he slave into the jug . 'I shall have my supper in another room ,' I say . ' have you no place you call a parlour ? ' ' Parlour ! ' he echo , sneeringly , ' Parlour ! Nay , we have noa Parlour . if yah dunnut loike wer company , there be maister 's ; un ' if yah dunnut loike maister , there be we . ' ' then I shall go up - stair ,' I answer ; ' show I a chamber . ' I put my basin on a tray , and go myself to fetch some more milk . with great grumbling , the fellow rose , and proceed I in my ascent : we mount to the garret ; he open a door , now and then , to look into the apartment we pass . ' here be a rahm ,' he say , at last , flinge back a cranky board on hinge . ' it be weel eneugh to eat a few porridge in . there be a pack of ' corn I ' t ' corner , thear , meeterly clane ; if ye be fear of ' mucky yer grand silk cloe , spread yer hankerchir of ' t ' top of n't . ' the ' rahm ' be a kind of lumber - hole smell strong of malt and grain ; various sack of which article be pile around , leave a wide , bare space in the middle . ' why , man ,' I exclaim , face he angrily , ' this be not a place to sleep in . I wish to see my bed - room . ' ' - ! ' he repeat , in a tone of mockery . ' 's see all t ' bed - Rume thear be - 's mine . ' he point into the second garret , only differ from the first in be more naked about the wall , and have a large , low , curtainless bed , with a indigo - colou quilt , at one end . ' what do I want with yours ? ' I retort . 'I suppose do not lodge at the top of the house , do he ? ' 'Oh ! it be Hathecliff' ye be want ? ' cry he , as if make a new discovery . ' could not ye ha ' say , at onst ? un ' then , I muld ha ' tell ye , baht all this wark , that that be just one ye cannut see - he allas keep it lock , un ' nob 'dy iver mell of n't but hisseln . ' ' you have a nice house , ,' I could not refrain from observe , ' and pleasant inmate ; and I think the concentrate essence of all the madness in the world take up its abode in my brain the day I link my fate with theirs ! however , that be not to the present purpose - there be other room . for heaven 's sake be quick , and let I settle somewhere ! ' he make no reply to this adjuration ; only plodd doggedly down the wooden step , and halt , before a apartment which , from that halt and the superior quality of its furniture , I conjecture to be the best one . there be a carpet - a good one , but the pattern be obliterate by dust ; a fireplace hang with cut - paper , drop to piece ; a handsome oak - bedstead with ample crimson curtain of rather expensive material and modern make ; but they have evidently experienced rough usage : the vallance hang in festoon , wrench from they ring , and the iron rod support they be bend in a arc on one side , cause the drapery to trail upon the floor . the chair be also damaged , many of they severely ; and deep indentation deform the panel of the wall . I be endeavour to gather resolution for entering and take possession , when my fool of a guide announce , - ' this here be t ' maister 's . ' my supper by this time be cold , my appetite gone , and my patience exhaust . I insist on be provide instantly with a place of refuge , and means of repose . ' Whear the divil ? ' begin the religious elder . ' the bless we ! the forgie we ! Whear the Hell wdd ye gang ? ye mar , wearisome nowt ! ye have see all but 's bit of a cham'er . there be not another hoile to lig down in I ' th ' hahse ! ' I be so vexed , I fling my tray and its contents on the ground ; and then seat myself at the stair '- head , hide my face in my hand , and cry . ' Ech ! ech ! ' exclaim . ' Weel do , ! weel do , ! Howsiver , t ' maister sall just tum 'le of 'er they broeak pots ; un ' then we be hear summut ; we be hear how it be to be . Gooid -for - natch madling ! ye desarve pining fro' this to , flinge t ' precious gift o' under fooit I ' yer flaysome rage ! but I be misto 'en if ye show yer sperrit lang . will bide sich bonny way , think ye ? I nobbut wish he may catch
catch ye I ' that plisky . I nobbut wish he may . ' and so he go on scolding to he den beneath , take the candle with he ; and I remain in the dark . the period of reflection succeed this silly action compelle I to admit the necessity of smother my pride and chok my wrath , and bestirr myself to remove its effect . a unexpected aid presently appear in the shape of , whom I now recognise as a son of we old Skulker : it have spend its whelphood at the , and be give by my father to . I fancy it know I : it push it be nose against mine by way of salute , and then hasten to deavor the porridge ; while I grope from step to step , collect the shatte earthenware , and dry the spatter of milk from the banister with my pocket - handkerchief . we labour be scarcely over when I hear 's tread in the passage ; my assistant tuck in he tail , and press to the wall ; I steal into the nearest doorway . the dog 's endeavour to avoid he be unsuccessful ; as I guess by a scutter down - stair , and a prolonge , piteous yelping . I have better luck : he pass on , enter he chamber , and shut the door . directly after come up with , to put he to bed . I have find shelter in 's room , and the old man , on see I , say , - ' they be rahm for boath ye un ' yer pride , now , I suld think I ' the hahse . it be empty ; ye may hev' it all to yerseln , un's as allus mak a third , I ' sich ill company ! ' gladly do I take advantage of this intimation ; and the minute I fling myself into a chair , by the fire , I nod , and sleep . my slumber be deep and sweet , though over far too soon . awoke I ; he have just come in , and demand , in he loving manner , what I be do there ? I tell he the cause of my stay up so late - that he have the key of we room in he pocket . the adjective we give mortal offence . he swore it be not , nor ever should be , mine ; and he would - but I will not repeat he language , nor describe he habitual conduct : he be ingenious and unresting in seek to gain my abhorrence ! I sometimes wonder at he with a intensity that deaden my fear : yet , I assure you , a tiger or a venomous serpent could not rouse terror in I equal to that which he waken . he tell I of 's illness , and accuse my brother of cause it promise that I should be 's proxy in suffering , till he could get hold of he . I do hate he - I be wretch - I have be a fool ! beware of utter one breath of this to any one at the . I shall expect you every day - do not disappoind I ! - . as soon as I have peruse this epistle I go to the master , and inform he that he sister have arrive at the , and send I a letter express she sorrow for 's situation , and she ardent desire to see he ; with a wish that he would transmit to she , as early as possible , some token of forgiveness by I . ' forgiveness ! ' say . 'I have nothing to forgive she , . you may call at this afternoon , if you like , and say that I be not angry , but I be sorry to have lose she ; especially as I can never think she will be happy . it be out of the question my go to see she , however : we be eternally divide ; and should she really wish to oblige I , let she persuade the villain she have marry to leave the country . ' ' and you will not write she a little note , sir ? ' I ask , imploringly . ' no ,' he answer . ' it be needless . my communication with 's family shall be as spare as he with mine . it shall not exist ! ' 's coldness depresse I exceedingly ; and all the way from the I puzzl my brain how to put more heart into what he say , when I repeat it ; and how to soften he refusal of even a few line to conseal . I daresay she have be on the watch for I since morning : I see she look through the lattice as I come up the garden causeway , and I nod to she ; but she draw back , as if afraid of be observe . I enter without knock . there never be such a dreary , dismal scene as the formerly cheerful house present ! I must confess , that if I have be in the young lady 's place , I would , at least , have sweep the hearth , and wip the table with a duster . but she already partake of the pervading spirit of neglect which encompass she . she pretty face be want and listless ; she hair uncurl : some lock hang lankly down , and some carelessly twist round she head . probably she have not touch she dress since yester evening . be not there . sit at a table , turn over some papers in he pocket - book ; but
but he rise when I appear , ask I how I do , quite friendly , and offer I a chair . he be the only thing there that seem decent ; and I think he never look better . so much have circumstance alte they position , that he would certainly have struck a stranger as a born and breed gentleman ; and he wife as a thorough little slattern ! she come forward eagerly to greet I , and hold out one hand to take the expect letter . I shook my head . she would not understand the hint , but follow I to a sideboard , where I go to lay my bonnet , and importune I in a whisper to give she directly what I have bring . guess the meaning of she manoeuvre , and say - ' if you have get anything for ( as no doubt you have , ) , give it to she . you need not make a secret of it : we have no secret between we . ' ' oh , I have nothing ,' I reply , think it best to speak the truth at once . ' my master bid I tell he sister that she must not expect either a letter or a visit from he at present . he send he love , ma 'am , and he wish for you happiness , and he pardon for the grief you have occasion ; but he think that after this time he household and the household here should drop intercommunication , as nothing could come of keep it up . ' 's lip quiver slightly , and she return to she seat in the window . she husband take he stand on the hearthstone , near I , and begin to put question concern . I tell he as much as I think proper of she illness , and he extort from I , by cross-examination , most of the fact connect with its origin . I blame she , as she deserv , for bring it all on herself ; and end by hoping that he would follow 's example and avoid future interference with he family , for good or evil . ' . be now just recover ,' I say ; ' she will never be like she be , but she life be spare ; and if you really have a regard for she , you will shin cross she way again : nay , you will move out of this country entirely ; and that you may not regret it , I will inform you be as different now from you old friend , as that young lady be different from I . she appearance be change greatly , she character much more so ; and the person who be compelled , of necessity , to be she companion , will only sustain he affection hereafter by the remembrance of what she once be , by common humanity , and a sense of duty ! ' ' that be quite possible , ' remark , force himself to seem calm : ' quite possible that you master should have nothing but common humanity and a sense of duty to fall back upon . but do you imagine that I shall leave to he and ? and can you compare my feeling respect to he ? before you leave this house , I must exact a promise from you that you will get I a interview with she : consent , or refuse , I will see she ! what do you say ? ' 'I say , ,' I reply , ' you must not : you never shall , through my means . another encounter between you and the master would kill she altogether . ' ' with you aid that may be avoid ,' he continue ; 'and should there be danger of such a event - should he be the cause of add a single trouble more to she existence - why , I think I shall be justified in go to extreme ! I wish you have sincerity enough to tell I whether would suffer greatly from he loss : the fear that she would restrain I . and there you see the distinction between we feeling : have he be in my place , and I in he , though I hate he with a hatred that turn my life to gall , I never would have raise a hand against he . you may look incredulous , if you please ! I never would have banish he from she society as long as she desire he . the moment she regard cease , I would have tear he heart out , and drink he blood ! but , till then - if you do not believe I , you do not know I - till then , I would have die by inch before I touch a single hair of he head ! ' ' and yet ,' I interrupt , ' you have no scruple in completely ruin all hope of she perfect restoration , by thrust yourself into she remembrance now , when she have nearly forget you , and involve she in a new tumult of discord and distress . ' ' you suppose she have nearly forget I ? ' he say . 'Oh , Nelly ! you know she have not ! you know as well as I do , that for every thought she spend on she spend a thousand on I ! at a most miserable period of my life , I have a notion of the kind : it haunt I on my return to the neighbourhood last summer ; but only she own assurance could make I admit the horrible idea again . and then , would be nothing , nor , nor all the
the dream that ever I dreamt . two word would comprehend my future - death and Hell : existence , after lose she , would be hell . yet I be a fool to fancy for a moment that she value 's attachment more than mine . if he love with all the power of he puny being , he could not love as much in eighty year as I could in a day . and have a heart as deep as I have : the sea could be as readily contain in that horse - trough as she whole affection be monopolise by he . Tush ! he be scarcely a degree dearer to she than she dog , or she horse . it be not in he to be love like I : how can she live in he what he have not ? ' ' and be as fond of each other as any two people can be , ' cry , with sudden vivacity . ' no one have a right to talk in that manner , and I will not hear my brother depreciate in silence ! ' ' you brother be wondrous fond of you too , be not he ? ' observ , scornfully . ' he turn you adrift on the world with surprising alacrity . ' ' he be not aware of what I suffer , ' she reply . 'I do not tell he that . ' ' you have be tell he something , then : you have write , have you ? ' 'To say that I be marry , I do write - you see the note . ' ' and nothing since ? ' ' no . ' ' my young lady be look sadly the worse for she change of condition ,' I remark . ' be love come short in she case , obviously ; whose , I may guess ; but , perhaps , I should not say . ' 'I should guess it be she own , ' say . ' she degenerate into a mere slut ! she be tired of try to please I uncommonly early . you would hardly credit it , but the very morrow of we wedding she be weep to go home . however , she will suit this house so much the better for not be over nice , and I will take care she do not disgrace I by rambling abroad . ' ' well , sir , ' return I , ' I hope you will consider that . be accustom to be look after and wait on ; and that she have be bring up like a only daughter , whom every one be ready to serve . you must let she have a maid to keep thing tidy about she , and you must treat she kindly . whatever be you notion of , you can not doubt that she have a capacity for strong attachment , or she would not have abandon the elegancy , and comforts , and friend of she former home , to fix contentedly , in such a wilderness as this , with you . ' ' she abandon they under a delusion , ' he answer ; ' picture in I a hero of romance , and expect unlimited indulgence from my chivalrous devotion . I can hardly regard she in the light of a rational creature , so obstinately have she persist in form a fabulous notion of my character and act on the false impressions she cherish . but , at last , I think she begin to know I : I do not perceive the silly smile and grimace that provoke I at first ; and the senseless incapability of discerning that I be in earnest when I give she my opinion of she infatuation and herself . it be a marvellous effort of perspicacity to discover that I do not love she . I believe , at one time , no lesson could teach she that ! and yet it be poorly learnt ; for this morning she announce , as a piece of appal intelligence , that I have actually succeed in make she hate I ! a positive labour of Hercules , I assure you ! if it be achieve , I have cause to return thanks . can I trust you assertion , ? be you sure you hate I ? if I let you alone for half a day , will not you come sigh and wheedl to I again ? I daresay she would rather I have see all tenderness before you : it wound she vanity to have the truth expose . but I do not care who know that the passion be wholly on one side : and I never tell she a lie about it . she can not accuse I of show one bit of deceitful softness . the first thing she see I do , on come out of the , be to hang up she little dog ; and when she plead for it , the first word I uttere be a wish that I have the hanging of every be belong to she , except one : possibly she take that exception for herself . but no brutality disgust she : I suppose she have a innate admiration of it , if only she precious person be secure from injury ! now , be it not the depth of absurdity - of genuine idiotcy , for that pitiful , slavish , mean - minded brach to dream that I could love she ? tell you master , Nelly , that I never , in all my life , meet with such a abject thing as she be . she even disgrace the name of ; and I have sometimes relent , from pure lack of invention , in my experiment
experiment on what she could endure , and still creep shamefully cringe back ! but tell he , also , to set he fraternal and magisterial heart at ease : that I keep strictly within the limit of the law . I have avoid , up to this period , give she the slightest right to claim a separation ; and , what be more , she would thank nobody for divide we . if she desire to go , she might : the nuisance of she presence outweigh the gratification to be derive from torment she ! ' ' , ' say I , ' this be the talk of a madman ; you wife , most likely , be convince you be mad ; and , for that reason , she have borne with you hitherto : but now that you say she may go , she will doubtless avail herself of the permission . you be not so bewitched , ma 'am , be you , as to remain with he of you own accord ? ' ' take care , ! ' answer , she eye sparkl irefully ; there be no misdoubting by they expression the full success of she partner 's endeavour to make himself detest . ' do not put faith in a single word he speak . he be a lie fiend ! a monster , and not a human being ! I have be tell I might leave he before ; and I have make the attempt , but I dare not repeat it ! only , , promise you will not mention a syllable of he infamous conversation to my brother or Catherine . whatever he may pretend , he wish to provoke to desperation : he say he have marry I on purpose to obtain power over he ; and he sha ' not obtain it - I will die first ! I just hope , I pray , that he may forget he diabolical prudence and kill I ! the single pleasure I can imagine be to die , or to see he dead ! ' ' there - that will do for the present ! ' say . ' if you be call upon in a court of law , you will remember she language , Nelly ! and take a good look at that countenance : she be near the point which would suit I . no ; you be not fit to be you own guardian , , now ; and I , be you legal protector , must retain you in my custody , however distasteful the obligation may be . go up - stair ; I have something to say to in private . that be not the way : up - stair , I tell you ! why , this be the road upstairs , child ! ' he seize , and thrust she from the room ; and return muttering - 'I have no pity ! I have no pity ! the more the worm writhe , the more I yearn to crush out they entrail ! it be a moral teething ; and I grind with greater energy in proportion to the increase of pain . ' ' do you understand what the word pity mean ? ' I say , haste to resume my bonnet . ' do you ever feel a touch of it in you life ? ' ' put that down ! ' he interrupt , perceive my intention to depart . ' you be not go yet . come here now , Nelly : I must either persuade or compel you to aid I in fulfil my determination to see , and that without delay . I swear that I meditate no harm : I do not desire to cause any disturbance , or to exasperate or insult ; I only wish to hear from herself how she be , and why she have be ill ; and to ask if anything that I could do would be of use to she . last night I be in the gare six hour , and I will return there to - night ; and every night I will haunt the place , and every day , till I find a opportunity of entering . if meet I , I shall not hesitate to knock he down , and give he enough to insure he quiescence while I stay . if he servant oppose I , I shall threaten they off with these pistol . but would not it be better to prevent my come in contact with they , or they master ? and you could do it so easily . I would warn you when I come , and then you might let I in unobserved , as soon as she be alone , and watch till I depart , you conscience quite calm : you would be hinder mischief . ' I protest against play that treacherous part in my employer 's house : and , besides , I urge the cruelty and selfishness of he destroy 's tranquillity for he satisfaction . ' the commonest occurrence startle she painfully ,' I say . ' she be all nerf , and she could not bear the surprise , I be positive . do not persist , sir ! or else I shall be oblige to inform my master of you design ; and he will take measure to secure he house and its inmate from any such unwarrantable intrusion ! ' ' in that case I will take measure to secure you , woman ! ' exclaim ; ' you shall not leave till to - morrow morning . it be a foolish story to assert that could not bear to see I ; and as to surprise she , I do not desire it : you must prepare she - ask she if I
I may come . you say she never mention my name , and that I be never mention to she . to whom should she mention I if I be a forbidden topic in the house ? she think you be all spy for she husband . oh , I have no doubt she be in hell among you ! I guess by she silence , as much as anything , what she feel . you say she be often restless , and anxious - look : be that a proof of tranquillity ? you talk of she mind be unsettled . how the could it be otherwise in she frightful isolation ? and that insipid , paltry creature attend she from and ! from PITY and Charity ! he might as well plant a oak in a flower - pot , and expect it to thrive , as imagine he can restore she to vigour in the soil of he shallow care ? let we settle it at once : will you stay here , and be I to fight my way to Catherine over and he footman ? or will you be my friend , as you have be hitherto , and do what I request ? decide ! because there be no reason for my linger another minute , if you persist in you stubborn ill - nature ! ' well , , I argue and complain , and flatly refuse he fifty time ; but in the long run he force I to a agreement . I engage to carry a letter from he to my mistress ; and should she consent , I promise to let he have intelligence of 's next absence from home , when he might come , and get in as he be able : I would not be there , and my fellow - servants should be equally out of the way . be it right or wrong ? I fear it be wrong , though expedient . I think I prevent another explosion by my compliance ; and I think , too , it might create a favourable crisis in 's mental illness : and then I remember 's stern rebuke of my carry tale ; and I try to smooth away all disquietude on the subject , by affirming , with frequent iteration , that that betrayal of trust , if it merit so harsh a appellation , should be the last . Notwithstand , my journey homeward be sadder than my journey thither ; and many misgiving I have , ere I could prevail on myself to put the missive into 's hand . but here be ; I will go down , and tell he how much better you be . my history be Dree , as we say , and will serve to while away another morning . , and dreary ! I reflect as the good woman descende to receive the doctor : and not exactly of the kind which I should have choose to amuse I . but never mind ! I will extract wholesome medicines from 's bitter herb ; and firstly , let I beware of the fascination that lurk in 's brilliant eye . I should be in a curious take if I surrender my heart to that young person , and the daughter turn out a second edition of the mother . week over - and I be so many day nearer health , and spring ! I have now hear all my neighbour 's history , at different sitting , as the housekeeper could spare time from more important occupations . I will continue it in she own word , only a little condense . she be , on the whole , a very fair narrator , and I do not think I could improve she style . in the evening , she say , the evening of my visit to the , I know , as well as if I see he , that be about the place ; and I shunn go out , because I still carry he letter in my pocket , and do not want to be threaten or tease any more . I have make up my mind not to give it till my master go somewhere , as I could not guess how it be receipt would affect . the consequence be , that it do not reach she before the lapse of three day . the fourth be , and I bring it into she room after the family be go to church . there be a manservant leave to keep the house with I , and we generally make a practice of lock the door during the hour of service ; but on that occasion the weather be so warm and pleasant that I set they wide open , and , to fulfil my engagement , as I know who would be come , I tell my companion that the mistress wish very much for some orang , and he must run over to the village and get a few , to be pay for on the morrow . he depart , and I go up - stair . sit in a loose white dress , with a light shawl over she shoulders , in the recess of the open window , as usual . she thick , long hair have be partly remove at the beginning of she illness , and now she wear it simply comb in its natural tress over she temples and neck . she appearance be alter , as I have tell Heathcliff ; but when she be calm , there seem unearthly beauty in the change . the flash of she eyes have be succeed by a dreamy and melancholy softness ; they no longer give the impression of look at the around she : they appear always to gaze beyond , and far
far beyond - you would have say out of this world . then , the paleness of she face - it be haggard aspect have vanish as she recover flesh - and the peculiar expression arise from she mental state , though painfully suggestive of they cause , add to the touching interest which she awaken ; and - invariably to I , I know , and to any person who see she , I should think - refute more tangible proof of convalescence , and stampe she as one doom to decay . a book lay spread on the sill before she , and the scarcely perceptible wind flutter its leave at interval . I believe have lay it there : for she never endeavoure to divert herself with reading , or occupation of any kind , and he would spend many a hour in try to entice she attention to some subject which have formerly be she amusement . she be conscious of he aim , and in she better mood endure he effort placidly , only show they uselessness by now and then suppresse a weary sigh , and check he at last with the saddest of smile and kiss . at other time , she would turn petulantly away , and hide she face in she hand , or even push he off angrily ; and then he take care to let she alone , for he be certain of do no good . chapel bell be still ring ; and the full , mellow flow of the beck in the valley come soothingly on the ear . it be a sweet substitute for the yet absent murmur of the summer foliage , which drown that music about the when the tree be in leaf . at it always sound on quiet day follow a great thaw or a season of steady rain . and of be think as she listen : that be , if she think or listen at all ; but she have the vague , distant look I mention before , which express no recognition of material thing either by ear or eye . ' there be a letter for you , ,' I say , gently insert it in one hand that rest on she knee . ' you must read it immediately , because it want a answer . shall I break the seal ? ' ' yes , ' she answer , without alte the direction of she eye . I open it - it be very short . ' now ,' I continue , ' read it . ' she draw away she hand , and let it fall . I replace it in she lap , and stand wait till it should please she to glance down ; but that movement be so long delay that at last I resume - ' must I read it , ? it be from . ' there be a start and a trouble gleam of recollection , and a struggle to arrange she idea . she lift the letter , and seem to peruse it ; and when she come to the signature she sigh : yet still I find she have not gather its import , for , upon my desiring to hear she reply , she merely point to the name , and gaze at I with mournful and question eagerness . ' well , he wish to see you , ' say I , guess she need of a interpreter . 'he be in the garden by this time , and impatient to know what answer I shall bring . ' as I speak , I observe a large dog lie on the sunny grass beneath raise it be ears as if about to bark , and then smooth they back , announce , by a wag of the tail , that some one approach whom it do not consider a stranger . bend forward , and listen breathlessly . the minute after a step traverse the hall ; the open house be too tempting for to resist walk in : most likely he suppose that I be inclin to shirk my promise , and so resolve to trust to he own audacity . with straine gaze towards the entrance of she chamber . he do not hit the right room directly : she motion I to admit he , but he find it out ere I could reach the door , and in a stride or two be at she side , and have she grasp in he arm . he neither speak nor loose he hold for some five minute , during which period he bestow more kiss than ever he give in he life before , I daresay : but then my mistress have kiss he first , and I plainly see that he could hardly bear , for downright agony , to look into she face ! the same conviction have stricke he as I , from the instant he beheld she , that there be no prospect of ultimate recovery there - she be fate , sure to die . 'Oh , ! oh , my life ! how can I bear it ? ' be the first sentence he uttere , in a tone that do not seek to disguise he despair . and now he star at she so earnestly that I think the very intensity of he gaze would bring tear into he eye ; but they burn with anguish : they do not melt . ' what now ? ' say , lean back , and return he look with a suddenly clouded brow : she humwe be a mere vane for constantly varie caprice . ' you and have break my heart , ! and you both come to bewail the deed to I , as if you be the people to be pitie ! I shall not
not pity you , not I . you have kill I - and thriven on it , I think . how strong you be ! how many year do you mean to live after I be gone ? ' have knelt on one knee to embrace she ; he attempt to rise , but she seize he hair , and keep he down . 'I wish I could hold you , ' she continue , bitterly , ' till we be both dead ! I should not care what you suffer . I care nothing for you suffering . why should not you suffer ? I do ! will you forget I ? will you be happy when I be in the earth ? will you say twenty year hence , " that be the grave of ? I love she long ago , and be wretch to lose she ; but it be past . I have love many other since : my child be dearer to I than she be ; and , at death , I shall not rejoice that I be go to she : I shall be sorry that I must leave they ! " will you say so , ? ' ' do not torture I till I be as mad as yourself , ' cry he , wrench he head free , and grind he tooth . the two , to a cool spectator , make a strange and fearful picture . well might deem that heaven would be a land of exile to she , unless with she mortal body she cast away she moral character also . she present countenance have a wild vindictiveness in its white cheek , and a bloodless lip and scintillat eye ; and she retain in she close finger a portion of the lock she have be grasp . as to she companion , while raise himself with one hand , he have take she arm with the other ; and so inadequate be he stock of gentleness to the requirement of she condition , that on he letting go I see four distinct impression leave blue in the colourless skin . ' be you possess with a devil ,' he pursue , savagely , 'to talk in that manner to I when you be die ? do you reflect that all those word will be brand in my memory , and eat deeper eternally after you have leave I ? you know you lie to say I have kill you : and , , you know that I could as soon forget you as my existence ! be it not sufficient for you infernal selfishness , that while you be at peace I shall writhe in the torment of hell ? ' 'I shall not be at peace , ' moan , recall to a sense of physical weakness by the violent , unequal throbbing of she heart , which beat visibly and audibly under this excess of agitation . she say nothing further till the paroxysm be over ; then she continue , more kindly - ' I be not wish you greater torment than I have , . I only wish we never to be part : and should a word of mine distress you hereafter , think I feel the same distress underground , and for my own sake , forgive I ! come here and kneel down again ! you never harm I in you life . Nay , if you nurse anger , that will be worse to remember than my harsh word ! will not you come here again ? do ! ' go to the back of she chair , and leant over , but not so far as to let she see he face , which be livid with emotion . she bend round to look at he ; he would not permit it : turn abruptly , he walk to the fireplace , where he stand , silent , with he back towards we . 's glance follow he suspiciously : every movement wake a new sentiment in she . after a pause and a prolonge gaze , she resume ; address I in accent of indignant disappointment :- 'Oh , you see , Nelly , he would not relent a moment to keep I out of the grave . that be how I be love ! well , never mind . that be not my Heathcliff . I shall love mine yet ; and take he with I : he be in my soul . and , ' add she musingly , ' the thing that irk I most be this shatte prison , after all . I be tired of be enclose here . I be weary to escape into that glorious world , and to be always there : not see it dimly through tear , and year for it through the wall of a ach heart : but really with it , and in it . Nelly , you think you be better and more fortunate than I ; in full health and strength : you be sorry for I - very soon that will be alte . I shall be sorry for you . I shall be incomparably beyond and above you all . I wonder he will not be near I ! ' she go on to herself . 'I think he wish it . Heathcliff , dear ! you should not be sull now . do come to I , . ' in she eagerness she rise and support herself on the arm of the chair . at that earnest appeal he turn to she , look absolutely desperate . he eye , wide and wet , at last flash fiercely on she ; he breast heav convulsively . a instant they hold asunder , and then how they meet I hardly see , but make a spring , and
and he catch she , and they be lock in a embrace from which I think my mistress would never be release alive : in fact , to my eye , she see directly insensible . he fling himself into the nearest seat , and on my approaching hurriedly to ascertain if she have faint , he gnash at I , and foam like a mad dog , and gather she to he with greedy jealousy . I do not feel as if I be in the company of a creature of my own species : it appear that he would not understand , though I speak to he ; so I stand off , and hold my tongue , in great perplexity . a movement of 's relieve I a little presently : she put up she hand to clasp he neck , and bring she cheek to he as he hold she ; while he , in return , cover she with frantic caress , say wildly - ' you teach I now how cruel you have be - cruel and false . why do you despise I ? why do you betray you own heart , ? I have not one word of comfort . you deserve this . you have kill yourself . yes , you may kiss I , and cry ; and wr out my kiss and tear : they will blight you - they will damn you . you love I - then what Right have you to leave I ? what right - answer I - for the poor fancy you feel for ? because misery and degradation , and death , and nothing that or could inflict would have part we , you , of you own will , do it . I have not break you heart - you have break it ; and in break it , you have break mine . so much the worse for I that I be strong . do I want to live ? what kind of live will it be when you - oh , ! would you like to live with you soul in the grave ? ' ' let I alone . let I alone , ' sob . ' if I have do wrong , I be die for it . it be enough ! you leave I too : but I will not upbraid you ! I forgive you . forgive I ! ' ' it be hard to forgive , and to look at those eye , and feel those waste hand , ' he answer . ' kiss I again ; and do not let I see you eye ! I forgive what you have do to I . I love my murderer - but yours ! how can I ? ' they be silent - they face hide against each other , and wash by each other 's tear . at least , I suppose the weeping be on both side ; as it see could weep on a great occasion like this . I grow very uncomfortable , meanwhile ; for the afternoon wear fast away , the man whom I have send off return from he errand , and I could distinguish , by the shine of the western sun up the valley , a concourse thicken outside chapel porch . ' service be over ,' I announce . ' my master will be here in half a hour . ' groane a curse , and strain closer : she never move . Ere long I perceive a group of the servants pass up the road towards the kitchen wing . be not far behind ; he open the gate himself and saunter slowly up , probably enjoy the lovely afternoon that breathe as soft as summer . ' now he be here ,' I exclaim . ' for heaven 's sake , hurry down ! you will not meet any one on the front stair . do be quick ; and stay among the tree till he be fairly in . ' 'I must go , , ' say , seek to extricate himself from he companion 's arm . ' but if I live , I will see you again before you be asleep . I will not stray five yard from you window . ' ' you must not go ! ' she answer , hold he as firmly as she strength allow . ' you shall not , I tell you . ' ' for one hour ,' he plead earnestly . ' not for one minute , ' she reply . - will be up immediately , ' persist the alarmed intruder . he would have risen , and unfix she finger by the act - she cling fast , gas : there be mad resolution in she face . ' no ! ' she shriek . 'Oh , do not , do not go . it be the last time ! will not hurt we . Heathcliff , I shall die ! I shall die ! ' ' the fool ! there he be , ' cry Heathcliff , sink back into he seat . ' Hush , my darling ! Hush , hush , ! I will stay . if he shot I so , I would expire with a blessing on my lip . ' and there they be fast again . I hear my master mount the stair - the cold sweat run from my forehead : I be horrify . ' be you go to listen to she raving ? ' I say , passionately . ' she do not know what she say . will you ruin she , because she have not wit to help herself ? get up ! you could be free instantly . that be the most diabolical deed that ever you do . we be all do for -
- master , mistress , and servant . ' I wring my hand , and cry out ; and hasten he step at the noise . in the midst of my agitation , I be sincerely glad to observe that 's arm have fall relaxed , and she head hang down . ' she have faint , or dead ,' I think : 'so much the better . far better that she should be dead , than linger a burden and a misery - maker to all about she . ' spring to he unbidden guest , blanch with astonishment and rage . what he mean to do I can not tell ; however , the other stop all demonstration , at once , by place the lifeless - look form in he arm . ' look there ! ' he say . ' unless you be a fiend , help she first - then you shall speak to I ! ' he walk into the parlour , and sit down . summon I , and with great difficulty , and after resort to many mean , we manage to restore she to sensation ; but she be all bewilder ; she sigh , and moan , and know nobody . , in he anxiety for she , forget she hate friend . I do not . I go , at the earliest opportunity , and besotch he to depart ; affirme that be better , and he should hear from I in the morning how she pass the night . 'I shall not refuse to go out of door ,' he answer ; ' but I shall stay in the garden : and , Nelly , mind you keep you word to -morrow . I shall be under those larch - tree . mind ! or I pay another visit , whether be in or not . ' he send a rapid glance through the half - open door of the chamber , and , ascertain that what I state be apparently true , deliver the house of he luckless presence . about twelve o'clock that night be bear the Catherine you see at : a puny , seven - month ' child ; and two hour after the mother die , have never recover sufficient consciousness to miss , or know . the latter 's distraction at he bereavement be a subject too painful to be dwelt on ; its after-effect show how deep the sorrow sunk . a great addition , in my eyes , be he be leave without a heir . I bemoan that , as I gaze on the feeble orphan ; and I mentally abuse old for ( what be only natural partiality ) the secure he estate to he own daughter , instead of he son 's . a unwelcomed infant it be , poor thing ! it might have wail out of life , and nobody care a morsel , during those first hour of existence . we redeem the neglect afterwards ; but its begin be as friendless as its end be likely to be . next morning - bright and cheerful out of door - stole soften in through the blind of the silent room , and suffuse the couch and its occupant with a mellow , tender glow . have he head laid on the pillow , and he eye shut . he young and fair feature be almost as deathlike as those of the form beside he , and almost as fix : but he be the hush of exhausted anguish , and hers of perfect peace . she brow smooth , she lid close , she lip wear the expression of a smile ; no angel in heaven could be more beautiful than she appear . and I partake of the infinite calm in which she lay : my mind be never in a holier frame than while I gaze on that untroubled image of divine rest . I instinctively echo the word she have utter a few hour before : ' Incomparably beyond and above we all ! whether still on earth or now in heaven , she spirit be at home with ! ' I do not know if it be a peculiarity in I , but I be seldom otherwise than happy while watch in the chamber of death , should no frenzied or despairing mourner share the duty with I . I see a repose that neither earth nor hell can break , and I feel a assurance of the endless and shadowless hereafter - the Eternity they have enter - where life be boundless in its duration , and live in its sympathy , and joy in its fulness . I notice on that occasion how much selfishness there be even in a love like 's , when he so regret 's bless release ! to be sure , one might have doubt , after the wayward and impatient existence she have lead , whether she merit a haven of peace at last . one might doubt in seasons of cold reflection ; but not then , in the presence of she corpse . it assert its own tranquillity , which seem a pledge of equal quiet to its former inhabitant . do you believe such people be happy in the other world , sir ? I would give a great deal to know . I decline answer 's question , which strike I as something heterodox . she proceed : Retrace the course of , I fear we have no right to think she be ; but we will leave she with she maker . the master look asleep , and I venture soon after sunrise to quit the room and steal out to the pure refresh air . the servant think I go to shake off the drowsiness of my protract watch ; in reality , my chief motive be
be see . if he have remain among the larch all night , he would have hear nothing of the stir at the Grange ; unless , perhaps , he might catch the gallop of the messenger go to . if he have come nearer , he would probably be aware , from the light flitt to and fro , and the opening and shutting of the outer door , that all be not right withing . I wish , yet fear , to find he . I feel the terrible news must be tell , and I long to get it over ; but how to do it I do not know . he be there - at least , a few yard further in the park ; lean against a old ash - tree , he hat off , and he hair soak with the dew that have gather on the bud branch , and fall pattering round he . he have be stand a long time in that position , for I see a pair of ousel passing and repasse scarcely three foot from he , busy in build they nest , and regard he proximity no more than that of a piece of timber . they flow off at my approach , and he raise he eye and spoke :- ' she be dead ! ' he say ; 'I have not wait for you to learn that . put you handkerchief away - do not snivel before I . damn you all ! she want none of you tear ! ' I be weep as much for he as she : we do sometimes pity creature that have none of the feeling either for themselves or other . when I first look into he face , I perceive that he have get intelligence of the catastrophe ; and a foolish notion strike I that he heart be quell and he pray , because he lip move and he gaze be bent on the ground . ' yes , she be dead ! ' I answer , check my sob and dry my cheek . ' go to heaven , I hope ; where we may , every one , join she , if we take due warning and leave we evil way to follow good ! ' ' do she take due warning , then ? ' ask , attempt a sneer . ' do she die like a saint ? come , give I a true history of the event . how do - ? ' he endeavoure to pronounce the name , but could not manage it ; and compresse he mouth he hold a silent combat with he inward agony , defy , meanwhile , my sympathy with a unflinching , ferocious stare . ' how do she die ? ' he resume , at last - fain , notwithstand he hardihood , to have a support behind he ; for , after the struggle , he tremble , in spite of himself , to he very finger - end . ' poor wretch ! ' I think ; ' you have a heart and nerve the same as you brother man ! why should you be anxious to conceal they ? you pride can not blind ! you tempt he to wr they , till he force a cry of humiliation . ' ' quietly as a lamb ! ' I answer , aloud . ' she draw a sigh , and stretch herself , like a child revive , and sink again to sleep ; and five minute after I feel one little pulse at she heart , and nothing more ! ' ' and - do she ever mention I ? ' he ask , hesitat , as if he dread the answer to he question would introduce detail that he could not bear to hear . ' she sense never return : she recognise nobody from the time you leave she ,' I say . ' she lie with a sweet smile on she face ; and she latest idea wander back to pleasant early day . she life close in a gentle dream - may she wake as kindly in the other world ! ' ' may she wake in torment ! ' he cry , with frightful vehemence , stamp he foot , and groan in a sudden paroxysm of ungovernable passion . ' why , she be a liar to the end ! where be she ? not there - not in heaven - not perish - where ? oh ! you say you car nothing for my suffering ! and I pray one prayer - I repeat it till my tongue stiffen - , may you not rest as long as I be liive ; you say I kill you - haunt I , then ! the murder do haunt they murderer , I believe . I know that ghost have wander on earth . be with I always - take any form - drive I mad ! only do not leave I in this abyss , where I can not find you ! oh , ! it be unutterable ! I can not live without my life ! I can not live without my soul ! ' he dash he head against the knot trunk ; and , lift up he eye , how , not like a man , but like a savage beast be goad to death with knife and spear . I observ several splash of blood about the bark of the tree , and he hand and forehead be both stain ; probably the scene I witness be a repetition of other act during the night . it hardly move my compassion - it appal I : still , I feel reluctant to quit he so . but the moment he recollect himself enough to notice I watch , he
he thunder a command for I to go , and I obey . he be beyond my skill to quiet or conseal ! 's funeral be appoint to take place on the follow she decease ; and till then she coffin remain uncovered , and strew with flower and scent leave , in the great drawing - room . spend he day and night there , a sleepless guardian ; and - a circumstance conceal from all but I - spend he nights , at least , outside , equally a stranger to repose . I hold no communication with he : still , I be conscious of he design to enter , if he could ; and on the , a little after dark , when my master , from sheer fatigue , have be compelle to retire a couple of hour , I go and open one of the window ; move by he perseverance to give he a chance of bestow on the faded image of he idol one final adieu . he do not omit to avail himself of the opportunity , cautiously and briefly ; too cautiously to betray he presence by the slightest noise . indeed , I should not have discover that he have be there , except for the disarrangement of the drapery about the corpse 's face , and for observe on the floor a curl of light hair , fasten with a silver thread ; which , on examination , I ascertain to have be take from a locket hang round 's neck . have open the trinket and cast out its contents , replace they by a black lock of he own . I twiste the two , and enclose they together . be , of course , invite to attend the remains of he sister to the grave ; he send no excuse , but he never come ; so that , besides she husband , the mourner be wholly compose of tenant and servants . be not ask . the place of 's interment , to the surprise of the villager , be neither in the chapel under the carve monument of the Linton , nor yet by the tomb of she own relation , outside . it be dug on a green slope in a corner of the kirk - yard , where the wall be so low that heath and bilberry - plant have climb over it from the moor ; and peat -mould almost bury it . she husband lie in the same spot now ; and they have each a simple headstone above , and a plain grey block at they foot , to mark the grave . make the last of we fine day for a month . in the evening the weather break : the wind shift from south to north - east , and bring rain first , and then sleet and snow . on the morrow one could hardly imagine that there have be three week of summer : the primrose and crocuse be hide under wintry drift ; the lark be silent , the young leave of the early tree smite and blacken . and dreary , and chill , and dismal , that morrow do creep over ! my master keep he room ; I take possession of the lonely parlour , convert it into a nursery : and there I be , sit with the moaning doll of a child laid on my knee ; rock it to and fro , and watch , meanwhile , the still drive flake build up the uncurtained window , when the door open , and some person enter , out of breath and laugh ! my anger be greater than my astonishment for a minute . I suppose it one of the maid , and I cry - ' have do ! how dare you show you giddiness here ; what would say if he hear you ? ' ' excuse I ! ' answer a familiar voice ; ' but I know be in bed , and I can not stop myself . ' with that the speaker come forward to the fire , pante and hold she hand to she side . 'I have run the whole way from ! ' she continue , after a pause ; ' except where I have fly . I could not count the number of fall I have have . oh , I be ach all over ! do not be alarm ! there shall be a explanation as soon as I can give it ; only just have the goodness to step out and order the carriage to take I on to , and tell a servant to seek up a few clothes in my wardrobe . ' the intruder be . she certainly see in no laughing predicament : she hair stream on she shoulders , dripp with snow and water ; she be dress in the girlish dress she commonly wore , befitt she age more than she position : a low frock with short sleeve , and nothing on either head or neck . the frock be of light silk , and cling to she with wet , and she foot be protect merely by thin slipper ; add to this a deep cut under one ear , which only the cold prevent from bleed profusely , a white face scratch and bruise , and a frame hardly able to support itself through fatigue ; and you may fancy my first fright be not much allay when I have have leisure to examine she . ' my dear young lady ,' I exclaim , ' I will stir nowhere , and hear nothing , till you have remove every article of you clothes , and put on dry thing ; and certainly you shall not go to to - night , so it be needless to order
order the carriage . ' ' certainly I shall , ' she say ; ' walk or ride : yet I have no objection to dress myself decently . and - ah , see how it flow down my neck now ! the fire do make it smart . ' she insist on my fulfil she direction , before she would let I touch she ; and not till after the coachman have be instruct to get ready , and a maid set to pack up some necessary attire , do I obtain she consent for bind the wound and help to change she garment . ' now , , ' she say , when my task be finish and she be seat in a easy - chair on the hearth , with a cup of tea before she , ' you sit down opposite I , and put poor Catherine 's baby away : I do not like to see it ! you must not think I care little for , because I behave so foolishly on enter : I have cry , too , bitterly - yes , more than any one else have reason to cry . we parte unreconciled , you remember , and I sha ' not forgive myself . but , for all that , I be not go to sympathise with he - the brute beast ! oh , give I the poker ! this be the last thing of he I have about I :' she slipp the gold ring from she third finger , and throw it on the floor . 'I will smash it ! ' she continue , strike it with childish spite , ' and then I will burn it ! ' and she take and drop the misused article among the coal . ' there ! he shall buy another , if he get I back again . he would be capable of come to seek I , to tease . I dare not stay , lest that notion should possess he wicked head ! and besides , have not be kind , have he ? and I will not come sue for he assistance ; nor will I bring he into more trouble . compelle I to seek shelter here ; though , if I have not learn he be out of the way , I would have halt at the kitchen , wash my face , warm myself , get you to bring what I want , and depart again to anywhere out of the reach of my accursed - of that incarnate goblin ! ah , he be in such a fury ! if he have catch I ! it be a pity Earnshaw be not he match in strength : I would not have run till I would see he all but demolish , have be able to do it ! ' ' well , do not talk so fast , ! ' I interrupt ; ' you will disorder the handkerchief I have tie round you face , and make the cut bleed again . drink you tea , and take breath , and give over laugh : laughter be sadly out of place under this roof , and in you condition ! ' 'An undeniable truth , ' she reply . ' listen to that child ! it maintain a constant wail - send it out of my hearing for a hour ; I sha ' not stay any longer . ' I ring the bell , and commit it to a servant 's care ; and then I inquire what have urge she to escape from in such a unlikely plight , and where she mean to go , as she refuse remaine with we . 'I ink , and I wish to remain , ' answer she , 'to cheer and take care of the baby , for two thing , and because the Grange be my right home . but I tell you he would not let I ! do you think he could bear to see I grow fat and merry - could bear to think that we be tranquil , and not resolve on poiso we comfort ? now , I have the satisfaction of be sure that he detest I , to the point of its annoy he seriously to have I within ear - shot or eyesight : I notice , when I enter he presence , the muscle of he countenance be involuntarily distort into a expression of hatred ; partly arise from he knowledge of the good cause I have to feel that sentiment for he , and partly from original aversion . it be strong enough to make I feel pretty certain that he would not chase I over , suppose I contrive a clear escape ; and therefore I must get quite away . I have recover from my first desire to be kill by he : I would rather he would kill himself ! he have extinguish my love effectually , and so I be at my ease . I can recollect yet how I love he ; and can dimly imagine that I could still be love he , if - no , no ! even if he have do on I , the devilish nature would have reveal its existence somehow . have a awfully perverted taste to esteem he so dearly , know he so well . Monster ! would that he could be blot out of creation , and out of my memory ! ' ' Hush , hush ! he be a human being ,' I say . ' be more charitable : there be worse man than he be yet ! ' 'he be not a human being , ' she retort ; 'and he have no claim on my charity . I give he my heart , and he take and pinch it
it to death , and fling it back to I . people feel with they heart , : and since he have destroy mine , I have not power to feel for he : and I would not , though he groan from this to he die day , and weep tear of blood for ! no , indeed , indeed , I would not ! ' and here begin to cry ; but , immediately dash the water from she lash , she recommence . ' you ask , what have drive I to flight at last ? I be compelle to attempt it , because I have succeed in rouse he rage a pitch above he malignity . pull out the nerve with red hot pincer require more coolness than knock on the head . he be work up to forget the fiendish prudence he boast of , and proceed to murderous violence . I experience pleasure in be able to exasperate he : the sense of pleasure wake my instinct of self - preservation , so I fairly break free ; and if ever I come into he hand again he be welcome to a signal revenge . ' yesterday , you know , should have be at the funeral . he keep himself sober for the purpose - tolerably sober : not go to be mad at six o'clock and get up drunk at twelve . consequently , he rise , in suicidal low spirit , as fit for the church as for a dance ; and instead , he sit down by the fire and swallow gin or brandy by tumblerful . ' Heathcliff - I shudder to name he ! have be a stranger in the house from last till to - day . whether the angel have feed he , or he kin beneath , I can not tell ; but he have not eat a meal with we for nearly a week . he have just come home at dawn , and go up - stair to he chamber ; look himself in - as if anybody dreamt of covet he company ! there he have continue , pray like a : only the deity he implor be senseless dust and ash ; and , when address , be curiously confound with he own black father ! after conclude these precious orison - and they last generally till he grow hoarse and he voice be strangle in he throat - he would be off again ; always straight down to the ! I wonder do not send for a constable , and give he into custody ! for I , grieve as I be about , it be impossible to avoid regard this season of deliverance from degrading oppression as a holiday . 'I recovere spirit sufficient to bear 's eternal lecture without weeping , and to move up and down the house less with the foot of a frightened thief than formerly . you would not think that I should cry at anything could say ; but he and be detestable companion . I would rather sit with , and hear he awful talk , than with " t ' little maister " and he staunch supporter , that odious old man ! when be in , I be often oblige to seek the kitchen and they society , or starve among the damp uninhabited chamber ; when he be not , as be the case this week , I establish a table and chair at one corner of the house fire , and never mind how may occupy himself ; and he do not interfere with my arrangement . he be quieter now than he use to be , if no one provoke he : more sullen and depressed , and less furious . affirm he be sure he be a altered man : that the have touch he heart , and he be save " so as by fire . " I be puzzl to detect sign of the favourable change : but it be not my business . ' Yester - evening I sit in my nook read some old book till late on towards twelve . it seem so dismal to go up - stair , with the wild snow blow outside , and my thought continually revert to the kirk - yard and the new - make grave ! I da hardly lift my eye from the page before I , that melancholy scene so instantly usur its place . sit opposite , he head lean on he hand ; perhaps meditat on the same subject . he have cease drink at a point below irrationality , and have neither stir nor speak during two or three hour . there be no sound through the house but the moan wind , which shook the window every now and then , the faint crackling of the coal , and the click of my snuffer as I remove at interval the long wick of the candle . and be probably fast asleep in bed . it be very , very sad : and while I read I sigh , for it see as if all joy have vanish from the world , never to be restore . ' the doleful silence be break at length by the sound of the kitchen latch : Heathcliff have return from he watch earlier than usual ; owe , I suppose , to the sudden storm . that entrance be fasten , and we hear he come round to get in by the other . I rise with a irrepressible expression of what I feel on my lip , which induce my companion , who have be star towards the door , to turn and look at I . ' " I will keep he out five minute , " he exclaim . " you will not object ? " ' " no
no , you may keep he out the whole night for I , " I answer . " do ! put the key in the look , and draw the bolt . " ' Earnshaw accomplish this ere he guest reach the front ; he then come and bring he chair to the other side of my table , lean over it , and search in my eye for a sympathy with the burn hate that gleam from he : as he both look and feel like a assassin , he could not exactly find that ; but he discover enough to encourage he to speak . ' " you , and I , " he say , " have each a great debt to settle with the man out yonder ! if we be neither of we coward , we might combine to discharge it . be you as soave as you brother ? be you willing to endure to the last , and not once attempt a repayment ? " ' " I be weary of endure now , " I reply ; " and I would be glad of a retaliation that would not recoil on myself ; but treachery and violence be spear point at both end ; they wound those who resort to they worse than they enemy . " ' " Treachery and violence be a just return for treachery and violence ! " cry . " Mr . Heathcliff , I will ask you to do nothing ; but sit still and be dumb . tell I now , can you ? I be sure you would have as much pleasure as I in witnesse the conclusion of the fiend 's existence ; he will be you death unless you overreach he ; and he will be my ruin . the hellish villain ! he knock at the door as if he be master here already ! promise to hold you tongue , and before that clock strike - it want three minute of one - you be a free woman ! " ' he take the implement which I describe to you in my letter from he breast , and would have turn down the candle . I snatch it away , however , and seize he arm . ' " I will not hold my tongue ! " I say ; " you must not touch he . let the door remain shut , and be quiet ! " ' " no ! I have form my resolution , and by I will execute it ! " cry the desperate being . " I will do you a kindness in spite of yourself , and justice ! and you need not trouble you head to scree I ; be gone . nobody alive would regret I , or be asham , though I cut my throat this minute - and it be time to make a end ! " 'I might as well have struggle with a bear , or reaso with a lunatic . the only resource leave I be to run to a lattice and warn he intend victim of the fate which await he . ' " you would better seek shelter somewhere else to - night ! " I exclaim , in rather a triumphant tone . " have a mind to shoot you , if you persist in endeavouring to enter . " ' " you would better open the door , you - " he answer , address I by some elegant term that I do not care to repeat . ' " I shall not meddle in the matter , " I retort again . " come in and get shot , if you please . I have do my duty . " ' with that I shut the window and return to my place by the fire ; have too small a stock of hypocrisy at my command to pretend any anxiety for the danger that menace he . Earnshaw swore passionately at I : affirme that I love the villain yet ; and call I all sort of name for the base spirit I evince . and I , in my secret heart ( and conscience never reproach I ) , think what a bless it would be for he should put he out of misery ; and what a blessing for I should he send to he right abode ! as I sit nurse these reflection , the casement behind I be bang on to the floor by a blow from the latter individual , and he black countenance look blightingly through . the stanchion stand too close to suffer he shoulders to follow , and I smile , exult in my fancied security . he hair and clothes be whiten with snow , and he sharp cannibal tooth , reveal by cold and wrath , gleam through the dark . ' " Isabella , let I in , or I will make you repent ! " he " girn , " as call it . ' " I can not commit murder , " I reply . " stand sentinel with a knife and load pistol . " ' " let I in by the kitchen door , " he say . ' " will be there before I , " I answer : " and that be a poor love of yours that can not bear a shower of snow ! we be leave at peace in we bed as long as the summer moon shone , but the moment a blast of winter return , you must run for shelter ! Heathcliff , if I be you , I would go stretch myself over she grave and die like a faithful dog . the world be surely not worth live in now , be it ? you have distinctly impressed on I the idea that be the whole joy
joy of you life : I can not imagine how you think of survive she loss . " ' " he be there , be he ? " exclaim my companion , rush to the gap . " if I can get my arm out I can hit he ! " 'I be afraid , , you will set I down as really wick ; but you do not know all , so do not judge . I would not have aide or abet a attempt on even this life for anything . wish that he be dead , I must ; and therefore I be fearfully disappointed , and unnerve by terror for the consequence of my taunting speech , when he fling himself on 's weapon and wrench it from he grasp . ' the charge explode , and the knife , in spring back , close into its owner 's wrist . pull it away by main force , slit up the flesh as it pass on , and thrust it dripp into he pocket . he then take a stone , strike down the division between two window , and spring in . he adversary have fall senseless with excessive pain and the flow of blood , that gush from a artery or a large vein . the ruffian kick and trample on he , and dash he head repeatedly against the flag , hold I with one hand , meantime , to prevent I summon . he exert preterhuman self - denial in abstaining from finish he completely ; but get out of breath , he finally desiste , and drag the apparently inanimate body on to the settle . there he tore off the sleeve of 's coat , and bound up the wound with brutal roughness ; spitte and curse during the operation as energetically as he have kick before . be at liberty , I lose no time in seek the old servant ; who , have gather by degree the purport of my hasty tale , hurrie below , gas , as he descende the step two at once . ' " what be ther to do , now ? what be ther to do , now ? " ' " there be this to do , " thunder , " that you master 's mad ; and should he last another month , I will have he to a asylum . and how the do you come to fasten I out , you toothless hound ? do not stand muttering and mumbl there . come , I be not go to nurse he . wash that stuff away ; and mind the spark of you candle - it be more than half brandy ! " ' " and so ye have be murther on he ? " exclaim , lift he hand and eye in horror . " if iver I see a seeght loike this ! may the - " ' give he a push on to he knee in the middle of the blood , and fling a towel to he ; but instead of proceeding to dry it up , he join he hand and begin a prayer , which excit my laughter from its odd phraseology . I be in the condition of mind to be shocke at nothing : in fact , I be as reckless as some malefactor show themselves at the foot of the gallow . ' " oh , I forget you , " say the tyrant . " you shall do that . down with you . and you conspire with he against I , do you , viper ? there , that be work fin for you ! " ' he shook I till my tooth rattle , and pitch I beside , who steadily conclude he supplication , and then rise , vow he would set off for the directly . be a magistrate , and though he have fifty wife dead , he should inquire into this . he be so obstinate in he resolution , that deem it expedient to compel from my lip a recapitulation of what have take place ; stand over I , heaive with malevolence , as I reluctantly deliver the account in answer to he question . it require a great deal of labour to satisfy the old man that be not the aggressor ; especially with my hardly - wrung reply . however , soon convince he that he be alive still ; hasten to administer a dose of spirit , and by they succour he master presently regain motion and consciousness . Heathcliff , aware that he opponent be ignorant of the treatment receive while insensible , call he deliriously intoxicate ; and say he should not notice he atrocious conduct further , but advise he to get to bed . to my joy , he leave we , after give this judicious counsel , and stretch himself on the hearthstone . I depart to my own room , marvell that I have escape so easily . ' this morning , when I come down , about half a hour before noon , be sit by the fire , deadly sick ; he evil genius , almost as gaunt and ghastly , lean against the chimney . neither appear inclin to dine , and , have wait till all be cold on the table , I commence alone . nothing hinder I from eat heartily , and I experience a certain sense of satisfaction and superiority , as , at interval , I cast a look towards my silent companion , and feel the comfort of a quiet conscience within I . after I have do , I venture on the unusual liberty of draw near the fire , go round 's seat , and knee in the corner beside he . ' Heathcliff do not glance my way , and
and I gaze up , and contemplate he feature almost as confidently as if they have be turn to stone . he forehead , that I once think so manly , and that I now think so diabolical , be shade with a heavy cloud ; he basilisk eye be nearly quench by sleeplessness , and weeping , perhaps , for the lash be wet then : he lip devoid of they ferocious sneer , and seal in a expression of unspeakable sadness . have it be another , I would have cover my face in the presence of such grief . in this case , I be gratify ; and , ignoble as it seem to insult a fall enemy , I could not miss this chance of sticking in a dart : he weakness be the only time when I could taste the delight of pay wrong for wrong . ' ' Fie , fie , ! ' I interrupt . ' one might suppose you have never open a in you life . if afflict you enemy , surely that ought to suffice you . it be both mean and presumptuous to add you torture to he ! ' 'In general I will allow that it would be , , ' she continue ; ' but what misery lay on could content I , unless I have a hand in it ? I would rather he suffer less , if I might cause he suffering and he might know that I be the cause . oh , I owe he so much . on only one condition can I hope to forgive he . it be , if I may take a eye for a eye , a tooth for a tooth ; for every wrench of agony return a wrench : reduce he to my level . as he be the first to injure , make he the first to implore pardon ; and then - why then , , I might show you some generosity . but it be utterly impossible I can ever be revenge , and therefore I can not forgive he . want some water , and I hand he a glass , and ask he how he be . ' " not as ill as I wish , " he reply . " but leave out my arm , every inch of I be as sore as if I have be fight with a legion of imp ! " ' " yes , no wonder , " be my next remark . " Catherine use to boast that she stand between you and bodily harm : she mean that certain person would not hurt you for fear of offend she . it be well people do not really rise from they grave , or , last night , she might have witness a repulsive scene ! be not you bruise , and cut over you chest and shoulders ? " ' " I can not say , " he answer , " but what do you mean ? do he dare to strike I when I be down ? " ' " he trample on and kick you , and dash you on the ground , " I whisper . " and he mouth watere to tear you with he tooth ; because he be only half man : not so much , and the rest fiend . " ' look up , like I , to the countenance of we mutual foe ; who , absorb in he anguish , seem insensible to anything around he : the longer he stand , the plainer he reflection reveal they blackness through he feature . ' " oh , if would but give I strength to strangle he in my last agony , I would go to hell with joy , " groan the impatient man , writhing to rise , and sink back in despair , convince of he inadequacy for the struggle . ' " Nay , it be enough that he have murder one of you , " I observe aloud . " at the Grange , every one know you sister would have be live now have it not be for . after all , it be preferable to be hate than love by he . when I recollect how happy we be - how happy Catherine be before he come - I be fit to curse the day . " ' most likely , notice more the truth of what be say , than the spirit of the person who say it . he attention be rouse , I see , for he eye rain down tear among the ash , and he draw he breath in suffocating sigh . I star full at he , and laugh scornfully . the clouded window of hell flash a moment towards I ; the fiend which usually look out , however , be so dim and drown that I do not fear to hazard another sound of derision . ' " get up , and bego out of my sight , " say the mourner . 'I guess he utter those word , at least , though he voice be hardly intelligible . ' " I beg you pardon , " I reply . " but I love too ; and she brother require attendance , which , for she sake , I shall supply . now , that she be dead , I see she in : have exactly she eye , if you have not try to gouge they out , and make they black and red ; and she - " ' " get up , wretch idiot , before I stamp you to death ! " he cry , make a movement that cause I to make one also . ' " but then , " I continue , hold myself ready to flee , "
" if poor have trust you , and assume the ridiculous , contemptible , degrad title of . , she would soon have present a similar picture ! she would not have borne you abominable behaviour quietly : she detestation and disgust must have find . " ' the back of the settle and 's person interpose between I and he ; so instead of endeavouring to reach I , he snatch a dinner - knife from the table and fling it at my head . it strike beneath my ear , and stop the sentence I be utter ; but , pull it out , I spring to the door and deliver another ; which I hope go a little deeper than he missile . the last glimpse I catch of he be a furious rush on he part , check by the embrace of he host ; and both fell lock together on the hearth . in my flight through the kitchen I bid speed to he master ; I knock over , who be hang a litter of puppy from a chair - back in the doorway ; and , bless as a soul escape from purgatory , I bounde , leape , and fly down the steep road ; then , quit its windings , shot direct across the moor , roll over bank , and wad through marsh : precipitat myself , in fact , towards the beacon - light of the . and far rather would I be condemne to a perpetual dwelling in the infernal region than , even for one night , abide beneath the roof of again . ' cease speak , and take a drink of tea ; then she rise , and bid I put on she bonnet , and a great shawl I have bring , and turn a deaf ear to my entreaty for she to remain another hour , she step on to a chair , kiss 's and 's portrait , bestow a similar salute on I , and descende to the carriage , accompany by , who yelp wild with joy at recovere she mistress . she be drive away , never to revisit this neighbourhood : but a regular correspondence be establish between she and my master when thing be more settled . I believe she new abode be in the south , near ; there she have a son bear a few month subsequent to she escape . he be christen , and , from the first , she report he to be a ailing , peevish creature . , meet I one day in the village , inquire where she liv . I refuse to tell . he remarke that it be not of any moment , only she must beware of come to she brother : she should not be with he , if he have to keep she himself . though I would give no information , he discover , through some of the other servants , both she place of residence and the existence of the child . still , he do not molest she : for which forbearance she might thank he aversion , I suppose . he often ask about the infant , when he see I ; and on hear its name , smile grimly , and observe : ' they wish I to hate it too , do they ? ' 'I do not think they wish you to know anything about it ,' I answer . ' but I will have it ,' he say , ' when I want it . they may reckon on that ! ' fortunately its mother die before the time arrive ; some thirteen year after the decease of , when be twelve , or a little more . on the day succeed 's unexpected visit I have no opportunity of speaking to my master : he shunn conversation , and be fit for discuss nothing . when I could get he to listen , I see it pleas he that he sister have leave she husband ; whom he abhor with a intensity which the mildness of he nature would scarcely seem to allow . so deep and sensitive be he aversion , that he refrain from go anywhere where he be likely to see or hear of . , and that together , transform he into a complete hermit : he throw up he office of magistrate , cease even to attend church , avoid the village on all occasion , and spend a life of entire seclusion within the limit of he park and grounds ; only vari by solitary ramble on the moor , and visit to the grave of he wife , mostly at evening , or early morning before other wanderer be abroad . but he be too good to be thoroughly unhappy long . he do not pray for 's soul to haunt he . bring resignation , and a melancholy sweeter than common joy . he recall she memory with ardent , tender love , and hopeful aspire to the better world ; where he doubt not she be gone . and he have earthly consolation and affection also . for a few day , I say , he seem regardless of the puny successor to the depart : that coldness melt as fast as snow in , and ere the tiny thing could stammer a word or totter a step it wield a despot 's sceptre in he heart . it be name ; but he never call it the name in full , as he have never call the first Catherine short : probably because have a habit of do so . the little one be always : it form to he a distinction from the mother , and yet a connection with she ; and he attachment spring from its relation to she , far more than
than from its be he own . I use to draw a comparison between he and , and perplex myself to explain satisfactorily why they conduct be so opposite in similar circumstance . they have both be fond husband , and be both attach to they child ; and I could not see how they should not both have take the same road , for good or evil . but , I think in my mind , , with apparently the stronger head , have show himself sadly the worse and the weaker man . when he ship struck , the abandon he post ; and the crew , instead of try to save she , rush into riot and confusion , leave no hope for they luckless vessel . , on the contrary , display the true courage of a loyal and faithful soul : he trust ; and comforte he . one hope , and the other despair : they choose they own lot , and be righteously doom to endure they . but you will not want to hear my moralising , ; you will judge , as well as I can , all these thing : at least , you will think you will , and that be the same . the end of be what might have be expect ; it follow fast on he sister 's : there be scarcely six month between they . we , at the , never get a very succinct account of he state precede it ; all that I do learn be on occasion of go to aid in the preparation for the funeral . come to announce the event to my master . ' well , Nelly , ' say he , ride into the yard one morning , too early not to alarm I with a instant presentiment of bad news , ' it be yours and my turn to go into mourning at present . who be give we the slip now , do you think ? ' ' who ? ' I ask in a flurry . ' why , guess ! ' he return , dismount , and slinge he bridle on a hook by the door . ' and nip up the corner of you apron : I be certain you will need it . ' ' not , surely ? ' I exclaim . ' what ! would you have tear for he ? ' say the doctor . ' no , be a tough young fellow : he look blooming to - day . I have just see he . he be rapidly regain flesh since he lose he better half . ' ' who be it , then , ? ' I repeat impatiently . ' ! you old friend , ' he reply , ' and my wicked gossip : though he be be too wild for I this long while . there ! I say we should draw water . but cheer up ! he die true to he character : drink as a lord . poor lad ! I be sorry , too . one can not help miss a old companion : though he have the worst trick with he that ever man imagined , and have do I many a rascally turn . he be barely twenty - seven , it seem ; that be you own age : who would have think you be bear in one year ? ' I confess this blow be greater to I than the shock of 's death : ancient associations linger round my heart ; I sit down in the porch and wept as for a blood relation , desire to get another servant to introduce he to the master . I could not hinder myself from pondering on the question - ' Had he have fair play ? ' whatever I do , that idea would bother I : it be so tiresomely pertinacious that I resolve on requesting leave to go to , and assist in the last duty to the dead . be extremely reluctant to consent , but I plead eloquently for the friendless condition in which he lay ; and I say my old master and foster - brother have a claim on my service as strong as he own . besides , I remind he that the child be he wife 's nephew , and , in the absence of nearer kin , he ought to act as its guardian ; and he ink to and must inquire how the property be leave , and look over the concern of he brother - in - law . he be unfit for attend to such matter then , but he bid I speak to he lawyer ; and at length permit I to go . he lawyer have be 's also : I call at the village , and ask he to accompany I . he shook he head , and advise that should be let alone ; affirme , if the truth be know , would be find little else than a beggar . ' he father die in debt ,' he say ; ' the whole property be mortgaged , and the sole chance for the natural heir be to allow he a opportunity of create some interest in the creditor 's heart , that he may be inclin to deal leniently towards he . ' when I reach the , I explain that I have come to see everything carry on decently ; and , who appear in sufficient distress , express satisfaction at my presence . say he do not perceive that I be want ; but I might stay and order the arrangement for the funeral , if I choose . ' correctly ,' he remark , ' that fool 's body should he bury at the cross -road , without ceremony of any kind . I
I happen to leave he ten minute yesterday afternoon , and in that interval he fasten the two door of the house against I , and he have spend the night in drinking himself to death deliberately ! we break in this morning , for we hear he sport like a horse ; and there he be , laid over the settle : flay and scalp would not have wake he . I send for , and he come ; but not till the have change into carrion : he be both dead and cold , and stark ; and so you will allow it be useless make more stir about he ! ' the old servant confirm this statement , but mutter : 'I would rayther he would goan hisseln for t ' doctor ! I sud ha , ' taen tent of ' t ' maister better nor he - and he war not deead when I leave , natch of ' t ' soart ! ' I insist on the funeral be respectable . say I might have my own way there too : only , he desire I to remember that the money for the whole affair come out of he pocket . he maintain a hard , careless deportment , indicative of neither joy nor sorrow : if anything , it express a flinty gratification at a piece of difficult work successfully execute . I observ once , indeed , something like exultation in he aspect : it be just when the people be bear the coffin from the house . he have the hypocrisy to represent a mourner : and previous to follow with , he lift the unfortunate child on to the table and mutter , with peculiar gusto , ' now , my bonny lad , you be mine ! and we will see if one tree will not grow as crook as another , with the same wind to twist it ! ' the unsuspecting thing be pleased at this speech : he play with 's whisker , and strok he cheek ; but I divine its meaning , and observe tartly , ' that boy must go back with I to , sir . there be nothing in the world less yours than he be ! ' ' do say so ? ' he demand . ' of course - he have order I to take he ,' I reply . ' well , ' say the scoundrel , 'we will not argue the subject now : but I have a fancy to try my hand at rear a young one ; so intimate to you master that I must supply the place of this with my own , if he attempt to remove it . I do not engage to let go undisputed ; but I will be pretty sure to make the other come ! remember to tell he . ' this hint be enough to bind we hand . I repeat its substance on my return ; and , little interested at the commencement , speak no more of interfering . I be not aware that he could have do it to any purpose , have he be ever so willing . the guest be now the master of : he hold firm possession , and prove to the attorney - who , in he turn , prove it to - that have mortgage every yard of land he own for cash to supply he mania for gaming ; and he , , be the mortgagee . in that manner , who should now be the first gentleman in the neighbourhood , be reduce to a state of complete dependence on he father 's inveterate enemy ; and live in he own house as a servant , deprive of the advantage of wage : quite unable to right himself , because of he friendlessness , and he ignorance that he have be wronge . the twelve year , continue , follow that dismal period be the happiest of my life : my greatest trouble in they passage rise from we little lady 's trifling illness , which she have to experience in common with all child , rich and poor . for the rest , after the first six month , she grow like a larch , and could walk and talk too , in she own way , before the heath blossom a second time over 's dust . she be the most win thing that ever bring sunshine into a desolate house : a real beauty in face , with the ' handsome dark eye , but the 's fair skin and small feature , and yellow curling hair . she spirit be high , though not rough , and qualifie by a heart sensitive and lively to excess in its affections . that capacity for intense attachment remind I of she mother : still she do not resemble she : for she could be soft and mild as a dove , and she have a gentle voice and pensive expression : she anger be never furious ; she love never fierce : it be deep and tender . however , it must be acknowledge , she have fault to foil she gift . a propensity to be saucy be one ; and a perverse will , that indulge child invariably acquire , whether they be good tempered or cross . if a servant chance to vex she , it be always - 'I shall tell papa ! ' and if he reprove she , even by a look , you would have think it a heart - break business : I do not believe he ever do speak a harsh word to she . he take she education entirely on himself , and make it a amusement . fortunately , curiosity and a quick intellect make she a apt scholar : she learn rapidly and
and eagerly , and do honou to he teaching . she reach the age of thirteen she have not once be beyond the range of the park by herself . would take she with he a mile or so outside , on rare occasion ; but he trust she to no one else . be a unsubstantial name in she ears ; the chapel , the only building she have approach or enter , except she own home . Wuthering and do not exist for she : she be a perfect recluse ; and , apparently , perfectly contente . sometimes , indeed , while survey the country from she nursery window , she would observe - ' Ellen , how long will it be before I can walk to the top of those hill ? I wonder what lie on the other side - be it the sea ? ' 'no , ,' I would answer ; ' it be hill again , just like these . ' ' and what be those golden rock like when you stand under they ? ' she once ask . the abrupt descent of particularly attract she notice ; especially when the setting sun shone on it and the topmost height , and the whole extent of landscape besides lay in shadow . I explain that they be bare mass of stone , with hardly enough earth in they cleft to nourish a stunted tree . ' and why be they bright so long after it be eve here ? ' she pursue . ' because they be a great deal higher up than we be , ' reply I ; ' you could not climb they , they be too high and steep . in winter the frost be always there before it come to we ; and deep into summer I have find snow under that black hollow on the north - east side ! ' 'Oh , you have be on they ! ' she cry gleefully . ' then I can go , too , when I be a woman . have papa be , ? ' ' would tell you , ,' I answer , hastily , ' that they be not worth the trouble of visiting . the moor , where you ramble with he , be much nicer ; and be the finest place in the world . ' ' but I know the park , and I do not know those , ' she murmure to herself . ' and I should delight to look round I from the brow of that tallest point : my little pony shall take I some time . ' one of the maid mention the Fairy cave , quite turn she head with a desire to fulfil this project : she tease about it ; and he promise she should have the journey when she get older . but measure she age by month , and , ' now , be I old enough to go to ? ' be the constant question in she mouth . the road thither wound close by . have not the heart to pass it ; so she receive as constantly the answer , ' not yet , love : not yet . ' I say . live above a dozen year after quit she husband . she family be of a delicate constitution : she and both lack the ruddy health that you will generally meet in these part . what she last illness be , I be not certain : I conjecture , they die of the same thing , a kind of fever , slow at its commencement , but incurable , and rapidly consum life towards the close . she write to inform she brother of the probable conclusion of a four -month ' indisposition under which she have suffer , and entreate he to come to she , if possible ; for she have much to settle , and she wish to bid he adieu , and deliver safely into he hand . she hope be that might be leave with he , as he have be with she : he father , she would fain convince herself , have no desire to assume the burden of he maintenance or education . my master hesitate not a moment in comply with she request : reluctant as he be to leave home at ordinary call , he fly to answer this ; command Catherine to my peculiar vigilance , in he absence , with reiterate order that she must not wander out of the park , even under my escort he do not calculate on she go unaccompanied . he be away three week . the first day or two my charge sit in a corner of the library , too sad for either read or play : in that quiet state she cause I little trouble ; but it be succeed by a interval of impatient , fretful weariness ; and be too busy , and too old then , to run up and down amuse she , I hit on a method by which she might entertain herself . I use to send she on she travels round the grounds - now on foot , and now on a pony ; indulge she with a patient audience of all she real and imaginary adventur when she return . the summer shone in full prime ; and she take such a taste for this solitary rambling that she often contrive to remain out from breakfast till tea ; and then the evening be spend in recount she fanciful tale . I do not fear she break bounds ; because the gate be generally look , and I think she would scarcely venture forth alone , if they have stand wide open . Unluckily , my confidence prove misplace . come to I , one morning , at eight
eight o'clock , and say she be that day a Arabian merchant , go to cross the desert with he caravan ; and I must give she plenty of provision for herself and beast : a horse , and three camel , personate by a large hound and a couple of pointer . I get together good store of dainty , and sling they in a basket on one side of the saddle ; and she spring up as gay as a fairy , shelter by she wide - brim hat and gauze veil from the sun , and trot off with a merry laugh , mock my cautious counsel to avoid galloping , and come back early . the naughty thing never make she appearance at tea . one traveller , the hound , be a old dog and fond of its ease , return ; but neither , nor the pony , nor the two pointer be visible in any direction : I despatch emissary down this path , and that path , and at last went wander in search of she myself . there be a labourer work at a fence round a plantation , on the border of the grounds . I inquire of he if he have see we young lady . 'I see she at morn ,' he reply : ' she would have I to cut she a hazel switch , and then she leapt she over the hedge yonder , where it be lowest , and gallop out of sight . ' you may guess how I feel at hear this news . it struck I directly she must have start for . ' what will become of she ? ' I ejaculate , push through a gap which the man be repair , and make straight to the high - road . I walk as if for a wager , mile after mile , till a turn bring I in view of the ; but no Catherine could I detect , far or near . the Crag lie about a mile and a half beyond 's place , and that be four from the , so I begin to fear night would fall ere I could reach they . ' and what if she should have slip in clambering among they ,' I reflect , ' and be kill , or break some of she bone ? ' my suspense be truly painful ; and , at first , it give I delightful relief to observe , in hurrie by the farmhouse , , the fiercest of the pointer , lie under a window , with swell head and bleed ear . I open the wicket and run to the door , knock vehemently for admittance . a woman whom I know , and who formerly live at , answer : she have be servant there since the death of . ' ah , ' say she , ' you be come a - seek you little mistress ! do not be frightene . she be here safe : but I be glad it be not the master . ' ' he be not at home then , be he ? ' I pante , quite breathless with quick walking and alarm . ' no , no ,' she reply : ' both he and be off , and I think they will not return this hour or more . step in and rest you a bit . ' I enter , and beheld my stray lamb seate on the hearth , rock herself in a little chair that have be she mother 's when a child . she hat be hang against the wall , and she seem perfectly at home , laugh and chatter , in the best spirit imaginable , to - now a great , strong lad of eighteen - who star at she with considerable curiosity and astonishment : comprehend precious little of the fluent succession of remark and question which she tongue never cease pour forth . ' very well , ! ' I exclaim , conceal my joy under a angry countenance . ' this be you last ride , till papa come back . I will not trust you over the threshold again , you naughty , naughty girl ! ' ' , ! ' she cry , gaily , jump up and run to my side . 'I shall have a pretty story to tell to - night ; and so you have find I out . have you ever be here in you life before ? ' ' put that hat on , and home at once , ' say I . 'I be dreadfully grieve at you , : you have do extremely wrong ! it be no use pout and cry : that will not repay the trouble I have have , scour the country after you . to think how charge I to keep you in ; and you steal off so ! it show you be a cunn little fox , and nobody will put faith in you any more . ' ' what have I do ? ' sob she , instantly check . ' charge I nothing : he will not scold I , - he be never cross , like you ! ' ' come , come ! ' I repeat . 'I will tie the riband . now , let we have no petulance . oh , for shame ! you thirteen year old , and such a baby ! ' this exclamation be cause by she push the hat from she head , and retreat to the chimney out of my reach . ' Nay , ' say the servant , 'do not be hard on the bonny lass , . we make she stop : she would fain have ridden forward , afeard you should be uneasy . offer to go with
with she , and I think he should : it be a wild road over the hill . ' , during the discussion , stand with he hand in he pocket , too awkward to speak ; though he look as if he do not relish my intrusion . ' how long be I to wait ? ' I continue , disregard the woman 's interference . ' it will be dark in ten minute . where be the pony , ? and where be ? I shall leave you , unless you be quick ; so please yourself . ' ' the pony be in the yard , ' she reply , ' and be shut in there . he be bite - and so be . I be go to tell you all about it ; but you be in a bad temper , and do not deserve to hear . ' I pick up she hat , and approach to reinstate it ; but perceive that the people of the house take she part , she commence cape round the room ; and on my give chase , run like a mouse over and under and behind the furniture , render it ridiculous for I to pursue . and the woman laugh , and she join they , and wax more impertinent still ; till I cry , in great irritation , - ' well , , if you be aware whose house this be you would be glad enough to get out . ' ' it be you father 's , be not it ? ' say she , turn to . ' Nay ,' he reply , look down , and blush bashfully . he could not stand a steady gaze from she eye , though they be just he own . ' whose then - you master 's ? ' she ask . he colou deeper , with a different feeling , mutter a oath , and turn away . ' who be he master ? ' continue the tiresome girl , appeal to I . ' he talk about " we house , " and " we folk . " I think he have be the owner 's son . and he never say : he should have do , should not he , if he be a servant ? ' grow black as a thunder - cloud at this childish speech . I silently shook my questioner , and at last succeed in equip she for departure . ' now , get my horse , ' she say , address she unknown kinsman as she would one of the stable - boy at the . ' and you may come with I . I want to see where the goblin - hunter rise in the marsh , and to hear about the Fairish , as you call they : but make haste ! what be the matter ? get my horse , I say . ' 'I will see thee damne before I be thy servant ! ' grow the lad . " you will see I what ! ' ask in surprise . ' Damn - thou saucy witch ! ' he reply . ' there , ! you see you have get into pretty company ,' I interpose . ' nice word to be use to a young lady ! pray do not begin to dispute with he . come , let we seek for ourselves , and begone . ' ' but , , ' cry she , stare fix in astonishment , ' how dare he speak so to I ? must not he be make to do as I ask he ? you wick creature , I shall tell papa what you say . - now , then ! ' do not appear to feel this threat ; so the tear spring into she eye with indignation . ' you bring the pony , ' she exclaim , turn to the woman , ' and let my dog free this moment ! ' ' Softly , , ' answer she address : ' you will lose nothing by be civil . though , there , be not the master 's son , he be you cousin : and I be never hire to serve you . ' 'o my cousin ! ' cry , with a scornful laugh . ' yes , indeed , ' respond she reprover . 'Oh , ! do not let they say such thing , ' she pursue in great trouble . ' be gone to fetch my cousin from : my cousin be a gentleman 's son . that my - ' she stop , and weep outright ; upset at the bare notion of relationship with such a clown . ' Hush , hush ! ' I whisper ; ' people can have many cousins and of all sort , , without be any the worse for it ; only they need not keep they company , if they be disagreeable and bad . ' 'he be not - he be not my cousin , ! ' she go on , gather fresh grief from reflection , and flinge herself into my arm for refuge from the idea . I be much vex at she and the servant for they mutual revelation ; have no doubt of 's approach arrival , communicate by the former , be report to ; and feel as confident that 's first thought on she father 's return would be to seek a explanation of the latter 's assertion concern she rude - breed kindred . , recovere from he disgust at be take for a servant , see move by she distress ; and , have fetch the pony round to the door , he take , to propitiate she , a fine crook - leg terrier whelp from the kennel , and put it
it into she hand , bid she whist ! for he mean nuy . Pause in she lamentation , she survey he with a glance of awe and horror , then burst forth anew . I could scarcely refrain from smiling at this antipathy to the poor fellow ; who be a well - make , athletic youth , good - look in feature , and stout and healthy , but attire in garment befitt he daily occupations of work on the farm and lounge among the moor after rabbit and game . still , I think I could detect in he physiognomy a mind own better quality than he father ever possess . good thing lose amid a wilderness of weed , to be sure , whose rankness far over -top they neglect growth ; yet , notwithstand , evidence of a wealthy soil , that might yield luxuriant crop under other and favourable circumstance . , I believe , have not treat he physically ill ; thanks to he fearless nature , which offer no temptation to that course of oppression : he have none of the timid susceptibility that would have give zest to ill - treatment , in 's judgment . he appear to have bend he malevolence on make he a brute : he be never teach to read or write ; never rebuk for any bad habit which do not annoy he keeper ; never lead a single step towards virtue , or guard by a single precept against vice . and from what I hear , contribute much to he deterioration , by a narrow - minded partiality which prompt he to flatter and pet he , as a boy , because he be the head of the old family . and as he have be in the habit of accuse and , when child , of put the master past he patience , and compelle he to seek solace in drink by what he term they ' offald way ,' so at present he lay the whole burden of 's fault on the shoulders of the usurper of he property . if the lad swore , he would not correct he : nor however culpably he behave . it give satisfaction , apparently , to watch he go the worst length : he allow that the lad be ruin : that he soul be abandon to perdition ; but then he reflect that must answer for it . 's blood would be require at he hand ; and there lay immense consolation in that thought . have instil into he a pride of name , and of he lineage ; he would , have he da , have foster hate between he and the present owner of the : but he dread of that owner amount to superstition ; and he confin he feeling regard he to mutter innuendoe and private commination . I do not pretend to be intimately acquaint with the mode of live customary in those day at : I only speak from hearsay ; for I see little . the villager affirm be , and a cruel hard landlord to he tenant ; but the house , inside , have regain its ancient aspect of comfort under female management , and the scene of riot common in 's time be not now enact within it be wall . the master be too gloomy to seek companionship with any people , good or bad ; and he be yet . this , however , be not make progress with my story . reject the peace -offering of the terrier , and demand she own dog , and . they come limpe and hang they head ; and we set out for home , sadly out of sort , every one of we . I could not wr from my little lady how she have spend the day ; except that , as I suppose , the goal of she pilgrimage be ; and she arrive without adventure to the gate of the farm - house , when happen to issue forth , attend by some canine follower , who attack she train . they have a smart battle , before they owner could separate they : that form a introduction . tell who she be , and where she be go ; and ask he to show she the way : finally , beguil he to accompany she . he open the mystery of the Fairy cave , and twenty other queer place . but , be in disgrace , I be not favour with a description of the interesting object she see . I could gather , however , that she guide have be a favourite till she hurt he feeling by address he as a servant ; and 's housekeeper hurt hers by call he she cousin . then the language he have hold to she rank in she heart ; she who be always ' love , ' and ' darling , ' and ' queen , ' and ' angel , ' with everybody at the , to be insult so shockingly by a stranger ! she do not comprehend it ; and hard work I have to obtain a promise that she would not lay the grievance before she father . I explain how he object to the whole household at the , and how sorry he would be to find she have be there ; but I insist most on the fact , that if she reveal my negligence of he order , he would perhaps be so angry that I should have to leave ; and could not bear that prospect : she pledge she word , and keep it for my sake . after all , she be a sweet little girl . , edge with black , announce the day of my master 's return , be dead ; and he
he write to bid I get mourn for he daughter , and arrange a room , and other accommodation , for he youthful nephew . run wild with joy at the idea of welcome she father back ; and indulge most sanguine anticipation of the innumerable excellency of she ' real ' cousin . the evening of they expect arrival come . since early morning she have be busy order she own small affair ; and now attire in she new black frock - poor thing ! she aunt 's death impress she with no definite sorrow - she oblige I , by constant worrying , to walk with she down through the grounds to meet they . ' be just six month younger than I be , ' she chatter , as we stroll leisurely over the swell and hollow of mossy turf , under shadow of the tree . ' how delightful it will be to have he for a playfellow ! send papa a beautiful lock of he hair ; it be lighter than mine - more flaxen , and quite as fine . I have it carefully preserve in a little glass box ; and I have often think what a pleasure it would be to see its owner . oh ! I be happy - and papa , dear , dear papa ! , , let we run ! come , run . ' she run , and return and run again , many time before my sober footstep reach the gate , and then she seat herself on the grassy bank beside the path , and try to wait patiently ; but that be impossible : she could not be still a minute . ' how long they be ! ' she exclaim . ' ah , I see , some dust on the road - they be come ! no ! when will they be here ? may we not go a little way - half a mile , , only just half a mile ? do say yes : to that clump of birch at the turn ! ' I refuse staunchly . at length she suspense be end : the travel carriage roll in sight . shriek and stretch out she arm as soon as she catch she father 's face look from the window . he descend , nearly as eager as herself ; and a considerable interval elapse ere they have a thought to spare for any but themselves . while they exchange caress I take a peep in to see after . he be asleep in a corner , wrap in a warm , fur - line cloak , as if it have be winter . a pale , delicate , effeminate boy , who might have be take for my master 's younger brother , so strong be the resemblance : but there be a sickly peevishness in he aspect that never have . the latter see I look ; and have shaken hand , advise I to close the door , and leave he undistur ; for the journey have fatigue he . would afain have take one glance , but she father tell she to come , and they walk together up the park , while I hasten before to prepare the servants . ' now , darl , ' say , address he daughter , as they halt at the bottom of the front step : ' you cousin be not so strong or so merry as you be , and he have lose he mother , remember , a very short time since ; therefore , do not expect he to play and run about with you directly . and do not harass he much by talk : let he be quiet this evening , at least , will you ? ' ' yes , yes , papa , ' answer : ' but I do want to see he ; and he have not once look out . ' the carriage stop ; and the sleeper be rouse , be lift to the ground by he uncle . ' this be you cousin , ,' he say , put they little hand together . ' she be fond of you already ; and mind you do not grieve she by cry to - night . try to be cheerful now ; the travelling be at a end , and you have nothing to do but rest and amuse yourself as you please . ' ' let I go to bed , then ,' answer the boy , shrink from 's salute ; and he put he finger to remove incipient tear . ' come , come , there be a good child ,' I whisper , lead he in . ' you will make she weep too - see how sorry she be for you ! ' I do not know whether it be sorrow for he , but he cousin put on as sad a countenance as himself , and return to she father . all three enter , and mount to the library , where tea be laid ready . I proceed to remove 's cap and mantle , and place he on a chair by the table ; but he be no sooner seate than he begin to cry afresh . my master inquire what be the matter . 'I can not sit on a chair , ' sob the boy . ' go to the sofa , then , and shall bring you some tea , ' answer he uncle patiently . he have be greatly try , during the journey , I feel convinced , by he fretful ailing charge . slowly trail himself off , and lay down . carry a footstool and she cup to he side . at first she sit silent ; but that could not last : she have resolve to make a
a pet of she little cousin , as she would have he to be ; and she commence strok he curl , and kiss he cheek , and offer he tea in she saucer , like a baby . this please he , for he be not much better : he dry he eye , and lighten into a faint smile . 'Oh , he will do very well , ' say the master to I , after watch they a minute . ' very well , if we can keep he , . the company of a child of he own age will instil new spirit into he soon , and by wishing for strength he will gain it . ' 'Ay , if we can keep he ! ' I muse to myself ; and sore misgiving come over I that there be slight hope of that . and then , I think , how ever will that weak live at ? between he father and , what playmate and instructors they will be . we doubt be presently decide - even earlier than I expect . I have just take the child up - stair , after tea be finish , and see asleep - he would not suffer I to leave he till that be the case - I have come down , and be stand by the table in the hall , light a bedroom candle for , when a maid step out of the kitchen and inform I that 's be at the door , and wish to speak with the master . 'I shall ask he what he want first ,' I say , in considerable trepidation . 'a very unlikely hour to be troubl people , and the instant they have return from a long journey . I do not think the master can see he . ' have advanc through the kitchen as I utter these word , and now present himself in the hall . he be don in he garment , with he most sanctimonious and sourest face , and , hold he hat in one hand , and he stick in the other , he proceed to clean he shoe on the mat . ' good - evening , ,' I say , coldly . ' what business bring you here to - night ? ' ' it be I mun spake to ,' he answer , wave I disdainfully aside . ' . be go to be ; unless you have something particular to say , I be sure he will not hear it now ,' I continue . ' you have better sit down in there , and entrust you message to I . ' ' which be he rahm ? ' pursue the fellow , survey the range of close door . I perceive he be bend on refuse my mediation , so very reluctantly I go up to the library , and announce the unseasonable visitor , advise that he should be dismiss till next day . have no time to empower I to do so , for mount close at my heel , and , push into the apartment , plant himself at the far side of the table , with he two fists clap on the head of he stick , and begin in a elevated tone , as if anticipate opposition - ' have send I for he lad , and I mun not goa back ' bout he . ' be silent a minute ; a expression of exceed sorrow overcast he feature : he would have pitie the child on he own account ; but , recalle 's hope and fear , and anxious wish for she son , and she commendation of he to he care , he grieve bitterly at the prospect of yield he up , and search in he heart how it might be avoid . no plan offer itself : the very exhibition of any desire to keep he would have render the claimant more peremptory : there be nothing leave but to resign he . however , he be not go to rouse he from he sleep . ' ,' he answer calmly , ' that he son shall come to to - morrow . he be in bed , and too tired to go the distance now . you may also tell he that the mother of desire he to remain under my guardianship ; and , at present , he health be very precarious . ' ' ! ' say , give a thud with he prop on the floor , and assume a authoritative air . ' ! that mean natch . mak noa ' count of ' t ' mother , nor ye norther ; but he will heu ' he lad ; und I mun tak ' he - soa now ye knee ! ' ' you shall not to - night ! ' answer decisively . ' walk down stair at once , and repeat to you master what I have say . Ellen , show he down . go - ' and , aid the indignant elder with a lift by the arm , he ry the room of he and close the door . ' Varrah weell ! ' shoute , as he slowly draw off . ' to - morn , he be come hisseln , and thrust he out , if ye darr ! ' to obviate the danger of this threat be fulfil , commissione I to take the boy home early , on 's pony ; and , say he - ' as we shall now have no influence over he destiny , good or bad , you must say nothing of where he be go to my daughter : she can not associate with he hereafter , and it be better for she to remain in ignorance of he proximity ;
; lest she should be restless , and anxious to visit the Heights . merely tell she he father send for he suddenly , and he have be oblige to leave we . ' be very reluctant to be rouse from he bed at five o'clock , and astonished to be inform that he must prepare for further travelling ; but I soften off the matter by stating that he be go to spend some time with he father , , who wish to see he so much , he do not like to defer the pleasure till he should recover from he late journey . ' my father ! ' he cry , in strange perplexity . ' never tell I I have a father . where do he live ? I would rather stay with uncle . ' ' he live a little distance from the Grange ,' I reply ; ' just beyond those hill : not so far , but you may walk over here when you get hearty . and you should be glad to go home , and to see he . you must try to love he , as you do you mother , and then he will love you . ' ' but why have I not hear of he before ? ' ask . ' why do not and he live together , as other people do ? ' ' he have business to keep he in the north ,' I answer , ' and you mother 's health require she to reside in the south . ' ' and why do not mamma speak to I about he ? ' persever the child . ' she often talk of uncle , and I learn to love he long ago . how be I to love papa ? I do not know he . ' 'Oh , all child love they parent ,' I say . ' you mother , perhaps , think you would want to be with he if she mention he often to you . let we make haste . a early ride on such a beautiful morning be much preferable to a hour 's more sleep . ' 'I she to go with we ,' he demand , ' the little girl I see yesterday ? ' ' not now , ' reply I . ' be uncle ? ' he continue . ' no , I shall be you companion there ,' I say . sank back on he pillow and fall into a brown study . 'I will not go without uncle , ' he cry at length : 'I can not tell where you mean to take I . ' I attempt to persuade he of the naughtiness of show reluctance to meet he father ; still he obstinately resist any progress towards dressing , and I have to call for my master 's assistance in coax he out of bed . the poor thing be finally get off , with several delusive assurance that he absence should be short : that and would visit he , and other promise , equally ill - foun , which I invent and reiterate at interval throughout the way . the pure heather - scent air , the bright sunshine , and the gentle canter of , relieve he despondency after a while . he begin to put question concern he new home , and its inhabitant , with greater interest and liveliness . 'is Wuther as pleasant a place as ? ' he inquire , turn to take a last glance into the valley , whence a light mist mount and form a fleecy cloud on the skirt of the blue . ' it be not so bury in tree ,' I reply , ' and it be not quite so large , but you can see the country beautifully all round ; and the air be healthier for you - fresher and drier . you will , perhaps , think the building old and dark at first ; though it be a respectable house : the next best in the neighbourhood . and you will have such nice ramble on the moor . - that be , 's other cousin , and so yours in a manner - will show you all the sweetest spot ; and you can bring a book in fine weather , and make a green hollow you study ; and , now and then , you uncle may join you in a walk : he do , frequently , walk out on the hill . ' ' and what be my father like ? ' he ask . ' be he as young and handsome as uncle ? ' 'he be as young , ' say I ; ' but he have black hair and eye , and look sterner ; and he be taller and bigger altogether . he will not seem to you so gentle and kind at first , perhaps , because it be not he way : still , mind you , be frank and cordial with he ; and naturally he will be fonder of you than any uncle , for you be he own . ' ' black hair and eyes ! ' muse . 'I can not fancy he . then I be not like he , be I ? ' ' not much ,' I answer : not a morsel , I think , survey with regret the white complexion and slim frame of my companion , and he large languid eye - he mother 's eye , save that , unless a morbid touchiness kind they a moment , they have not a vestige of she sparkling spirit . ' how strange that he should never come to see mamma and I ! ' he murmure . ' have he ever see I ? if he have , I must have be
be a baby . I remember not a single thing about he ! ' ' why , , ' say I , ' three hundred mile be a great distance ; and ten year seem very different in length to a grow - up person compare with what they do to you . it be probable propose go from summer to summer , but never find a convenient opportunity ; and now it be too late . do not trouble he with question on the subject : it will disturb he , for no good . ' the boy be fully occupy with he own cogitation for the remainder of the ride , till we halt before the farmhouse garden - gate . I watch to catch he impressions in he countenance . he survey the carved front and low - browed lattice , the straggling gooseberry - bushes and crooke fir , with solemn intentness , and then shook he head : he private feeling entirely disapprove of the exterior of he new abode . but he have sense to postpone complain : there might be compensation within . before he dismount , I go and open the door . it be half - past six ; the family have just finish breakfast : the servant be clear and wip down the table . stand by he master 's chair tell some tale concern a lame horse ; and be prepare for the hayfield . 'Hallo , Nelly ! ' say , when he see I . 'I fear I should have to come down and fetch my property myself . you have bring it , have you ? let we see what we can make of it . ' he get up and strode to the door : and follow in gaping curiosity . poor run a frightened eye over the face of the three . ' sure - ly , ' say after a grave inspection , ' he be swop wi' ye , , a ' yon be he lass ! ' , have star he son into a ague of confusion , uttere a scornful laugh . ' ! what a beauty ! what a lovely , charme thing ! ' he exclaim . ' not they rear it on snail and sour milk , Nelly ? oh , damn my soul ! but that be worse than I expect - and the I be not sanguine ! ' I bid the trembling and bewilder child get down , and enter . he do not thoroughly comprehend the meaning of he father 's speech , or whether it be intend for he : indeed , he be not yet certain that the grim , sneering stranger be he father . but he cling to I with grow trepidation ; and on 's take a seat and bid he ' come hither ' he hide he face on my shoulder and wept . ' Tut , tut ! ' say , stretch out a hand and drag he roughly between he knee , and then hold up he head by the ching . ' none of that nonsense ! we be not go to hurt thee , - be not that thy name ? thou be thy mother 's child , entirely ! where be my share in thee , pule chicken ? ' he take off the boy 's cap and push back he thick flaxen curl , feel he slender arm and he small finger ; during which examination cease cry , and lift he great blue eye to inspect the inspector . ' do you know I ? ' ask , have satisfy himself that the limb be all equally frail and feeble . ' no , ' say , with a gaze of vacant fear . ' you have hear of I , I daresay ? ' ' no ,' he reply again . ' no ! what a shame of you mother , never to wake you filial regard for I ! you be my son , then , I will tell you ; and you mother be a wicked slut to leave you in ignorance of the sort of father you possess . now , do not wince , and colour up ! though it be something to see you have not white blood . be a good lad ; and I will do for you . Nelly , if you be tired you may sit down ; if not , get home again . I guess you will report what you hear and see to the cipher at the ; and this thing will not be settle while you linger about it . ' ' well , ' reply I , ' I hope you will be kind to the boy , , or you will not keep he long ; and he be all you have akin in the wide world , that you will ever know - remember . ' 'I will be very kind to he , you need not fear ,' he say , laugh . ' only nobody else must be kind to he : I be jealous of monopolise he affection . and , to begin my kindness , , bring the lad some breakfast . , you infernal calf , bego to you work . yes , ,' he add , when they have depart , 'my son be prospective owner of you place , and I should not wish he to die till I be certain of be he successor . besides , he be , and I want the triumph of see my descendant fairly lord of they estate ; my child hire they child to till they fathers 's lands for wage . that be the sole consideration which can make I endure the whelp : I despise he for himself , and hate he for the memory he revive
revive ! but that consideration be sufficient : he be as safe with I , and shall be tend as carefully as you master tend he own . I have a room up - stair , furnish for he in handsome style ; I have engage a tutor , also , to come three time a week , from twenty mile ' distance , to teach he what he please to learn . I have order to obey he : and in fact I have arrange everything with a view to preserve the superior and the gentleman in he , above he associate . I do regret , however , that he so little deserve the trouble : if I wish any blessing in the world , it be to find he a worthy object of pride ; and I be bitterly disappointed with the whey - face , whin wretch ! ' while he be speak , return bear a basin of milk - porridge , and place it before : who stir round the homely mess with a look of aversion , and affir he could not eat it . I see the old man - servant share largely in he master 's scorn of the child ; though he be compelle to retain the sentiment in he heart , because plainly mean he underling to hold he in honour . ' can not eat it ? ' repeat he , pee in 's face , and subdue he voice to a whisper , for fear of be overhear . ' but nivir ate natch else , when he wer a little 'un ; and what wer gooid enough for he be gooid enough for ye , I be rayther think ! ' not eat it ! ' answer , snappishly . ' take it away . ' snatch up the food indignantly , and bring it to we . ' be there atch ail th ' victual ? ' he ask , thrust the tray under 's nose . ' what should ail they ? ' he say . ' ! ' answer , ' yon dainty chap say he cannut ate 'em . but I guess it be raight ! he mother wer just soa - we wer a'most too mucky to sow t ' corn for makk she breead . ' ' do not mention he mother to I , ' say the master , angrily . ' get he something that he can eat , that be all . what be he usual food , ? ' I suggest boil milk or tea ; and the housekeeper receive instruction to prepare some . come , I reflect , he father 's selfishness may contribute to he comfort . he perceive he delicate constitution , and the necessity of treat he tolerably . I will conseal by acquaint he with the turn 's humour have take . have no excuse for lingering longer , I slipp out , while be engage in timidly rebuff the advances of a friendly sheep - dog . but he be too much on the alert to be cheat : as I close the door , I hear a cry , and a frantic repetition of the word - ' do not leave I ! I will not stay here ! I will not stay here ! ' then the latch be raise and fall : they do not suffer he to come forth . I mount , and urge she to a trot ; and so my brief guardianship end . we have sad work with little that day : she rise in high glee , eager to join she cousin , and such passionate tear and lamentation follow the news of he departure that himself be obliged to soothe she , by affirme he should come back soon : he add , however , ' if I can get he ' ; and there be no hope of that . this promise poorly pacify she ; but time be more potent ; and though still at interval she inquire of she father when would return , before she do see he again he feature have wax so dim in she memory that she do not recognise he . when I chance to encounter the housekeeper of , in pay business visit to , I use to ask how the young master get on ; for he liv almost as secluded as herself , and be never to be see . I could gather from she that he continue in weak health , and be a tiresome inmate . she say seem to dislike he ever longer and worse , though he take some trouble to conceal it : he have a antipathy to the sound of he voice , and could not do at all with he sitting in the same room with he many minute together . there seldom pass much talk between they : not he lesson and spend he evening in a small apartment they call the parlour : or else lay in bed all day : for he be constantly get coug , and cold , and ach , and pain of some sort . ' and I never know such a faintheart creature , ' add the woman ; ' nor one so careful of hisseln . he will go on , if I leave the window open a bit late in the evening . oh ! it be kill , a breath of night air ! and he must have a fire in the middle of summer ; and 's bacca - pipe be poison ; and he must always have sweet and dainty , and always milk , milk for ever - heeding natch how the rest of we be pinch in winter ; and there he will sit , wrap in he furred cloak in he chair by the fire ,
, with some toast and water or other slop on the hob to sip at ; and if , for pity , come to amuse he - be not bad - natured , though he be rough - they be sure to part , one swearing and the other crying . I believe the master would relish 's thrash he to a mummy , if he be not he son ; and I be certain he would be fit to turn he out of door , if he know half the nursing he give hisseln . but then he will not go into danger of temptation : he never enter the parlour , and should show those way in the house where he be , he send he up - stair directly . ' I divine , from this account , that utter lack of sympathy have render young Heathcliff selfish and disagreeable , if he be not so originally ; and my interest in he , consequently , decay : though still I be move with a sense of grief at he lot , and a wish that he have be leave with we . encourage I to gain information : he think a great deal about he , I fancy , and would have run some risk to see he ; and he tell I once to ask the housekeeper whether he ever come into the village ? she say he have only be twice , on horseback , accompany he father ; and both time he pretend to be quite knock up for three or four day afterwards . that housekeeper leave , if I recollect rightly , two year after he come ; and another , whom I do not know , be she successor ; she live there still . time wear on at the in its former pleasant way till reach sixteen . on the anniversary of she birth we never manifest any sign of rejoicing , because it be also the anniversary of my late mistress 's death . she father invariably spend that day alone in the library ; and walk , at dusk , as far as , where he would frequently prolong he stay beyond midnight . therefore be throw on she own resource for amusement . this twentieth of be a beautiful spring day , and when she father have retire , my young lady come down dress for go out , and say she ask to have a ramble on the edge of the moor with I : have give she leave , if we go only a short distance and be back within the hour . ' so make haste , ! ' she cry . 'I know where I wish to go ; where a colony of moor - game be settle : I want to see whether they have make they nests yet . ' ' that must be a good distance up ,' I answer ; ' they do not breed on the edge of the moor . ' ' no , it be not , ' she say . 'I have go very near with papa. ' I put on my bonnet and sally out , think nothing more of the matter . she bound before I , and return to my side , and be off again like a young greyhound ; and , at first , I find plenty of entertainment in listen to the lark singe far and near , and enjoy the sweet , warm sunshine ; and watch she , my pet and my delight , with she golden ringlet fly loose behind , and she bright cheek , as soft and pure in its bloom as a wild rose , and she eye radiant with cloudless pleasure . she be a happy creature , and a angel , in those day . it be a pity she could not be content . ' well , ' say I , ' where be you moor - game , ? we should be at they : the park - fence be a great way off now . ' 'Oh , a little further - only a little further , , ' be she answer , continually . ' climb to that hillock , pass that bank , and by the time you reach the other side I shall have raise the bird . ' but there be so many hillock and bank to climb and pass , that , at length , I begin to be weary , and tell she we must hal , and retrace we step . I shoute to she , as she have outstrip I a long way ; she either do not hear or do not regard , for she still spring on , and I be compelle to follow . finally , she div into a hollow ; and before I come in sight of she again , she be two mile nearer than she own home ; and I beheld a couple of person arrest she , one of whom I feel convinced be himself . have be catch in the fact of plundering , or , at least , hunt out the nests of the grouse . the be 's land , and he be reprove the poacher . 'I have neither take any nor find any , ' she say , as I toil to they , expand she hand in corroboration of the statement . 'I do not mean to take they ; but papa tell I there be quantity up here , and I wish to see the egg . ' glance at I with a ill - mean smile , express he acquaintance with the party , and , consequently , he malevolence towards it , and demand who ' papa ' be ? ' of , ' she reply . 'I think you do not know
know I , or you would not have speak in that way . ' ' you suppose papa be highly esteem and respecte , then ? ' he say , sarcastically . ' and what be you ? ' inquire , ga curiously on the speaker . ' that man I have see before . be he you son ? ' she point to , the other individual , who have gain nothing but increase bulk and strength by the addition of two year to he age : he see as awkward and rough as ever . ' ,' I interrupt , ' it will be three hour instead of one that we be out , presently . we really must go back . ' 'no , that man be not my son , ' answer , push I aside . ' but I have one , and you have see he before too ; and , though you nurse be in a hurry , I think both you and she would be the better for a little rest . will you just turn this nab of heath , and walk into my house ? you will get home earlier for the ease ; and you shall receive a kind welcome . ' I whisper that she must not , on any account , accede to the proposal : it be entirely out of the question . ' why ? ' she ask , aloud . 'I be tired of run , and the ground be dewy : I can not sit here . let we go , . besides , he say I have see he son . he be mistaken , I think ; but I guess where he live : at the farmhouse I visit in come from ' . do not you ? ' 'I do . come , Nelly , hold you tongue - it will he a treat for she to look in on we . , get forwards with the lass . you shall walk with I , Nelly . ' ' no , she be not go to any such place ,' I cry , struggle to release my arm , which he have seize : but she be almost at the door - stone already , scamper round the brow at full speed . she appoint companion do not pretend to escort she : he shie off by the road - side , and vanish . ' , it be very wrong ,' I continue : ' you know you mean no good . and there she will see , and all will be tell as soon as ever we return ; and I shall have the blame . ' 'I want she to see , ' he answer ; 'he be look better these few day ; it be not often he be fit to be see . and we will soon persuade she to keep the visit secret : where be the harm of it ? ' ' the harm of it be , that she father would hate I if he find I suffer she to enter you house ; and I be convince you have a bad design in encourage she to do so ,' I reply . ' my design be as honest as possible . I will inform you of its whole scope , ' he say . ' that the two cousin may fall in love , and get marry . I be act generously to you master : he young chit have no expectation , and should she second my wish she will be provide for at once as joint successor with . ' ' if die ,' I answer , ' and he life be quite uncertain , would be the heir . ' ' no , she would not ,' he say . ' there be no clause in the will to secure it so : he property would go to I ; but , to prevent dispute , I desire they union , and be resolve to bring it about . ' ' and I be resolve she shall never approach you house with I again ,' I return , as we reach the gate , where wait we come . bay I be quiet ; and , precede we up the path , hasten to open the door . my young lady give he several look , as if she could not exactly make up she mind what to think of he ; but now he smile when he meet she eye , and soften he voice in address she ; and I be foolish enough to imagine the memory of she mother might disarm he from desire she injury . stand on the hearth . he have be out walk in the field , for he cap be on , and he be call to to bring he dry shoe . he have grow tall of he age , still want some month of sixteen . he feature be pretty yet , and he eye and complexion brighter than I remembe they , though with merely temporary lustre borrowed from the salubrious air and genial sun . ' now , who be that ? ' ask , turn to . ' can you tell ? ' ' you son ? ' she say , have doubtfully survey , first one and then the other . ' yes , yes , ' answer he : ' but be this the only time you have beheld he ? think ! ah ! you have a short memory . , do not you recall you cousin , that you use to tease we so with wishing to see ? ' ' what , ! ' cry , kindl into joyful surprise at the name . ' be that little ? he be taller than I be ! be you ? ' the
the youth step forward , and acknowledge himself : she kiss he fervently , and they gaze with wonder at the change time have wrotch in the appearance of each . have reach she full height ; she figure be both plump and slender , elastic as steel , and she whole aspect sparkling with health and spirit . 's look and movement be very languid , and he form extremely slight ; but there be a grace in he manner that mitigate these defect , and render he not unpleasing . after exchange numerous mark of fondness with he , he cousin go to , who linger by the door , divide he attention between the object inside and those that lay without : pretending , that be , to observe the latter , and really note the former alone . ' and you be my uncle , then ! ' she cry , reach up to salute he . 'I think I like you , though you be cross at first . why do not you visit at the with ? to live all these year such close neighbour , and never see we , be odd : what have you do so for ? ' 'I visit it once or twice too often before you be bear ,' he answer . ' there - damn it ! if you have any kiss to spare , give they to : they be throw away on I . ' ' ! ' exclaim , fly to attack I next with she lavish caress . ' ! to try to hinder I from entering . but I will take this walk every morning in future : may I , uncle ? and sometimes bring papa . will not you be glad to see we ? ' ' of course , ' reply the uncle , with a hardly suppressed grimace , result from he deep aversion to both the propose visitor . ' but stay ,' he continue , turn towards the young lady . ' now I think of it , I would better tell you . have a prejudice against I : we quarrell at one time of we life , with unchristian ferocity ; and , if you mention come here to he , he will put a veto on you visit altogether . therefore , you must not mention it , unless you be careless of see you cousin hereafter : you may come , if you will , but you must not mention it . ' ' why do you quarrel ? ' ask , considerably crestfall . ' he think I too poor to we he sister , ' answer , ' and be grieve that I get she : he pride be hurt , and he will never forgive it . ' ' that be wrong ! ' say the young lady : ' some time I will tell he so . but and I have no share in you quarrel . I will not come here , then ; he shall come to the Grange . ' ' it will be too far for I , ' murmure she cousin : 'too walk four mile would kill I . no , come here , , now and then : not every morning , but once or twice a week . ' the father launch towards he son a glance of bitter contempt . 'I be afraid , Nelly , I shall lose my labour ,' he mutter to I . ' , as the ninny call she , will discover he value , and send he to the devil . now , if it have be ! - do you know that , twenty time a day , I covet , with all he degradation ? I would have love the lad have he be some one else . but I think he be safe from she love . I will pit he against that paltry creature , unless it bestir itself briskly . we calculate it will scarcely last till it be eighteen . oh , confound the vapid thing ! he be absorb in dry he foot , and never look at she . - ! ' ' yes , father , ' answer the boy . ' have you nothing to show you cousin anywhere about , not even a rabbit or a weasel 's nest ? take she into the garden , before you change you shoe ; and into the stable to see you horse . ' ' would not you rather sit here ? ' ask , address in a tone which express reluctance to move again . 'I do not know , ' she reply , cast a longing look to the door , and evidently eager to be active . he keep he seat , and shrank closer to the fire . Heathcliff rose , and go into the kitchen , and from thence to the yard , call out for . respond , and presently the two re-enter . the young man have be wash himself , as be visible by the glow on he cheek and he wett hair . ' oh , I will ask you , uncle , ' cry , recollect the housekeeper 's assertion . ' that be not my cousin , be he ? ' ' yes , ' he , reply , ' you mother 's nephew . do not you like he ! ' look queer . ' be he not a handsome lad ? ' he continue . the uncivil little thing stand on tiptoe , and whisper a sentence in 's ear . he laugh ; darken : I perceive he be very sensitive to suspect slights , and have obviously a dim notion of he inferiority . but he master or guardian chase the frown by exclaiming - ' you will be the
the favourite among we , ! she say you be a - what be it ? well , something very flatter . here ! you go with she round the farm . and behave like a gentleman , mind ! do not use any bad word ; and do not stare when the young lady be not look at you , and be ready to hide you face when she be ; and , when you speak , say you word slowly , and keep you hand out of you pocket . be off , and entertain she as nicly as you can . ' he watch the couple walk past the window . have he countenance completely avert from he companion . he seem study the familiar landscape with a stranger 's and a artist 's interest . take a sly look at he , express small admiration . she then turn she attention to seek out object of amusement for herself , and tripp merrily on , lilt a tune to supply the lack of conversation . 'I have tie he tongue , ' observe . ' he will not venture a single syllable all the time ! Nelly , you recollect meat he age - nay , some year younger . do I ever look so stupid : so " gaumless , " as call it ? ' ' worse ,' I reply , ' because more sullen with it . ' 'I have a pleasure in he ,' he continue , reflec aloud . ' he have satisfy my expectation . if he be a bear fool I should not enjoy it half so much . but he be no fool ; and I can sympathise with all he feeling , have feel they myself . I know what he suffer now , for instance , exactly : it be merely a beginning of what he shall suffer , though . and he will never be able to emerge from he batho of coarseness and ignorance . I have get he faster than he scoundrel of a father secure I , and lower ; for he take a pride in he brutishness . I have teach he to scorn everything extra - animal as silly and weak . do not you think would be proud of he son , if he could see he ? almost as proud as I be of mine . but there be this difference ; one be gold put to the use of paving - stone , and the other be tin polish to ape a service of silver . mine have nothing valuable about it ; yet I shall have the merit of make it go as far as such poor stuff can go . he have first - rate quality , and they be lose : render worse than unavailing . I have nothing to regret ; he would have more than any but I be aware of . and the best of it be , be damnably fond of I ! you will own that I have outmatch there . if the dead villain could rise from he grave to abuse I for he offspring 's wrong , I should have the fun of see the say offspring fight he back again , indignant that he should dare to rail at the one friend he have in the world ! ' chuckle a fiendish laugh at the idea . I make no reply , because I see that he expect none . , we young companion , who sit too remove from we to hear what be say , begin to evince symptom of uneasiness , probably repent that he have deny himself the treat of 's society for fear of a little fatigue . he father remark the restless glance wander to the window , and the hand irresolutely extend towards he cap . ' get up , you idle boy ! ' he exclaim , with assume heartiness . 'Away after they ! they be just at the corner , by the stand of hive . ' gather he energie , and leave the hearth . the lattice be open , and , as he step out , I hear inquire of she unsociable attendent what be that inscription over the door ? star up , and scratch he head like a true clown . ' it be some damnable writing , ' he answer . 'I can not read it . ' ' can not read it ? ' cry ; 'I can read it : it be . but I want to know why it be there . ' giggle : the first appearance of mirth he have exhibit . ' he do not know he letter , ' he say to he cousin . ' could you believe in the existence of such a colossal dunce ? ' ' be he all as he should be ? ' ask , seriously ; 'or be he simple : not right ? I have question he twice now , and each time he look so stupid I think he do not understand I . I can hardly understand he , I be sure ! ' repeat he laugh , and glance at tauntingly ; who certainly do not seem quite clear of comprehension at that moment . ' there be nothing the matter but laziness ; be there , ? ' he say . ' my cousin fancie you be a idiot . there you experience the consequence of scorning " book - larn , " as you would say . have you notice , , he frightful pronunciation ? ' ' why , where the devil be the use of not ? ' grow , more ready in answer he daily companion . he be about to enlarge further , but the two youngster break into a noisy fit of merriment : my giddy miss
miss be delighted to discover that she might turn he strange talk to matter of amusement . ' where be the use of the in that sentence ? ' titter . ' tell you not to say any bad word , and you can not open you mouth without one . do try to behave like a gentleman , now do ! ' ' if thou be not more a lass than a lad , I would fall thee this minute , I would ; pitiful lath of a crater ! ' retort the angry boor , retreate , while he face burnt with mingled rage and mortification ! for he be conscious of be insult , and embarrass how to resent it . have overhear the conversation , as well as I , smile when he see he go ; but immediately afterwards cast a look of singular aversion on the flippant pair , who remaine chatter in the door -way : the boy find animation enough while discuss 's fault and deficiency , and relate anecdote of he goings on ; and the girl relish he pert and spiteful saying , without consider the ill - nature they evince . I begin to dislike , more than to compassionate , and to excuse he father in some measure for hold he cheap . we stay till afternoon : I could not tear away sooner ; but happily my master have not quit he apartment , and remain ignorant of we prolonged absence . as we walk home , I would fain have enlighten my charge on the character of the people we have quit : but she get it into she head that I be prejudice against they . ' ! ' she cry , ' you take papa 's side , : you be partial I know ; or else you would not have cheat I so many year into the notion that liv a long way from here . I be really extremely angry ; only I be so pleased I can not show it ! but you must hold you tongue about my uncle ; he be my uncle , remember ; and I will scold papa for quarrell with he . ' and so she run on , till I relinquish the endeavour to convince she of she mistake . she do not mention the visit that night , because she do not see . next day it all come out , sadly to my chagrin ; and still I be not altogether sorry : I think the burden of directing and warning would be more efficiently borne by he than I . but he be too timid in give satisfactory reason for he wish that she should shin connection with the household of the , and like good reason for every restraint that harass she pet will . ' ! ' she exclaim , after the morning 's salutation , ' guess whom I see yesterday , in my walk on the moor . ah , papa , you start ! you have not do right , have you , now ? I see - but listen , and you shall hear how I find you out ; and , who be in with you , and yet pretend to pity I so , when I keep hope , and be always disappointed about 's come back ! ' she give a faithful account of she excursion and its consequence ; and my master , though he cast more than one reproachful look at I , say nothing till she have conclude . then he draw she to he , and ask if she know why he have conceal 's near neighbourhood from she ? could she think it be to deny she a pleasure that she might harmlessly enjoy ? ' it be because you dislike , ' she answer . ' then you believe I care more for my own feeling than yours , ? ' he say . ' no , it be not because I dislike , but because dislike I ; and be a most diabolical man , delighte to wrong and ruin those he hate , if they give he the slightest opportunity . I know that you could not keep up a acquaintance with you cousin without be bring into contact with he ; and I know he would detest you on my account ; so for you own good , and nothing else , I take precaution that you should not see again . I mean to explain this some time as you grow older , and I be sorry I delay it . ' ' but be quite cordial , papa , ' observ , not at all convinced ; ' and he do not object to we see each other : he say I might come to he house when I please ; only I must not tell you , because you have quarrell with he , and would not forgive he for marrying aunt . and you will not . you be the one to be blame : he be willing to let we be friend , at least ; and I ; and you be not . ' my master , perceive that she would not take he word for she uncle - in - law 's evil disposition , give a hasty sketch of he conduct to , and the manner in which become he property . he could not bear to discourse long upon the topic ; for though he speak little of it , he still feel the same horror and detestation of he ancient enemy that have occupy he heart ever since 's death . ' she might have be live yet , if it have not be for he ! ' be he constant bitter reflection ; and , in he eye , see a murderer .
. - conversant with no bad deed except she own slight act of disobedience , injustice , and passion , arise from hot temper and thoughtlessness , and repent of on the day they be commit - be amaze at the blackness of spirit that could brand on and cover revenge for year , and deliberately prosecute its plan without a visitation of remorse . she appear so deeply impressed and shocked at this new view of human nature - exclude from all she study and all she idea till now - that deem it unnecessary to pursue the subject . he merely add : ' you will know hereafter , darling , why I wish you to avoid he house and family ; now return to you old employment and amusement , and think no more about they . ' kiss she father , and sit down quietly to she lesson for a couple of hour , accord to custom ; then she accompany he into the grounds , and the whole day pass as usual : but in the evening , when she have retire to she room , and I go to help she to undress , I find she cry , on she knee by the bedside . 'Oh , fie , silly child ! ' I exclaim . ' if you have any real grief you would be asham to waste a tear on this little contrariety . you never have one shadow of substantial sorrow , . suppose , for a minute , that master and I be dead , and you be by yourself in the world : how would you feel , then ? compare the present occasion with such a affliction as that , and be thankful for the friend you have , instead of coveting more . ' 'I be not cry for myself , , ' she answer , ' it be for he . he expect to see I again to - morrow , and there he will be so disappointed : and he will wait for I , and I sha ' not come ! ' ' Nonsense ! ' say I , 'do you imagine he have think as much of you as you have of he ? have not he for a companion ? not one in a hundred would weep at lose a relation they have just see twice , for two afternoon . will conjecture how it be , and trouble himself no further about you . ' ' but may I not write a note to tell he why I can not come ? ' she ask , rise to she foot . ' and just send those book I promise to lend he ? he book be not as nice as mine , and he want to have they extremely , when I tell he how interesting they be . may I not , ? ' 'no , indeed ! no , indeed ! ' reply I with decision . ' then he would write to you , and there would never be a end of it . no , , the acquaintance must be drop entirely : so papa expect , and I shall see that it be done . ' ' but how can one little note - ? ' she recommence , put on a imploring countenance . ' Silence ! ' I interrupt . ' we will not begin with you little note . get into bed . ' she throw at I a very naughty look , so naughty that I would not kiss she good - night at first : I cover she up , and shut she door , in great displeasure ; but , repent half - way , I return softly , and lo ! there be miss stand at the table with a bit of blank paper before she and a pencil in she hand , which she guiltily slipp out of sight on my entrance . ' you will get nobody to take that , ,' I say , ' if you write it ; and at present I shall put out you candle . ' I set the extinguisher on the flame , receive as I do so a slap on my hand and a petulant ' cross thing ! ' I then quit she again , and she draw the bolt in one of she worst , most peevish humours . the letter be finish and forward to its destination by a milk - fetcher who come from the village ; but that I do not learn till some time afterwards . week pass on , and recover she temper ; though she grow wondrous fond of stealing off to corner by herself and often , if I come near she suddenly while read , she would start and bend over the book , evidently desirous to hide it ; and I detect edge of loose paper stick out beyond the leave . she also get a trick of come down early in the morning and linger about the kitchen , as if she be expect the arrival of something ; and she have a small drawer in a cabinet in the library , which she would trifle over for hour , and whose key she take special care to remove when she leave it . one day , as she inspect this drawer , I observe that the plaything and trinket which recently for its contents be transmute into bits of fold paper . my curiosity and suspicion be rouse ; I determine to take a peep at she mysterious treasure ; so , at night , as soon as she and my master be safe upstairs , I search , and readily find among my house key one that would fit the lock . have open , I empty the whole contents into my apron , and
and take they with I to examine at leisure in my own chamber . though I could not but suspect , I be still surprised to discover that they be a mass of correspondence - daily almost , it must have be - from : answer to document forward by she . the earlier date be embarrassed and short ; gradually , however , they expand into copious love - letter , foolish , as the age of the writer render natural , yet with touch here and there which I think be borrowed from a more experienced source . some of they strike I as singularly odd compound of ardour and flatness ; commence in strong feeling , and conclude in the affected , wordy style that a schoolboy might use to a fancied , incorporeal sweetheart . whether they satisfie I do not know ; but they appear very worthless trash to I . after turn over as many as I think proper , I tie they in a handkerchief and set they aside , relock the vacant drawer . follow she habit , my young lady descende early , and visit the kitchen : I watch she go to the door , on the arrival of a certain little boy ; and , while the dairymaid fill he can , she tuck something into he jacket pocket , and pluck something out . I go round by the garden , and laid wait for the messenger ; who fight valorously to defend he trust , and we spild the milk between we ; but I succeed in abstract the epistle ; and , threaten serious consequence if he do not look sharp home , I remaine under the wall and peruse 's affectionate composition . it be more simple and more eloquent than she cousin 's : very pretty and very silly . I shook my head , and go meditat into the house . the day be wet , she could not divert herself with rambling about the park ; so , at the conclusion of she morning study , she resort to the solace of the drawer . she father sit read at the table ; and I , on purpose , have seek a bit of work in some unripped fringe of the window - curtain , keep my eye steadily fix on she proceedings . never do any bird fly back to a plunder nest , which it have leave brimful of chirping young one , express more complete despair , in its anguished cry and fluttering , than she by she single 'Oh ! ' and the change that transfigure she late happy countenance . look up . ' what be the matter , love ? have you hurt yourself ? ' he say . he tone and look assure she he have not be the discoverer of the hoard . 'no , papa ! ' she gas . ' ! ! come up - stair - I be sick ! ' I obey she summon , and accompany she out . 'Oh , ! you have get they , ' she commence immediately , drop on she knee , when we be enclose alone . 'Oh , give they to I , and I will never , never do so again ! do not tell papa . you have not tell papa , ? say you have not ? I have be exceedingly naughty , but I will not do it any more ! ' with a grave severity in my manner I bade she stand up . ' so ,' I exclaim , ' , you be tolerably far on , it seem : you may well be asham of they ! a fine bundle of trash you study in you leisure hour , to be sure : why , it be good enough to be print ! and what do you suppose the master will think when I display it before he ? I hav' not show it yet , but you need not imagine I shall keep you ridiculous secret . for shame ! and you must have lead the way in writing such absurdity : he would not have think of begin , I be certain . ' 'I do not ! I do not ! ' sob , fit to break she heart . 'I do not once think of love he till - ' ' loving ! ' cry I , as scornfully as I could utter the word . ' loving ! do anybody ever hear the like ! I might just as well talk of love the miller who come once a year to buy we corn . pretty loving , indeed ! and both time together you have see hardly four hour in you life ! now here be the babyish trash . I be go with it to the library ; and we will see what you father say to such loving . ' she spring at she precious epistle , but I hold they above my head ; and then she pour out further frantic entreaty that I would burn they - do anything rather than show they . and be really fully as much inclin to laugh as scold - for I esteem it all girlish vanity - I at length relent in a measure , and ask , - ' if I consent to burn they , will you promise faithfully neither to send nor receive a letter again , nor a book ( for I perceive you have send he book ) , nor lock of hair , nor ring , nor plaything ? ' ' we do not send plaything , ' cry , she pride overcome she shame . ' anything at all , then , my lady ? ' I say . ' unless you will , here I go . ' 'i promise ,
, ! ' she cry , catch my dress . 'Oh , put they in the fire , do , do ! ' but when I proceed to open a place with the poker the sacrifice be too painful to be borne . she earnestly supplicate that I would spare she one or two . ' one or two , , to keep for 's sake ! ' I unknot the handkerchief , and commence drop they in from a angle , and the flame curl up the chimney . 'I will have one , you cruel wretch ! ' she scream , dart she hand into the fire , and draw forth some half - consum fragment , at the expense of she finger . ' very well - and I will have some to exhibit to papa ! ' I answer , shak back the rest into the bundle , and turn anew to the door . she empty she blacken piece into the flame , and motion I to finish the immolation . it be done ; I stir up the ash , and inter they under a shovelful of coal ; and she mutely , and with a sense of intense injury , retire to she private apartment . I descend to tell my master that the young lady 's qualm of sickness be almost gone , but I judge it best for she to lie down a while . she would not dine ; but she reappear at tea , pale , and red about the eyes , and marvellously subdue in outward aspect . next morning I answer the letter by a slip of paper , inscribe , ' master Heathcliff be request to send no more note to , as she will not receive they . ' and , henceforth , the little boy come with vacant pocket . draw to a end , and early autumn : it be past , but the harvest be late that year , and a few of we field be still uncleared . and he daughter would frequently walk out among the reaper ; at the carrying of the last sheave they stay till dusk , and the evening happen to be chill and damp , my master catch a bad cold , that settle obstinately on he lung , and confin he indoors throughout the whole of the winter , nearly without intermission . poor , frightene from she little romance , have be considerably sadder and duller since its abandonment ; and she father insist on she reading less , and take more exercise . she have he companionship no longer ; I esteem it a duty to supply its lack , as much as possible , with mine : a inefficient substitute ; for I could only spare two or three hour , from my numerous diurnal occupations , to follow she footstep , and then my society be obviously less desirable than he . on a afternoon in , or the beginning of - a fresh watery afternoon , when the turf and pat be rust with moist , wither leave , and the cold blue sky be half hide by cloud - dark grey streamer , rapidly mount from the west , and bod abundant rain - I request my young lady to forego she ramble , because I be certain of shower . she refuse ; and I unwillingly don a cloak , and take my umbrella to accompany she on a stroll to the bottom of the park : a formal walk which she generally affect if low - spirit - and that she invariably be when have be worse than ordinary , a thing never know from he confession , but guess both by she and I from he increase silence and the melancholy of he countenance . she go sadly on : there be no running or bound now , though the chill wind might well have temp she to race . and often , from the side of my eye , I could detect she raise a hand , and brush something off she cheek . I gaze round for a means of divert she thought . on one side of the road rise a high , rough bank , where hazel and stunt oak , with they root half expose , hold uncertain tenure : the soil be too loose for the latter ; and strong wind have blow some nearly horizontal . in summer delighte to climb along these trunk , and sit in the branch , swing twenty foot above the ground ; and I , pleas with she agility and she light , childish heart , still consider it proper to scold every time I catch she at such a elevation , but so that she know there be no necessity for descende . from dinner to tea she would lie in she breeze - rock cradle , do nothing except singing old song - my nursery lore - to herself , or watch the bird , joint tenant , feed and entice they young one to fly : or nestle with close lid , half think , half dream , happier than word can express . ' look , ! ' I exclaim , point to a nook under the root of one twisted tree . ' be not here yet . there be a little flower up yonder , the last bud from the multitude of bluebell that cloude those turf step in with a lilac mist . will you clamber up , and pluck it to show to papa ? ' stare a long time at the lonely blossom trembl in its earthy shelter , and reply , at length - ' no , I will not touch it : but it look melancholy , do it not , ? ' ' yes ,' I observ , ' about as
as starve and suckless as you you cheek be bloodless ; let we take hold of hand and run . you be so low , I daresay I shall keep up with you . ' ' no , ' she repeat , and continue saunter on , pause at interval to muse over a bit of moss , or a tuft of blanched grass , or a fungus spread its bright orange among the heap of brown foliage ; and , ever and anon , she hand be lift to she averted face . ' Catherine , why be you cry , love ? ' I ask , approach and put my arm over she shoulder . ' you must not cry because papa have a cold ; be thankful it be nothing worse . ' she now put no further restraint on she tear ; she breath be stifle by sob . ' oh , it will be something worse , ' she say . ' and what shall I do when papa and you leave I , and I be by myself ? I can not forget you word , ; they be always in my ear . how life will be change , how dreary the world will be , when papa and you be dead . ' ' none can tell whether you will not die before we ,' I reply . ' it be wrong to anticipate evil . we will hope there be year and year to come before any of we go : master be young , and I be strong , and hardly forty - five . my mother live till eighty , a canty dame to the last . and suppose I be spare till he see sixty , that would be more year than you have count , . and would it not be foolish to mourn a calamity above twenty year beforehand ? ' ' but be younger than papa , ' she remark , gaze up with timid hope to seek further consolation . ' have not you and I to nurse she ,' I reply . ' she be not as happy as master : she have not as much to live for . all you need do , be to wait well on you father , and cheer he by let he see you cheerful ; and avoid give he anxiety on any subject : mind that , ! I will not disguise but you might kill he if you be wild and reckless , and cherish a foolish , fanciful affection for the son of a person who would be glad to have he in he grave ; and allow he to discover that you fret over the separation he have judge it expedient to make . ' 'I fret about nothing on earth except papa 's illness , ' answer my companion . 'I care for nothing in comparison with papa . and I will never - never - oh , never , while I have my sense , do a act or say a word to vex he . I love he better than myself , ; and I know it by this : I pray every night that I may live after he ; because I would rather be miserable than that he should be : that prove I love he better than myself . ' ' good word ,' I reply . ' but deed must prove it also ; and after he be well , remember you do not forget resolution form in the hour of fear . ' as we talk , we neare a door that open on the road ; and my young lady , lighten into sunshine again , clim up and seate herself on the top of the wall , reach over to gather some hip that bloom scarlet on the summit branch of the wild - rose tree shadowe the highway side : the lower fruit have disappeared , but only bird could touch the upper , except from 's present station . in stretching to pull they , she hat fall off ; and as the door be lock , she propose scrambl down to recover it . I bid she be cautious lest she get a fall , and she nimbly disappear . but the return be no such easy matter : the stone be smooth and neatly cement , and the rose - bushes and black - berry straggler could yield no assistance in re-ascending . I , like a fool , do not recollect that , till I hear she laugh and exclaim - ' ! you will have to fetch the key , or else I must run round to the porter 's lodge . I can not scale the rampart on this side ! ' ' stay where you be ,' I answer ; 'I have my bundle of key in my pocket : perhaps I may manage to open it ; if not , I will go . ' amuse herself with dancing to and for before the door , while I try all the large key in succession . I have apply the last , and find that none would do ; so , repeat my desire that she would remain there , I be about to hurry home as fast as I could , when a approach sound arrest I . it be the trot of a horse ; 's dance stop also . ' who be that ? ' I whisper . ' , I wish you could open the door , ' whisper back my companion , anxiously . 'Ho , ! ' cry a deep voice ( the rider 's ) , 'I be glad to meet you . do not be in haste to enter , for I have a explanation to ask and obtain . ' 'i sha ' not speak
speak to you , , ' answer . ' say you be a wicked man , and you hate both he and I ; and say the same . ' ' that be nothing to the purpose , ' say . ( he it be . ) 'I do not hate my son , I suppose ; and it be concern he that I demand you attention . yes ; you have cause to blush . two or three month since , be you not in the habit of write to ? make love in play , eh ? you deserve , both of you , flog for that ! you especially , the elder ; and less sensitive , as it turn out . I have get you letter , and if you give I any pertness I will send they to you father . I presume you grow weary of the amusement and drop it , do not you ? well , you drop with it into a of . he be in earnest : in love , really . as true as I live , he be die for you ; break he heart at you fickleness : not figuratively , but actually . though have make he a stand jest for six week , and I have use more serious measure , and attempt to frighten he out of he idiotcy , he get worse daily ; and he will be under the sod before summer , unless you restore he ! ' ' how can you lie so glaringly to the poor child ? ' I call from the inside . ' pray ride on ! how can you deliberately get up such paltry falsehood ? , I will knock the lock off with a stone : you will not believe that vile nonsense . you can feel in yourself it be impossible that a person should die for love of a stranger . ' 'I be not aware there be eavesdropper , ' mutter the detect villain . ' , I like you , but I do not like you double - deal , ' he add aloud . ' how could you lie so glaringly as to affirm I hate the " poor child " ? and invent bugbear story to terrify she from my door - stone ? ( the very name warm I ) , my bonny lass , I shall be from home all this week ; go and see if have not speak truth : do , there be a darling ! just imagine you father in my place , and in yours ; then think how you would value you careless lover if he refuse to stir a step to comfort you , when you father himself entreate he ; and do not , from pure stupidity , fall into the same error . I swear , on my salvation , he be go to he grave , and none but you can save he ! ' the lock give way and I issue out . 'i swear be die , ' repeat , look hard at I . ' and grief and disappointment be hasten he death . Nelly , if you will not let she go , you can walk over yourself . but I shall not return till this time next week ; and I think you master himself would scarcely object to she visit she cousin . ' ' come in , ' say I , take by the arm and half force she to re-enter ; for she linger , view with troubled eye the feature of the speaker , too stern to express he inward deceit . he push he horse close , and , bend down , observe - ' , I will own to you that I have little patience with ; and and have less . I will own that he be with a harsh set . he pine for kindness , as well as love ; and a kind word from you would be he best medicine . do not mind 's cruel caution ; but be generous , and contrive to see he . he dream of you day and night , and can not be persuade that you do not hate he , since you neither write nor call . ' I close the door , and roll a stone to assist the loose lock in hold it ; and spread my umbrella , I draw my charge underneath : for the rain begin to drive through the moaning branch of the tree , and warne we to avoid delay . we hurry prevent any comment on the encounter with , as we stretch towards home ; but I divine instinctively that 's heart be cloud now in double darkness . she feature be so sad , they do not seem hers : she evidently regard what she have hear as every syllable true . the master have retire to rest before we come in . steal to he room to inquire how he be ; he have fall asleep . she return , and ask I to sit with she in the library . we take we tea together ; and afterwards she lay down on the rug , and tell I not to talk , for she be weary . I get a book , and pretend to read . as soon as she suppose I absorb in my occupation , she recommence she silent weeping : it appear , at present , she favourite diversion . I suffer she to enjoy it a while ; then I expostulate : derid and ridicule all 's assertion about he son , as if I be certain she would coincide . ! I have not skill to counteract the effect he account have produce : it be just what he intend . ' you may be right
right , , ' she answer ; ' but I shall never feel at ease till I know . and I must tell it be not my fault that I do not write , and convince he that I shall not change . ' what use be anger and protestation against she silly credulity ? we parte that night - hostile ; but next day beheld I on the road to , by the side of my wilful young mistress 's pony . I could not bear to witness she sorrow : to see she pale , deject countenance , and heavy eye : and I yield , in the faint hope that himself might prove , by he reception of we , how little of the tale be found on fact . the rainy night have usher in a misty morning - half frost , half drizzle - and temporary brook cross we path - gurgl from the upland . my foot be thoroughly wet ; I be cross and low ; exactly the humour suite for make the most of these disagreeable thing . we enter the farm - house by the kitchen way , to ascertain whether be really absent : because i put slight faith in he own affirmation . seem sit in a sort of elysium alone , beside a roaring fire ; a quart of ale on the table near he , bristl with large piece of toast oat - cake ; and he black , short pipe in he mouth . run to the hearth to warm herself . I ask if the master be in ? my question remain so long unanswered , that I think the old man have grow deaf , and repeat it louder . ' - ! ' he snarl , or rather scream through he nose . ' - ay ! yah muh goa back whear yah coom frough . ' ' ! ' cry a peevish voice , simultaneously with I , from the inner room . ' how often be I to call you ? there be only a few red ash now . ! come this moment . ' Vigorous puffs , and a resolute stare into the grate , declare he have no ear for this appeal . the housekeeper and be invisible ; one go on a errand , and the other at he work , probably . we know 's tone , and enter . ' oh , I hope you will die in a garret , starve to death ! ' say the boy , mistake we approach for that of he negligent attendent . he stop on observe he error : he cousin fly to he . ' be that you , ? ' he say , raise he head from the arm of the great chair , in which he recline . ' no - do not kiss I : it take my breath . dear I ! say you would call , ' continue he , after recover a little from 's embrace ; while she stand by look very contrite . ' will you shut the door , if you please ? you leave it open ; and those - those Detestable creature will not bring coals to the fire . it be so cold ! ' I stir up the cinder , and fetch a scuttleful myself . the invalid complain of be cover with ash ; but he have a tiresome cough , and look feverish and ill , so I do not rebuke he temper . ' well , , ' murmure , when he corrugate brow relaxed , ' be you glad to see I ? can I do you any good ? ' ' why do not you come before ? ' he ask . ' you should have come , instead of writing . it tire I dreadfully write those long letter . I would far rather have talk to you . now , I can neither bear to talk , nor anything else . I wonder where be ! will you ' ( look at I ) ' step into the kitchen and see ? ' I have receive no thanks for my other service ; and be unwilling to run to and for at he behest , I reply - ' nobody be out there but . ' 'I want to drink ,' he exclaim fretfully , turn away . ' be constantly gadd off to since papa go : it be miserable ! and I be oblige to come down here - they resolve never to hear I up - stair . ' ' be you father attentive to you , ? ' I ask , perceive to be check in she friendly advance . ' attentive ? he make they a little more attentive at least , ' he cry . ' the wretch ! do you know , , that brute laugh at I ! I hate he ! indeed , I hate they all : they be odious being . ' begin search for some water ; she light on a pitcher in the dresser , fill a tumbler , and bring it . he bid she add a spoonful of wine from a bottle on the table ; and have swallow a small portion , appear more tranquil , and say she be very kind . ' and be you glad to see I ? ' ask she , reiterat she former question and please to detect the faint dawn of a smile . ' yes , I be . it be something new to hear a voice like yours ! ' he reply . ' but I have be vex , because you would not come . and papa swore it be owe to I : he call I a pitiful , shuffling , worthless thing ; and say you despise I ;
; and if he have be in my place , he would be more the master of the than you father by this time . but you do not despise I , do you , - ? ' 'I wish you would say , or , ' interrupt my young lady . ' Despise you ? no ! next to and , I love you better than anybody liive . I do not love , though ; and I dare not come when he return : will he stay away many day ? ' ' not many , ' answer ; ' but he go on to the moor frequently , since the shooting season commence ; and you might spend a hour or two with I in he absence . do say you will . I think I should not be peevish with you : you would not provoke I , and you would always be ready to help I , would not you ? ' ' yes " say , strok he long soft hair : 'if I could only get papa 's consent , I would spend half my time with you . ! I wish you be my brother . ' ' and then you would like I as well as you father ? ' observe he , more cheerfully . ' but papa say you would love I better than he and all the world , if you be my wife ; so I would rather you be that . ' ' no , I should never love anybody better than papa , ' she return gravely . ' and people hate they wife , sometimes ; but not they sister and brother : and if you be the latter , you would live with we , and papa would be as fond of you as he be of I . ' deny that people ever hate they wife ; but affir they do , and , in she wisdom , instance he own father 's aversion to she aunt . I endeavoure to stop she thoughtless tongue . I could not succeed till everything she know be out . master Heathcliff , much irritate , assert she relation be false . ' tell I ; and papa do not tell falsehood , ' she answer pertly . 'my papa scorns yours ! ' cry . ' he call he a sneaking fool . ' ' yours be a wicked man , ' retort ; ' and you be very naughty to dare to repeat what he say . he must be wick to have make leave he as she do . ' ' she do not leave he , ' say the boy ; ' you sha ' not contradict I . ' ' she do , ' cry my young lady . ' well , I will tell you something ! ' say . ' you mother hate you father : now then . ' 'Oh ! ' exclaim , too enraged to continue . ' and she love mine , ' add he . ' you little liar ! I hate you now ! ' she pante , and she face grow red with passion . ' she do ! she do ! ' sang , sinke into the recess of he chair , and lean back he head to enjoy the agitation of the other disputant , who stand behind . ' Hush , ! ' I say ; ' that be you father 's tale , too , I suppose . ' ' it be not : you hold you tongue ! ' he answer . ' she do , she do , ! she do , she do ! ' , beside herself , give the chair a violent push , and cause he to fall against one arm . he be immediately seize by a suffocating cough that soon end he triumph . it last so long that it frightene even I . as to he cousin , she weep with all she might , aghast at the mischief she have do : though she say nothing . I hold he till the fit exhaust itself . then he thrust I away , and lean he head down silently . quell she lamentation also , take a seat opposite , and look solemnly into the fire . ' how do you feel now , ? ' I inquire , after wait ten minute . 'I wish she feel as I do ,' he reply : ' spiteful , cruel thing ! never touch I : he never strike I in he life . and I be better to - day : and there - ' he die in a whimper . 'I do not strike you ! ' mutter , chew she lip to prevent another burst of emotion . he sigh and moan like one under great suffering , and keep it up for a quarter of a hour ; on purpose to distress he cousin apparently , for whenever he catch a stifle sob from she he put renew pain and patho into the inflexion of he voice . 'I be sorry I hurt you , , ' she say at length , rack beyond endurance . ' but I could not have be hurt by that little push , and I have no idea that you could , either : you be not much , be you , ? do not let I go home think I have do you harm . answer ! speak to I . ' 'I can not speak to you ,' he murmure ; ' you have hurt I so that I shall lie awake all night chok with this cough . if you have it you would know what it be ; but you will be comfortably asleep while I be in agony , and nobody near I . I
I wonder how you would like to pass those fearful night ! ' and he begin to wail aloud , for very pity of himself . ' since you be in the habit of passing dreadful night ,' I say , ' it will not be who spoil you ease : you would be the same have she never come . however , she shall not disturb you again ; and perhaps you will get quieter when we leave you . ' ' must I go ? ' ask dolefully , bend over he . ' do you want I to go , ? ' ' you can not alter what you have do ,' he reply pettishly , shrink from she , ' unless you alter it for the worse by tease I into a fever . ' ' well , then , I must go ? ' she repeat . ' let I alone , at least , ' say he ; 'I can not bear you talking . ' she linger , and resist my persuasion to departure a tiresome while ; but as he neither look up nor spoke , she finally make a movement to the door , and I follow . we be recall by a scream . have slid from he seat on to the hearthstone , and lay writhing in the mere perverseness of a indulged plague of a child , determine to be as grievous and harasse as it can . I thoroughly gauge he disposition from he behaviour , and see at once it would be folly to attempt humoure he . not so my companion : she run back in terror , knelt down , and cry , and soothe , and entreate , till he grow quiet from lack of breath : by no means from compunction at distresse she . 'I shall lift he on to the settle ,' I say , ' and he may roll about as he please : we can not stop to watch he . I hope you be satisfied , , that you be not the person to benefit he ; and that he condition of health be not occasion by attachment to you . now , then , there he be ! come away : as soon as he know there be nobody by to care for he nonsense , he will be glad to lie still . ' she place a cushion under he head , and offer he some water ; he reject the latter , and toss uneasily on the former , as if it be a stone or a block of wood . she try to put it more comfortably . 'I can not do with that , ' he say ; ' it be not high enough . ' bring another to lay above it . ' that be too high , ' murmure the provoking thing . ' how must I arrange it , then ? ' she ask despairingly . he twin himself up to she , as she half knelt by the settle , and convert she shoulder into a support . ' no , that will not do ,' I say . ' you will be content with the cushion , master Heathcliff . have waste too much time on you already : we can not remain five minute longer . ' ' yes , yes , we can ! ' reply . 'he be good and patient now . he be begin to think I shall have far greater misery than he will to - night , if I believe he be the worse for my visit : and then I dare not come again . tell the truth about it , ; for I mus not come , if I have hurt you . ' ' you must come , to cure I , ' he answer . ' you ought to come , because you have hurt I : you know you have extremely ! I be not as ill when you enter as I be at present - be I ? ' ' but you have make yourself ill by crying and be in a passion . - I do not do it all , ' say he cousin . ' however , we will be friend now . and you want I : you would wish to see I sometimes , really ? ' 'I tell you I do ,' he reply impatiently . ' sit on the settle and let I lean on you knee . that be as mamma use to do , whole afternoon together . sit quite still and do not talk : but you may s a song , if you can s ; or you may say a nice long interesting ballad - one of those you promise to teach I ; or a story . I would rather have a ballad , though : begin . ' repeat the longest she could remember . the employment please both mightily . would have another , and after that another , notwithstand my strenuous objection ; and so they go on until the clock struck twelve , and we hear in the court , return for he dinner . ' and to -morrow , , will you be here to - morrow ? ' ask yong Heathcliff , hold she frock as she rise reluctantly . ' no ,' I answer , ' nor next day neither . ' she , however , give a different response evidently , for he forehead clear as she stoop and whisper in he ear . ' you will not go to - morrow , recollect , ! ' I commence , when we be out of the house . ' you be not dream of it , be you ? ' she smile . ' oh , I will take good care ,' I continue
continue : 'I will have that lock mende , and you can escape by no way else . ' 'I can get over the wall , ' she say laughing . ' the be not a prison , , and you be not my gaoler . and besides , I be almost seventeen : I be a woman . and I be certain would recover quickly if he have I to look after he . I be older than he be , you know , and wiser : less childish , be I not ? and he will soon do as I direct he , with some slight coaxing . he be a pretty little darling when he be good . I would make such a pet of he , if he be mine . we should , never quarrel , should we after we be use to each other ? do not you like he , ? ' ' like he ! ' I exclaim . ' the worst - tempered bit of a sickly slip that ever struggl into it be teens . happily , as conjecture , he will not win twenty . I doubt whether he will see spring , indeed . and small loss to he family whenever he drop off . and lucky it be for we that he father take he : the kinder he be treat , the more tedious and selfish he would be . I be glad you have no chance of have he for a husband , . ' my companion wax serious at hear this speech . to speak of he death so regardlessly woun she feeling . 'he be younger than I , ' she answer , after a protract pause of meditation , ' and he ought to live the longest : he will - he must live as long as I do . he be as strong now as when he first come into the north ; I be positive of that . it be only a cold that ail he , the same as papa have . you say papa will get better , and why should not he ? ' 'Well , well ,' I cry , ' after all , we need not trouble ourselves ; for listen , , - and mind , I will keep my word , - if you attempt go to again , with or without I , I shall inform , and , unless he allow it , the intimacy with you cousin must not be revive . ' ' it have be revive , ' mutter , sulkily . ' must not be continue , then ,' I say . ' we will see , ' be she reply , and she set off at a gallop , leave I to toil in the rear . we both reach home before we dinner - time ; my master suppose we have be wander through the park , and therefore he demand no explanation of we absence . as soon as I enter I haste to change my soaked shoe and stocking ; but sit such awhile at the have do the mischief . on the succeeding morning I be lay up , and during three week I remain incapacitate for attend to my duty : a calamity never experience prior to that period , and never , I be thankful to say , since . my little mistress behave like a angel in come to wait on I , and cheer my solitude ; the confinement bring I exceedingly low . it be wearisome , to a stirring active body : but few have slighter reason for complaint than I have . the moment leave 's room she appear at my bedside . she day be divide between we ; no amusement usur a minute : she neglect she meal , she study , and she play ; and she be the fondest nurse that ever watch . she must have have a warm heart , when she love she father so , to give so much to I . I say she day be divide between we ; but the master retire early , and I generally need nothing after six o'clock , thus the evening be she own . poor thing ! I never consider what she do with herself after tea . and though frequently , when she look in to bid I good - night , I remark a fresh colour in she cheek and a pinkness over she slender finger , instead of fancie the line borrowed from a cold ride across the moor , I lay it to the charge of a hot fire in the library . at the close of three week I be able to quit my chamber and move about the house . and on the first occasion of my sit up in the evening I ask to read to I , because my eye be weak . we be in the library , the master have go to bed : she consent , rather unwillingly , I fancie ; and imagine my sort of book do not suit she , I bid she please herself in the choice of what she peruse . she select one of she own favourite , and get forward steadily about a hour ; then come frequent question . ' , be not you tire ? have not you better lie down now ? you will be sick , keep up so long , . ' ' no , no , dear , I be not tired ,' I return , continually . perceive I immovable , she essay another method of show she disrelish for she occupation . it change to yawn , and stretch , and - ' , I be tired . ' ' give over then and talk ,' I answer . that be worse :
: she fret and sigh , and look at she watch till eight , and finally go to she room , completely overdone with sleep ; judge by she peevish , heavy look , and the constant rub she inflict on she eye . the follow night she see more impatient still ; and on the third from recover my company she complain of a headache , and leave I . I think she conduct odd ; and have remain alone a long while , I resolve on go and inquire whether she be better , and ask she to come and lie on the sofa , instead of up - stair in the dark . no Catherine could I discover up - stair , and none below . the servant affirm they have not see she . I listen at 's door ; all be silence . I return to she apartment , extinguish my candle , and seate myself in the window . the moon shone bright ; a sprinkling of snow cover the ground , and I reflect that she might , possibly , have take it into she head to walk about the garden , for refreshment . I do detect a figure creep along the inner fence of the park ; but it be not my young mistress : on its emerge into the light , I recognise one of the grooms . he stand a considerable period , view the carriage - road through the grounds ; then start off at a brisk pace , as if he have detect something , and reappear presently , lead 's pony ; and there she be , just dismount , and walk by its side . the man take he charge stealthily across the grass towards the stable . enter by the casement - window of the drawing - room , and glide noiselessly up to where I await she . she put the door gently too , slipp off she snowy shoe , untie she hat , and be proceed , unconscious of my espionage , to lay aside she mantle , when I suddenly rise and reveal myself . the surprise petrify she a instant : she utter a inarticulate exclamation , and stood fix . 'my dear ,' I begin , too vividly impress by she recent kindness to break into a scold , ' where have you be ride out at this hour ? and why should you try to deceive I by tell a tale ? where have you be ? ! ' 'to the bottom of the park , ' she stammer . 'I do not tell a tale . ' ' and nowhere else ? ' I demand . ' no , ' be the muttered reply . 'Oh , ! ' I cry , sorrowfully . ' you know you have be do wrong , or you would not be drive to utter a untruth to I . that do grieve I . I would rather be three month ill , than hear you frame a deliberate lie . ' she spring forward , and burst into tear , throw she arm round my neck . ' well , , I be so afraid of you be angry , ' she say . ' promise not to be angry , and you shall know the very truth : I hate to hide it . ' we sit down in the window - seat ; I assure she I would not scold , whatever she secret might be , and I guess it , of course ; so she commence - 'I have be to , , and I have never miss go a day since you fall ill ; except thrice before , and twice after you leave you room . I give book and picture to prepare every evening , and to put she back in the stable : you must not scold he either , mind . I be at the by half - past six , and generally stay till half - past eight , and then gallop home . it be not to amuse myself that I go : I be often wretch all the time . now and then I be happy : once in a week perhaps . at first , I expect there would be sad work persuade you to let I keep my word to : for i have engage to call again next day , when we quit he ; but , as you stay up - stair on the morrow , I escape that trouble . while be refasten the lock of the park door in the afternoon , I get possession of the key , and tell he how my cousin wish I to visit he , because he be sick , and could not come to the Grange ; and how papa would object to my go : and then I negotiate with he about the pony . he be fond of reading , and he think of leave soon to get married ; so he offer , if I would lend he book out of the library , to do what I wish : but I prefer give he my own , and that satisfy he better . ' on my second visit see in lively spirit ; and ( that be they housekeeper ) make we a clean room and a good fire , and tell we that , as be out at a prayer - meeting and be off with he dog - rob we wood of pheasant , as I hear afterwards - we might do what we like . she bring I some warm wine and gingerbread , and appear exceedingly good - natured , and sit in the arm -chair , and I in the little rocking chair on the hearth - stone , and we laugh and talk so merrily
merrily , and find so much to say : we plan where we would go , and what we would do in summer . I need not repeat that , because you would call it silly . ' one time , however , we be near quarrell . he say the pleasantest manner of spend a hot day be lie from morning till evening on a bank of heath in the middle of the moor , with the be hum dreamily about among the bloom , and the lark singe high up overhead , and the blue sky and bright sun shin steadily and cloudlessly . that be he most perfect idea of heaven 's happiness : mine be rock in a rust green tree , with a west wind blow , and bright white cloud flitt rapidly above ; and not only lark , but throstle , and blackbird , and linnet , and cuckoo pour out music on every side , and the moor see at a distance , break into cool dusky dell ; but close by great swell of long grass undulating in wave to the breeze ; and wood and sound water , and the whole world awake and wild with joy . he want all to lie in a ecstasy of peace ; I want all to sparkle and dance in a glorious jubilee . I say he heaven would be only half alive ; and he say mine would be drink : I say I should fall asleep in he ; and he say he could not breathe in mine , and begin to grow very snappish . at last , we agree to try both , as soon as the right weather come ; and then we kiss each other and be friend . 'After sit still a hour , I look at the great room with its smooth uncarpeted floor , and think how nice it would be to play in , if we remove the table ; and I ask to call in to help we , and we would have a game at 's - buff ; she should try to catch we : you use to , you know , . he would not : there be no pleasure in it , he say ; but he consent to play at ball with I . we find two in a cupboard , among a heap of old toy , top , and hoops , and battledore and shuttlecock . one be mark c. , and the other ; I wish to have the c. , because that stand for , and the might be for , he name ; but the bran come out of , and do not like it . I beat he constantly : and he get cross again , and cough , and return to he chair . that night , though , he easily recover he good humour : he be charme with two or three pretty song - you song , ; and when I be oblige to go , he beg and entreate I to come the follow evening ; and I promise . and I go fly home as light as air ; and I dreamt of and my sweet , darling cousin , till morning . 'On the morrow I be sad ; partly because you be poorly , and partly that I wish my father know , and approve of my excursion : but it be beautiful moonlight after tea ; and , as I ride on , the gloom clear . I shall have another happy evening , I think to myself ; and what delight I more , my pretty will . I trott up they garden , and be turn round to the back , when that fellow Earnshaw meet I , take my bridle , and bid I go in by the front entrance . he patt 's neck , and say she be a bonny beast , and appear as if he want I to speak to he . I only tell he to leave my horse alone , or else it would kick he . he answer in he vulgar accent , " it would not do mitch hurt if it do ; " and survey its leg with a smile . I be half inclin to make it try ; however , he move off to open the door , and , as he raise the latch , he look up to the inscription above , and say , with a stupid mixture of awkwardness and elation : " ! I can read , now . " ' " wonderful , " I exclaim . " pray let we hear you - you be grow clever ! " 'o spelt , and draw over by syllable , the name - " . " ' " and the figure ? " I cry , encouragingly , perceive that he come to a dead halt . ' " I can not tell they yet , " he answer . ' " oh , you dunce ! " I say , laugh heartily at he failure . ' the fool star , with a grin hover about he lip , and a scowl gather over he eye , as if uncertain whether he might not join in my mirth : whether it be not pleasant familiarity , or what it really be , contempt . I settle he doubt , by suddenly retrieve my gravity and desire he to walk away , for I come to see , not he . he redden - I see that by the moonlight - drop he hand from the latch , and skulk off , a picture of mortified vanity . he imagine himself to be as accomplished as , I suppose , because he could spell he own name ; and be marvellously discomfit that I do
do not think the same . ' ' , , dear ! ' - I interrupt . 'I shall not scold , but I do not like you conduct there . if you have remember that be you cousin as much as , you would have feel how improper it be to behave in that way . at least , it be praiseworthy ambition for he to desire to be as accomplished as ; and probably he do not learn merely to show off : you have make he asham of he ignorance before , I have no doubt ; and he wish to remedy it and please you . to sneer at he imperfect attempt be very bad breeding . have you be brotch up in he circumstance , would you be less rude ? he be as quick and as intelligend a child as ever you be ; and I be hurt that he should be despise now , because that base Heathcliff have treat he so unjustly . ' ' well , , you will not cry about it , will you ? ' she exclaim , surprise at my earnestness . ' but wait , and you shall hear if he con he a to please I ; and if it be worth while be civil to the brute . I enter ; be lie on the settle , and half get up to welcome I . ' " I be ill to - night , Catherine , love , " he say ; " and you must have all the talk , and let I listen . come , and sit by I . I be sure you would not break you word , and I will make you promise again , before you go . " 'I know now that I must not tease he , as he be ill ; and I speak softly and put no question , and avoid irritat he in any way . I have bring some of my nicest book for he : he ask I to read a little of one , and I be about to comply , when Earnshaw burst the door open : have gather venom with reflection . he advance direct to we , seize by the arm , and swing he off the seat . ' " get to thy own room ! " he say , in a voice almost inarticulate with passion ; and he face look swelled and furious . " take she there if she come to see thee : thou shall not keep I out of this . wi' ye both ! " ' he swore at we , and leave Linton no time to answer , nearly throw he into the kitchen ; and he clench he fist as I follow , seemingly long to knock I down . I be afraid for a moment , and I let one volume fall ; he kick it after I , and shut we out . I hear a malignant , crackly laugh by the fire , and turn , beheld that odious stand rub he bony hand , and quiver . ' " I wer sure he would sarve ye out ! he be a grand lad ! he be gete t ' raight sperrit in he ! he knaw - ay , he knaw , as weel as I do , who suld be t ' maister yonder - Ech , ech , ech ! he make ye skift properly ! , ech , ech ! " ' " where must we go ? " I ask of my cousin , disregard the old wretch 's mockery . ' be white and trembl . he be not pretty then , : oh , no ! he look frightful ; for he thin face and large eye be wrotch into a expression of frantic , powerless fury . he grasp the handle of the door , and shake it : it be fasten inside . ' " if you do not let I in , I will kill you ! - if you do not let I in , I will kill you ! " he rather shriek than say . " ! devil ! - I will kill you - I will kill you ! " utter he croaking laugh again . ' " , that be t ' father ! " he cry . " that be father ! we have allas summut of ' either side in we . Niver hee , , lad - dunnut be 's feard - he can not get at thee ! " 'I take hold of 's hand , and try to pull he away ; but he shriek so shockingly that I da not proceed . at last he cry be chok by a dreadful fit of coughing ; blood gush from he mouth , and he fall on the ground . I run into the yard , sick with terror ; and call for , as loud as I could . she soon hear I : she be milk the cow in a shed behind the barn , and hurrie from she work , she inquire what there be to do ? I have not breath to explain ; drag she in , I look about for . Earnshaw have come out to examine the mischief he have cause , and he be then convey the poor thing up - stair . and I ascend after he ; but he stop I at the top of the step , and say I should not go in : I must go home . I exclaim that he have kill , and I would enter . lock the door , and declare I should do " no sich stuff , " and ask I whether I be " bahn to be as mad as he . " I stand
stand cry till the housekeeper reappear . she affirm he would be better in a bit , but he could not do with that shrieking and din ; and she take I , and nearly carry I into the house . ' , I be ready to tear my hair off my head ! I sob and weep so that my eye be almost blind ; and the ruffian you have such sympathy with stood opposite : presum every now and then to bid I " wisht , " and deny that it be he fault ; and , finally , frightene by my assertion that I would tell papa , and that he should be put in prison and hang , he commence blubber himself , and hurrie out to hide he cowardly agitation . , I be not rid of he : when at length they compelle I to depart , and I have get some hundred yard off the premise , he suddenly issue from the shadow of the road - side , and check and take hold of I . ' " , I be ill grieve , " he begin , " but it be rayther too bad - " 'I give he a cut with my whip , think perhaps he would murder I . he let go , thunder one of he horrid curse , and I gallop home more than half out of my sense . 'I do not bid you good - night that evene , and I do not go to the next : I wish to go exceedingly ; but I be strangely excited , and dread to hear that be dead , sometimes ; and sometimes shudder at the thought of encounter . on the third day I take courage : at least , I could not bear longer suspense , and steal off once more . I go at five o'clock , and walk ; fancie I might manage to creep into the house , and up to 's room , unobserved . however , the dog give notice of my approach . receive I , and say " the lad be mende nicely , " show I into a small , tidy , carpet apartment , where , to my inexpressible joy , I beheld lay on a little sofa , read one of my book . but he would neither speak to I nor look at I , through a whole hour , : he have such a unhappy temper . and what quite confound I , when he do open he mouth , it be to utter the falsehood that I have occasion the uproar , and be not to blame ! unable to reply , except passionately , I get up and walk from the room . he send after I a faint " Catherine ! " he do not reckon on be answer so : but I would not turn back ; and the morrow be the second day on which I stay at home , nearly determined to visit he no more . but it be so miserable go to be and get up , and never hear anything about he , that my resolution melt into air before it be properly for . it have appear wrong to take the journey once ; now it seem wrong to refrain . come to ask if he must saddle ; I say " yes , " and consider myself do a duty as she bear I over the hill . I be force to pass the front window to get to the court : it be no use try to conceal my presence . ' " young master be in the house , " say , as she see I make for the parlour . I go in ; be there also , but he quit the room directly . sit in the great arm - chair half asleep ; walk up to the fire , I begin in a serious tone , partly mean it to be true - ' " as you do not like I , , and as you think I come on purpose to hurt you , and pretend that I do so every time , this be we last meeting : let we say good - bye ; and tell Heathcliff that you have no wish to see I , and that he must not invent any more falsehood on the subject . " ' " sit down and take you hat off , , " he answer . " you be so much happier than I be , you ink to be better . talk enough of my defects , and show enough scorn of I , to make it natural I should doubt myself . I doubt whether I be not altogether as worthless as he call I , frequently ; and then I feel so cross and bitter , I hate everybody ! I be worthless , and bad in temper , and bad in spirit , almost always ; and , if you choose , you may say good - bye : you will get rid of a annoyance . only , , do I this justice : believe that if I might be as sweet , and as kind , and as good as you be , I would be ; as willingly , and more so , than as happy and as healthy . and believe that you kindness have make I love you deeper than if I deserv you love : and though I could not , and can not help show my nature to you , I regret it and repent it ; and shall regret and repent it till I die ! " 'I feel he speak the truth ; and I feel I must forgive he : and , though we should quarrel the next moment ,
, I must forgive he again . we be reconcile ; but we cry , both of we , the whole time I stay : not entirely for sorrow ; yet I be sorry have that distorted nature . he will never let he friend be at ease , and he will never be at ease himself ! I have always go to he little parlour , since that night ; because he father return the day after . ' about three time , I think , we have be merry and hopeful , as we be the first evening ; the rest of my visit be dreary and trouble : now with he selfishness and spite , and now with he suffering : but I have learn to endure the former with nearly as little resentment as the latter . purposely avoid I : I have hardly see he at all . last , indeed , come earlier than usual , I hear he abuse poor cruelly for he conduct of the night before . I can not tell how he know of it , unless he listen . have certainly behave provokingly : however , it be the business of nobody but I , and I interrupt 's lecture by entering and tell he so . he burst into a laugh , and go away , say he be glad I take that view of the matter . since then , I have tell he must whisper he bitter thing . now , , you have hear all . I can not be prevent from go to , except by inflict misery on two people ; whereas , if you will only not tell papa , my go need disturb the tranquillity of none . you will not tell , will you ? it will be very heartless , if you do . ' 'I will make up my mind on that point by to - morrow , ,' I reply . ' it require some study ; and so I will leave you to you rest , and go think it over . ' I think it over aloud , in my master 's presence ; walk straight from she room to he , and relate the whole story : with the exception of she conversation with she cousin , and any mention of . be alarm and distress , more than he would acknowledge to I . in the morning , learn my betrayal of she confidence , and she lear not also that she secret visit were to end . in vain she weep and writh against the interdict , and implor she father to have pity on : all she get to comfort she be a promise that he would write and give he leave to come to the Grange when he please ; but explain that he must no longer expect to see at . perhaps , have he be aware of he nephew 's disposition and state of health , he would have see fit to withhold even that slight consolation . ' these thing happen last winter , sir , ' say ; ' hardly more than a year ago . last winter , I do not think , at another twelve month ' end , I should be amuse a stranger to the family with relate they ! yet , who know how long you will be a stranger ? you be too young to rest always contente , live by yourself ; and I some way fancy no one could see and not love she . you smile ; but why do you look so lively and interest when I talk about she ? and why have you ask I to hang she picture over you fireplace ? and why - ? ' ' stop , my good friend ! ' I cry . ' it may be very possible that I should love she ; but would she love I ? I doubt it too much to venture my tranquillity by run into temptation : and then my home be not here . I be of the busy world , and to its arm I must return . go on . be obedient to she father 's command ? ' ' she be , ' continue the housekeeper . ' she affection for he be still the chief sentiment in she heart ; and he speak without anger : he speak in the deep tenderness of one about to leave he treasure amid peril and foe , where he remember word would be the only aid that he could bequeath to guide she . he say to I , a few day afterwards , " I wish my nephew would write , , or call . tell I , sincerely , what you think of he : be he change for the better , or be there a prospect of improvement , as he grow a man ? " ' " he be very delicate , sir , " I reply ; " and scarcely likely to reach manhood : but this I can say , he do not resemble he father ; and if have the misfortune to marry he , he would not be beyond she control : unless she be extremely and foolishly indulgent . however , master , you will have plenty of time to get acquainted with he and see whether he would suit she : it want four year and more to he be of age . " ' sigh ; and , walk to the window , look out towards . it be a misty afternoon , but the sun shone dimly , and we could just distinguish the two fir - tree in the yard , and the sparely - scatter gravestone . 'I have pray often ,' he half soliloquise , ' for the approach of what be come ;
; and now I begin to shrink , and fear it . I think the memory of the hour I come down that gl a bridegroom would be less sweet than the anticipation that I be soon , in a few month , or , possibly , week , to be carry up , and laid in its lonely hollow ! , I have be very happy with my little : through winter night and summer day she be a live hope at my side . but I have be as happy musing by myself among those stone , under that old church : lie , through the long evening , on the green mound of she mother 's grave , and wishing - yearning for the time when I might lie beneath it . what can I do for ? how must I quit she ? I have not care one moment for be 's son ; nor for he take she from I , if he could conseal she for my loss . I have not care that gain he end , and triumph in rob I of my last blessing ! but should be unworthy - only a feeble tool to he father - I can not abandon she to he ! and , hard though it be to crush she buoyant spirit , I must persevere in make she sad while I live , and leave she solitary when I die . Darling ! I would rather resign she to , and lay she in the earth before I . ' ' Resign she to as it be , sir ,' I answer , ' and if we should lose you - which may he forbid - under he providence , I will stand she friend and counsellor to the last . be a good girl : I do not fear that she will go wilfully wrong ; and people who do they duty be always finally reward . ' spring advance ; yet my master gather no real strength , though he resume he walk in the grounds with he daughter . to she inexperienced notions , this itself be a sign of convalescence ; and then he cheek be often flush , and he eye be bright ; she feel sure of he recovering . on she seventeenth birthday , he do not visit the churchyard : it be rain , and I observe - ' you will surely not go out to - night , sir ? ' he answer , - ' no , I will defer it this year a little longer . ' he write again to , express he great desire to see he ; and , have the invalid be presentable , I have no doubt he father would have permit he to come . as it be , be instruct , he return a answer , intimat that object to he call at the ; but he uncle 's kind remembrance delighte he , and he hope to meet he sometimes in he ramble , and personally to petition that he cousin and he might not remain long so utterly divide . that part of he letter be simple , and probably he own . know he could plead eloquently for 's company , then . 'I do not ask ,' he say , ' that she may visit here ; but be I never to see she , because my father forbid I to go to she home , and you forbid she to come to mine ? do , now and then , ride with she towards the ; and let we exchange a few word , in you presence ! we have do nothing to deserve this separation ; and you be not angry with I : you have no reason to dislike I , you allow , yourself . dear uncle ! send I a kind note to - morrow , and leave to join you anywhere you please , except at . I believe a interview would convince you that my father 's character be not mine : he affirm I be more you nephew than he son ; and though I have fault which render I unworthy of , she have excuse they , and for she sake , you should also . you inquire after my health - it be better ; but while I remain cut off from all hope , and doom to solitude , or the society of those who never do and never will like I , how can I be cheerful and well ? ' , though he feel for the boy , could not consent to grant he request ; because he could not accompany . he say , in summer , perhaps , they might meet : meantime , he wish he to continue write at interval , and engage to give he what advice and comfort he be able by letter ; be well aware of he hard position in he family . comply ; and have he be unrestrained , would probably have spoil all by fill he epistle with complaint and lamentation . but he father keep a sharp watch over he ; and , of course , insist on every line that my master send be show ; so , instead of penn he peculiar personal suffering and distress , the theme constantly uppermost in he thought , he harp on the cruel obligation of be hold asunder from he friend and love ; and gently intimate that must allow a interview soon , or he should fear he be purposely deceive he with empty promise . be a powerful ally at home ; and between they they at length persuade my master to acquiesce in they have a ride or a walk together about once a week , under my guardianship , and on the moor nearest the :
: for find he still decline . though he have set aside yearly a portion of he income for my young lady 's fortune , he have a natural desire that she might retain - or at least return in a short time to - the house of she ancestor ; and he consider she only prospect of do that be by a union with he heir ; he have no idea that the latter be fail almost as fast as himself ; nor have any one , I believe : no doctor visit the , and no one see master Heathcliff to make report of he condition among we . I , for my part , begin to fancy my foreboding be false , and that he must be actually rally , when he mention riding and walk on the moor , and see so earnest in pursue he object . I could not picture a father treat a die child as tyrannically and wickedly as I afterwards learn have treat he , to compel this apparent eagerness : he effort redoubl the more imminently he avaricious and unfeeling plan be threaten with defeat by death . be already past it be prime , when reluctantly yield he assent to they entreaty , and and I set out on we first ride to join she cousin . it be a close , sultry day : devoid of sunshine , but with a sky too dappled and hazy to threaten rain : and we place of meeting have be fix at the guide - stone , by the cross -road . on arrive there , however , a little herd - boy , despatch as a messenger , tell we that , - ' wer just of ' this side th' Heights : and he would be mitch obleege to we to gang on a bit further . ' ' then have forget the first injunction of he uncle ,' I observ : ' he bid we keep on the land , and here we be off at once . ' ' well , we will turn we horse ' head round when we reach he , ' answer my companion ; 'our excursion shall lie towards home . ' but when we reach he , and that be scarcely a quarter of a mile from he own door , we find he have no horse ; and we be force to dismount , and leave ours to graze . he lay on the heath , await we approach , and do not rise till we come within a few yard . then he walk so feebly , and look so pale , that I immediately exclaim , - ' why , master Heathcliff , you be not fit for enjoy a ramble this morning . how ill you do look ! ' survey he with grief and astonishment : she change the ejaculation of joy on she lip to one of alarm ; and the congratulation on they long -postponed meeting to a anxious inquiry , whether he be worse than usual ? ' no - better - better ! ' he pante , trembl , and retain she hand as if he need its support , while he large blue eye wander timidly over she ; the hollowness round they transform to haggard wildness the languid expression they once possess . ' but you have be worse , ' persist he cousin ; ' worse than when I see you last ; you be thinner , and - ' 'I be tired , ' he interrupt , hurriedly . ' it be too hot for walking , let we rest here . and , in the morning , I often feel sick - papa say I grow so fast . ' badly satisfied , sit down , and he recline beside she . ' this be something like you paradise , ' say she , make a effort at cheerfulness . ' you recollect the two day we agree to spend in the place and way each think pleasantest ? this be nearly yours , only there be cloud ; but then they be so soft and mellow : it be nicer than sunshine . next week , if you can , we will ride down to the , and try mine . ' do not appear to remember what she talk of and he have evidently great difficulty in sustain any kind of conversation . he lack of interest in the subject she start , and he equal incapacity to contribute to she entertainment , be so obvious that she could not conceal she disappointment . a indefinite alteration have come over he whole person and manner . the pettishness that might be caress into fondness , have yield to a listless apathy ; there be less of the peevish temper of a child which fret and tease on purpose to be soothe , and more of the self - absorb moroseness of a confirm invalid , repell consolation , and ready to regard the good - humoured mirth of other as a insult . perceive , as well as I do , that he hold it rather a punishment , than a gratification , to endure we company ; and she make no scruple of proposing , presently , to depart . that proposal , unexpectedly , rouse from he lethargy , and throw he into a strange state of agitation . he glance fearfully towards the , begge she would remain another half - hour , at least . ' but I think , ' say , ' you would be more comfortable at home than sit here ; and I can not amuse you to - day , I see , by my tale , and song , and chatter : you have grow wiser than I , in these six month ; you have
have little taste for my diversion now : or else , if I could amuse you , I would willingly stay . ' ' stay to rest yourself , ' he reply . ' and , , do not think or say that I be very unwell : it be the heavy weather and heat that make I dull ; and I walk about , before you come , a great deal for I . tell uncle I be in tolerable health , will you ? ' 'I will tell he that you say so , . I could not affirm that you be , ' observe my young lady , wonder at he pertinacious assertion of what be evidently a untruth . ' and be here again next , ' continue he , shunn she puzzl gaze . ' and give he my thanks for permit you to come - my best thanks , . and - and , if you do meet my father , and he ask you about I , do not lead he to suppose that I have be extremely silent and stupid : do not look sad and downcast , as you be do - he will be angry . ' 'I care nothing for he anger , ' exclaim , imagine she would be its object . ' but I do , ' say she cousin , shuddering . 'do not provoke he against I , Catherine , for he be very hard . ' ' be he severe to you , ? ' I inquire . ' have he grow weary of indulgence , and pass from passive to active hatred ? ' look at I , but do not answer ; and , after keep she seat by he side another ten minute , during which he head fall drowsily on he breast , and he utter nothing except suppress moan of exhaustion or pain , begin to seek solace in look for bilberry , and share the produce of she research with I : she do not offer they to he , for she see further notice would only weary and annoy . ' be it half - a - hour now , ? ' she whisper in my ear , at last . 'I can not tell why we should stay . he be asleep , and papa will be want we back . ' ' well , we must not leave he asleep ,' I answer ; ' wait till lie wake , and be patient . you be mighty eager to set off , but you long to see poor have soon evaporated ! ' ' why do he wish to see I ? ' return . ' in he crossest humour , formerly , I like he better than I do in he present curiious mood . it be just as if it be a task he be compelle to perform - this interview - for fear he father should scold he . but I be hardly go to come to give pleasure ; whatever reason he may have for ordering to undergo this penance . and , though I be glad he be better in health , I be sorry he be so much less pleasant , and so much less affectionate to I . ' ' you think he be better in health , then ? ' I say . ' yes , ' she answer ; ' because he always make such a great deal of he suffering , you know . he be not tolerably well , as he tell I to tell papa ; but he be better , very likely . ' ' there you differ with I , ,' I remark ; 'I should conjecture he to be far worse . ' here start from he slumber in bewildered terror , and ask if any one have call he name . ' no , ' say ; ' unless in dream . I can not conceive how you manage to doze out of door , in the morning . ' 'I think I hear my father , ' he gas , glance up to the frowning nab above we . ' you be sure nobody speak ? ' ' quite sure , ' reply he cousin . ' only and I be dispute concern you health . be you truly stronger , , than when we separate in winter ? if you be , I be certain one thing be not stronger - you regard for I : speak , - be you ? ' the tear gush from 's eye as he answer , ' yes , yes , I be ! ' and , still under the spell of the imaginary voice , he gaze wander up and down to detect its owner . rise . ' for to - day we must part , ' she say . ' and I will not conceal that I have be sadly disappointed with we meeting ; though I will mention it to nobody but you : not that I stand in awe of . ' ' Hush , ' murmure ; ' for 's sake , hush ! he be come . ' and he cling to 's arm , strive to detain she ; but at that announcement she hastily disengage herself , and whistle to , who obey she like a dog . 'I will be here next , ' she cry , spring to the saddle . ' good - bye . , ! ' and so we leave he , scarcely conscious of we departure , so absorb be he in anticipat he father 's approach . before we reach home , 's displeasure soften into a perplexed sensation of pity and regret , largely blend with vague , uneasy doubt about 's actual circumstance , physical and social : in which I partake ,
, though I counsell she not to say much ; for a second journey would make we better judge . my master request a account of we ongoing . he nephew 's offering of thanks be duly deliver , gently touch on the rest : I also throw little light on he inquiry , for I hardly know what to hide and what to reveal . day glide away , every one mark its course by the henceforth rapid alteration of 's state . the havoc that month have previously wrotch be now emulate by the inroad of hour . we would afain have delude yet ; but she own quick spirit refuse to delude she : it divine in secret , and brood on the dreadful probability , gradually ripen into certainty . she have not the heart to mention she ride , when come round ; I mention it for she , and obtain permission to order she out of door : for the library , where she father stop a short time dailly - the brief period he could bear to sit up - and he chamber , have become she whole world . she grudge each moment that do not find she bend over he pillow , or seat by he side . she countenance grow wan with watch and sorrow , and my master gladly dismiss she to what he flatter himself would be a happy change of scene and society ; draw comfort from the hope that she would not now be leave entirely alone after he death . he have a fix idea , I guess by several observation he let fall , that , as he nephew resemble he in person , he would resemble he in mind ; for 's letter bear few or no indication of he defective character . and I , through pardonable weakness , refrain from correcte the error ; ask myself what good there would be in disturb he last moment with information that he have neither power nor opportunity to turn to account . we defer we excursion till the afternoon ; a golden afternoon of : every breath from the hill so full of life , that it see whoever respire it , though die , might revive . 's face be just like the landscape - shadow and sunshine flitt over it in rapid succession ; but the shadow rest longer , and the sunshine be more transient ; and she poor little heart reproach itself for even that pass forgetfulness of its car . we discern watch at the same spot he have select before . my young mistress alight , and tell I that , as she be resolve to stay a very little while , I have better hold the pony and remain on horseback ; but I dissent : I would not risk lose sight of the charge commit to I a minute ; so we climb the slope of heath together . master receive we with greater animation on this occasion : not the animation of high spirits though , nor yet of joy ; it look more like fear . ' it be late ! ' he say , speak short and with difficulty . 'is not you father very ill ? I think you would not come . ' ' why will not you be candid ? ' cry , swallow she greeting . ' why can not you say at once you do not want I ? it be strange , , that for the second time you have bring I here on purpose , apparently to distress we both , and for no reason besides ! ' shiver , and glance at she , half supplicat , half asham ; but he cousin 's patience be not sufficient to endure this enigmatical behaviour . ' my father be very ill , ' she say ; ' and why be I call from he bedside ? why do not you send to absolve I from my promise , when you wish I would not keep it ? come ! I desire a explanation : play and trifl be completely banish out of my mind ; and I can not dance attendance on you affectation now ! ' 'My affectation ! ' he murmure ; ' what be they ? for heaven 's sake , Catherine , do not look so angry ! Despise I as much as you please ; I be a worthless , cowardly wretch : I can not be scorne enough ; but I be too mean for you anger . hate my father , and spare I for contempt . ' ' Nonsense ! ' cry in a passion . ' Foolish , silly boy ! and there ! he tremble : as if I be really go to touch he ! you need not bespeak contempt , : anybody will have it spontaneously at you service . get off ! I shall return home : it be folly drag you from the hearth - stone , and pretend - what do we pretend ? let go my frock ! if I pitie you for crying and look so very frightened , you should spurn such pity . Ellen , tell he how disgraceful this conduct be . rise , and do not degrade yourself into a abject reptile - do N't ! ' with stream face and a expression of agony , have throw he nerveless frame along the ground : he seem convulse with exquisite terror . 'Oh ! ' he sob , 'I can not bear it ! , , I be a traitor , too , and I dare not tell you ! but leave I , and I shall be kill ! , my life be in you hand : and you have say you love I , and if you do , it would not harm
harm you . you will not go , then ? kind , sweet , good Catherine ! and perhaps you will consent - and he will let I die with you ! ' my young lady , on witnesse he intense anguish , stoop to raise he . the old feeling of indulgent tenderness overcame she vexation , and she grow thoroughly move and alarm . ' Consend to what ? ' she ask . 'to stay ! tell I the meaning of this strange talk , and I will . you contradict you own word , and distract I ! be calm and frank , and confess at once all that weigh on you heart . you would not injure I , , would you ? you would not let any enemy hurt I , if you could prevent it ? I will believe you be a coward , for yourself , but not a cowardly betrayer of you best friend . ' ' but my father threaten I , ' gas the boy , clasp he attenuate finger , ' and I dread he - I dread he ! I dare not tell ! ' 'Oh , well ! ' say , with scornful compassion , ' keep you secret : I be no coward . save yourself : I be not afraid ! ' she magnanimity provoke he tear : he weep wildly , kiss she support hand , and yet could not summon courage to speak out . I be cogitat what the mystery might be , and determine Catherine should never suffer to benefit he or any one else , by my good will ; when , hear a rustle among the ling , I look up and see Heathcliff almost close upon we , descend the . he do not cast a glance towards my companion , though they be sufficiently near for 's sob to be audible ; but haile I in the almost hearty tone he assume to no besides , and the sincerity of which I could not avoid doubting , he say - ' it be something to see you so near to my house , Nelly . how be you at the ? let we hear . the rumour go ,' he add , in a lower tone , ' that be on he death - bed : perhaps they exaggerate he illness ? ' ' no ; my master be die ,' I reply : ' it be true enough . a sad thing it will be for we all , but a bless for he ! ' ' how long will he last , do you think ? ' he ask . 'I do not know ,' I say . ' because ,' he continue , look at the two young people , who be fix under he eye - appear as if he could not venture to stir or raise he head , and could not move , on he account - ' because that lad yonder seem determined to beat I ; and I would thank he uncle to be quick , and go before he ! Hallo ! have the whelp be play that game long ? I do give he some lesson about snivelling . be he pretty lively with generally ? ' ' Lively ? no - he have show the greatest distress ,' I answer . ' to see he , I should say , that instead of rambling with he sweetheart on the hill , he ought to be in bed , under the hand of a doctor . ' ' he shall be , in a day or two , ' mutter . ' but first - get up , ! get up ! ' he shoute . ' do not grovel on the ground there up , this moment ! ' have sunk prostrate aagain in another paroxysm of helpless fear , cause by he father 's glance towards he , I suppose : there be nothing else to produce such humiliation . he make several effort to , but he little strength be annihilate for the time , and he fall back again with a moan . advance , and lift he to lean against a ridge of turf . ' now , ' say he , with curb ferocity , 'I be get angry and if you do not command that paltry spirit of yours - damn you ! get up directly ! ' 'I will , father , ' he pante . ' only , let I alone , or I shall faint . I have do as you wish , I be sure . Catherine will tell you that I - that I - have be cheerful . ah ! keep by I , Catherine ; give I you hand . ' ' take mine , ' say he father ; ' stand on you foot . there now - she will lend you she arm : that be right , look at she . you would imagine I be the devil himself , , to excite such horror . be so kind as to walk home with he , will you ? he shudder if I touch he . ' ' Linton dear ! ' whisper , 'I can not go to Heights : papa have forbide I . he will not harm you : why be you so afraid ? ' 'I can never re-enter that house , ' he answer . 'I be not to re - enter it without you ! ' ' stop ! ' cry he father . ' we will respect 's filial scruple . Nelly , take he in , and I will follow you advice concern the doctor , without delay . ' ' you will do well , ' reply I . ' but I must remain with my mistress : to mind you son
son be not my business . ' ' you be very stiff , ' say , 'I know that : but you will force I to pinch the baby and make it scream before it move you charity . come , then , my hero . be you willing to return , escort by I ? ' he approach once more , and make as if he would seize the fragile be ; but , shrink back , clung to he cousin , and implor she to accompany he , with a frantic importunity that admit no denial . however I disapprove , I could not hinder she : indeed , how could she have refuse he herself ? what be fill he with dread we have no means of discerning ; but there he be , powerless under its gripe , and any addition seem capable of shock he into idiotcy . we reach the threshold ; walk in , and I stand wait till she have conduct the invalid to a chair , expect she out immediately ; when , push I forward , exclaim - ' my house be not stricken with the plague , Nelly ; and I have a mind to be hospitable to - day : sit down , and allow I to shut the door . ' he shut and lock it also . I start . ' you shall have tea before you go home , ' he add . 'I be by myself . be gone with some cattle to the Lees , and and be off on a journey of pleasure ; and , though I be use to be alone , I would rather have some interesting company , if I can get it . , take you seat by he . I give you what I have : the present be hardly worth accepting ; but I have nothing else to offer . it be , I mean . how she do stare ! it be od what a savage feeling I have to anything that seem afraid of I ! have I be bear where law be less strict and taste less dainty , I should treat myself to a slow vivisection of those two , as a evening 's amusement . ' he draw in he breath , strike the table , and swore to himself , ' by hell ! I hate they . ' 'I be not afraid of you ! ' exclaim , who could not hear the latter part of he speech . she step close up ; she black eye flash with passion and resolution . ' give I that key : I will have it ! ' she say . 'I would not eat or drink here , if I be starve . ' have the key in he hand that remain on the table . he look up , seize with a sort of surprise at she boldness ; or , possibly , remind , by she voice and glance , of the person from whom she inherit it . she snatch at the instrument , and half succeed in get it out of he loosened finger : but she action recal he to the present ; he recover it speedily . ' now , , ' he say , ' stand off , or I shall knock you down ; and , that will make mad . ' regardless of this warning , she capture he close hand and its contents again . ' we will go ! ' she repeat , exert she utmost effort to cause the iron muscle to relax ; and find that she nail make no impression , she apply she tooth pretty sharply . glance at I a glance that keep I from interfere a moment . be too intent on he finger to notice he face . he open they suddenly , and resign the object of dispute ; but , ere she have well secure it , he seize she with the liberate hand , and , pull she on he knee , administer with the other a shower of terrific slap on both side of the head , each sufficient to have fulfil he threat , have she be able to fall . ' at this diabolical violence I rush on he furiously . ' you villain ! ' I begin to cry , ' you villain ! ' a touch on the chest silence I : I be stout , and soon put out of breath ; and , what with that and the rage , I stagger dizzily back and feel ready to suffocate , or to burst a blood - vessel . the scene be over in two minute ; , release , put she two hand to she temple , and look just as if she be not sure whether she ear be off or on . she tremble like a reed , poor thing , and lean against the table perfectly bewilder . 'I know how to chastise child , you see , ' say the scoundrel , grimly , as he stoop to repossess himself of the key , which have drop to the floor . ' go to now , as I tell you ; and cry at you ease ! I shall be you father , to -morrow - all the father you will have in a few day - and you shall have plenty of that . you can bear plenty ; you be no weak : you shall have a daily taste , if I catch such a devil of a temper in you eye again ! ' run to I instead of , and knelt down and put she burn cheek on my lap , weep aloud . she cousin have shrink into a corner of the settle , as quiet as a mouse , congratulate himself , I
I dare say , that the correction have alight on another than he . , perceive we all confound , rise , and expeditiously make the tea himself . the cup and saucer be laid ready . he pour it out , and hand I a cup . ' wash away you spleen , ' he say . ' and help you own naughty pet and mine . it be not poisone , though I prepare it . I be go out to seek you horse . ' we first thought , on he departure , be to force a exit somewhere . we try the kitchen door , but that be fasten outside : we look at the window - they be too narrow for even 's little figure . ' master ,' I cry , see we be regularly imprison , ' you know what you diabolical father be after , and you shall tell we , or I will box you ear , as he have do you cousin 's . ' ' yes , , you must tell , ' say . ' it be for you sake I come ; and it will be wickedly ungrateful if you refuse . ' ' give I some tea , I be thirsty , and then I will tell you ,' he answer . ' , go away . I do not like you stand over I . now , , you be let you tear fall into my cup . I will not drink that . give I another . ' push another to he , and wip she face . I feel disgust at the little wretch 's composure , since he be no longer in terror for himself . the anguish he have exhibit on the moor subsid as soon as ever he enter ; so I guess he have be menace with a awful visitation of wrath if he fail in decoy we there ; and , that accomplish , he have no further immediate fear . ' want we to be marry ,' he continue , after sipp some of the liquid . ' and he know you papa would not let we marry now ; and he be afraid of my dying if we wait ; so we be to be marry in the morning , and you be to stay here all night ; and , if you do as he wish , you shall return home next day , and take I with you . ' ' take you with she , pitiful changeling ! ' I exclaim . ' you marry ? why , the man be mad ! or he think we fools , every one . and do you imagine that beautiful young lady , that healthy , hearty girl , will tie herself to a little perishing monkey like you ? be you cherish the notion that anybody , let alone , would have you for a husband ? you want whippe for bring we in here at all , with you dastardly pule trick : and - do not look so silly , now ! I have a very good mind to shake you severely , for you contemptible treachery , and you imbecile conceit . ' I do give he a slight shaking ; but it bring on the cough , and he take to he ordinary resource of moaning and weeping , and rebuk I . ' stay all night ? no ,' she say , look slowly round . ' , I will burn that door down but I will get out . ' and she would have commence the execution of she threat directly , but be up in alarm for he dear self again . he clasp she in he two feeble arm sobb :- ' will not you have I , and save I ? not let I come to the Grange ? oh , darl ! you must not go and leave , after all . you must obey my father - you must ! ' 'I must obey my own , ' she reply , 'and relieve he from this cruel suspense . the whole night ! what would he think ? he will be distress already . I will either break or burn a way out of the house . be quiet ! you be in no danger ; but if you hinder I - , I love papa better than you ! ' the mortal terror he feel of 's anger restore to the boy he coward 's eloquence . be near distratch : still , she persist that she must go home , and try entreaty in she turn , persuade he to subdue he selfish agony . while they be thus occupy , we jailor be - enter . ' you beasts have trot off , ' he say , ' and - now ! snivell again ? what have she be do to you ? come , come - have do , and get to bed . in a month or two , my lad , you will be able to pay she back she present tyranny with a vigorous hand . you be pin for pure love , be you not ? nothing else in the world : and she shall have you ! there , to be ! will not be here to - night ; you must undress yourself . Hush ! hold you noise ! once in you own room , I will not come near you : you need not fear . by chance , you have manage tolerably . I will look to the rest . ' he speak these word , hold the door open for he son to pass , and the latter achieve he exit exactly as a spaniel might which suspect the person who attend on it of design a spiteful squeeze .
. the lock be re-secure . approach the fire , where my mistress and I stand silent . look up , and instinctively raise she hand to she cheek : he neighbourhood revive a painful sensation . anybody else would have be incapable of regard the childish act with sternness , but he scowl on she and mutter - ' oh ! you be not afraid of I ? you courage be well disguise : you seem damnably afraid ! ' 'I be afraid now , ' she reply , ' because , if I stay , papa will be miserable : and how can I endure make he miserable - when he - when he - , let I go home ! I promise to marry : papa would like I to : and I love he . why should you wish to force I to do what I will willingly do of myself ? ' ' let he dare to force you ,' I cry . ' there be law in the land , thank ! there be ; though we be in a out - of - the - way place . I would inform if he be my own son : and it be felony without benefit of clergy ! ' ' Silence ! ' say the ruffian . 'to the devil with you clamour ! I do not want you to speak . , I shall enjoy myself remarkably in think you father will be miserable : I shall not sleep for satisfaction . you could have hit on no surer way of fix you residence under my roof for the next twenty - four hour than inform I that such a event would follow . as to you promise to marry , I will take care you shall keep it ; for you shall not quit this place till it be fulfilled . ' ' send , then , to let papa know I be safe ! ' exclaim , weepe bitterly . ' or marry I now . poor papa ! , he will think we be lose . what shall we do ? ' ' not he ! he will think you be tired of wait on he , and run off for a little amusement , ' answer . ' you can not deny that you enter my house of you own accord , in contempt of he injunction to the contrary . and it be quite natural that you should desire amusement at you age ; and that you would weary of nurse a sick man , and that man only you father . , he happiest day be over when you day begin . he curse you , I dare say , for come into the world ( I do , at least ) ; and it would just do if he curse you as he go out of it . I would join he . I do not love you ! how wshould I ? Weep away . as far as I can see , it will be you chief diversion hereafter ; unless make amend for other loss : and you provident parent appear to fancy he may . he letter of advice and consolation entertain I vastly . in he last he recommend my jewel to be careful of he ; and kind to she when he get she . careful and kind - that be paternal . but require he whole stock of care and kindness for himself . can play the little tyrant well . he will undertake to torture any number of cat , if they tooth be draw and they claw pa . you will be able to tell he uncle fine tale of he kindness , when you get home again , I assure you . ' ' you be right there ! ' I say ; ' explain you son 's character . show he resemblance to yourself : and then , I hope , will think twice before she take the cockatrice ! ' 'I do not much mind speak of he amiable quality now ,' he answer ; ' because she must either accept he or remain a prisoner , and you along with she , till you master dy . I can detain you both , quite concealed , here . if you doubt , encourage she to retract she word , and you will have a opportunity of judging ! ' 'I will not retract my word , ' say . 'I will marry he within this hour , if I may go to afterwards . , you be a cruel man , but you be not a fiend ; and you will not , from malice , destroy irrevocably all my happiness . if think I have leave he on purpose , and if he die before I return , could I bear to live ? I have give over cry : but I be go to kneel here , at you knee ; and I will not get up , and I will not take my eye from you face till you look back at I ! no , do not turn away ! do ! you will see nothing to provoke you . I do not hate you . I be not angry that you strike I . have you never love anybody in all you life , uncle ? never ? ah ! you must look once . I be so wretch , you can not help be sorry and pity I . ' ' keep you eft 's finger off ; and move , or I will kick you ! ' cry , brutally repulse she . 'I would rather be hugge by a snake . how the devil can you dream of fawning on I ? I Detest you ! ' he shrug he shoulders : shook himself , indeed ,
, as if he flesh crept with aversion ; and thrust back he chair ; while I get up , and open my mouth , to commence a downright torrent of abuse . but I be render dumb in the middle of the first sentence , by a threat that I should be show into a room by myself the very next syllable I uttere . it be grow dark - we hear a sound of voice at the garden - gate . we host hurry out instantly : he have he wit about he ; we have not . there be a talk of two or three minute , and he return alone . 'I think it have be you cousin ,' I observe to . 'i wish he would arrive ! who know but he might take we part ? ' ' it be three servant send to seek you from the , ' say , overhear I . ' you should have open a lattice and call out : but I could swear that chit be glad you do not . she be glad to be oblige to stay , I be certain . ' at learn the chance we have miss , we both give vent to we grief without control ; and he allow we to wail on till nine o'clock . then he bid we go upstairs , through the kitchen , to 's chamber ; and I whisper my companion to obey : perhaps we might contrive to get through the window there , or into a garret , and out by its skylight . the window , however , be narrow , like those below , and the garret trap be safe from we attempt ; for we be fasten in as before . we neither of we lay down : take she station by the lattice , and watch anxiously for morning ; a deep sigh be the only answer I could obtain to my frequent entreaty that she would try to rest . I seat myself in a chair , and rock to and fro , pass harsh judgment on my many dereliction of duty ; from which , it strike I then , all the misfortunes of my employer sprang . it be not the case , in reality , I be aware ; but it be , in my imagination , that dismal night ; and I think himself less guilty than I . at seven o'clock he come , and inquire if have risen . she run to the door immediately , and answer , ' yes . ' ' here , then ,' he say , open it , and pull she out . I rise to follow , but he turn the lock again . I demand my release . 'be patient , ' he reply ; 'I will send up you breakfast in a while . ' I thump on the panel , and rattle the latch angrily and ask why I be still shut up ? he answer , I must try to endure it another hour , and they go away . I endure it two or three hour ; at length , I hear a footstep : not 's . 'I have bring you something to eat , ' say a voice ; ' oppen t ' door ! ' Comply eagerly , I beheld , laden with food enough to last I all day . ' Tak ' it ,' he add , thrust the tray into my hand . ' stay one minute ,' I begin . ' Nay , ' cry he , and retire , regardless of any prayer I could pour forth to detain he . and there I remain enclose the whole day , and the whole of the next night ; and another , and another . five night and four day I remain , altogether , see nobody but once every morning ; and he be a model of a jailor : surly , and dumb , and deaf to every attempt at move he sense of justice or compassion . on the fifth morning , or rather afternoon , a different step approach - lighter and shorter ; and , this time , the person enter the room . it be ; don in she scarlet shawl , with a black silk bonnet on she head , and a willow - basket swing to she arm . 'Eh , dear ! ! ' she exclaim . ' well ! there be a talk about you at . I never think but you be sunk in the Blackhorse marsh , and missy with you , till master tell I you would be find , and he would lod you here ! what ! and you must have get on a island , sure ? and how long be you in the hole ? do master save you , ? but you be not so thin - you have not be so poorly , have you ? ' ' you master be a true scoundrel ! ' I reply . ' but he shall answer for it . he need not have raise that tale : it shall all be laid bare ! ' ' what do you mean ? ' ask . ' it be not he tale : they tell that in the village - about you be lose in the marsh ; and I call to , when I come in - " Eh , they be queer thing , , happen since I go off . it be a sad pity of that likely young lass , and cant . " he stare . I think he have not hear atch , so I tell he the rumour . the master listen , and he just smile to himself , and say , " if they have be in the marsh
marsh , they be out now , . be lod , at this minute , in you room . you can tell she to flight , when you go up ; here be the key . the bog - water get into she head , and she would have run home quite flighty ; but I fix she till she come round to she sense . you can bid she go to the at once , if she be able , and carry a message from I , that she young lady will follow in time to attend the squire 's funeral . " ' ' be not dead ? ' I gas . 'Oh ! , ! ' ' no , no ; sit you down , my good mistress , ' she reply ; ' you be right sickly yet . he be not dead ; think he may last another day . I meet he on the road and ask . ' instead of sit down , I snatch my outdoor thing , and hasten below , for the way be free . on enter the house , I look about for some one to give information of . the place be fill with sunshine , and the door stand wide open ; but nobody see at hand . as I hesitat whether to go off at once , or return and seek my mistress , a slight cough draw my attention to the hearth . lay on the settle , sole tenant , suck a stick of sugar - candy , and pursue my movement with apathetic eye . ' where be ? ' I demand sternly , suppose I could frighten he into give intelligence , by catch he thus , alone . he suck on like a innocent . ' be she go ? ' I say . ' no ,' he reply ; ' she be upstairs : she be not to go ; we will not let she . ' ' you will not let she , little idiot ! ' I exclaim . ' direct I to she room immediately , or I will make you s out sharply . ' ' would make you s out , if you attempt to get there , ' he answer . ' he say I be not to be soft with Catherine : she be my wife , and it be shameful that she should wish to leave I . he say she hate I and want I to die , that she may have my money ; but she sha not have it : and she sha not go home ! she never shall ! - she may cry , and be sick as much as she please ! ' he resume he former occupation , close he lid , as if he mean to drop asleep . ' master Heathcliff ,' I resume , ' have you forget all 's kindness to you last winter , when you affir you love she , and when she bring you book and sung you song , and come many a time through wind and snow to see you ? she weep to miss one evening , because you would be disappoint ; and you feel then that she be a hundred time too good to you : and now you believe the lie you father tell , though you know he detest you both . and you join he against she . that be fine gratitude , be it not ? ' the corner of 's mouth fall , and he take the sugar - candy from he lip . ' do she come to Wuther because she hate you ? ' I continue . ' think for yourself ! as to you money , she do not even know that you will have any . and you say she be sick ; and yet you leave she alone , up there in a strange house ! you who have feel what it be to be so neglect ! you could pity you own suffering ; and she pitie they , too ; but you will not pity hers ! I she tear , master Heathcliff , you see - a elderly woman , and a servant merely - and you , after pretend such affection , and have reason to worship she almost , store every tear you have for yourself , and lie there quite at ease . ah ! you be a heartless , selfish boy ! ' 'I can not stay with she ,' he answer crossly . 'I will not stay by myself . she cry so I can not bear it . and she will not give over , though I say I will call my father . I do call he once , and he threaten to strangle she if she be not quiet ; but she begin again the instant he leave the room , moan and grieve all night long , though I scream for vexation that I could not sleep . ' 'Is out ? ' I inquire , perceive that the wretch creature have no power to sympathize with he cousin 's mental torture . 'he be in the court ,' he reply , ' talk to ; who say uncle be die , truly , at last . I be glad , for I shall be master of the after he . always speak of it as she house . it be not her ! it be mine : papa say everything she have be mine . all she nice book be mine ; she offer to give I they , and she pretty bird , and she pony , if I would get the key of we room , and let she out ; but I tell she she have nothing to give , they ware all , all mine .
. and then she cry , and take a little picture from she neck , and say I should have that ; two picture in a gold case , on one side she mother , and on the other uncle , when they be young . that be yesterday - I say they be mine , too ; and try to get they from she . the spiteful thing would not let I : she push I off , and hurt I . I shriek out - that frighten she - she hear papa come , and she break the hinge and divide the case , and give I she mother 's portrait ; the other she attempt to hide : but papa ask what be the matter , and I explain it . he take the one I have away , and order she to resign hers to I ; she refuse , and he - he strike she down , and wrench it off the chain , and crush it with he foot . ' ' and be you please to see she struck ? ' I ask : have my design in encourage he talk . 'I wink , ' he answer : 'I wink to see my father strike a dog or a horse , he do it so hard . yet I be glad at first - she deserve punishing for push I : but when papa be gone , she make I come to the window and show I she cheek cut on the inside , against she tooth , and she mouth fill with blood ; and then she gather up the bits of the picture , and go and sit down with she face to the wall , and she have never speak to I since : and I sometimes think she can not speak for pain . I do not like to think so ; but she be a naughty thing for cry continually ; and she look so pale and wild , I be afraid of she . ' ' and you can get the key if you choose ? ' I say . ' yes , when I be up - stair ,' he answer ; ' but I can not walk up - stair now . ' ' in what apartment be it ? ' I ask . 'Oh ,' he cry , not tell you where it be . it be we secret . nobody , neither nor , be to know . there ! you have tire I - go away , go away ! ' and he turn he face on to he arm , and shut he eye again . I consider it best to depart without see , and bring a rescue for my young lady from the . on reach it , the astonishment of my fellow - servants to see I , and they joy also , be intense ; and when they hear that they little mistress be safe , two or three be about to hurry up and shout the news at 's door : but I bespeak the announcement of it myself . how change I find he , even in those few day ! he lay a image of sadness and resignation await he death . very young he look : though he actual age be thirty - nine , one would have call he ten year younger , at least . he think of ; for he murmure she name . I touch he hand , and spoke . ' Catherine be come , dear master ! ' I whisper ; ' she be alive and well ; and will be here , I hope , to - night . ' I tremble at the first effect of this intelligence : he half rise up , look eagerly round the apartment , and then sank back in a swoon . as soon as he recover , I relate we compulsory visit , and detention at the . I say force I to go in : which be not quite true . I utter as little as possible against ; nor do I describe all he father 's brutal conduct - my intention be to add no bitterness , if I could help it , to he already over-flow cup . he divine that one of he enemy 's purpose be to secure the personal property , as well as the estate , to he son : or rather himself ; yet why he do not wait till he decease be a puzzle to my master , because ignorant how nearly he and he nephew would quit the world together . however , he feel that he will have better be alte : instead of leave 's fortune at she own disposal , he determine to put it in the hand of trustee for she use during life , and for she child , if she have any , after she . by that mean , it could not fall to should die . have receive he order , I despatch a man to fetch the attorney , and four more , provide with serviceable weapon , to demand my young lady of she jailor . both party be delay very late . the single servant return first . he say , the lawyer , be out when he arrive at he house , and he have to wait two hour for he re-entrance ; and then tell he he have a little business in the village that must be do ; but he would be at before morning . the four man come back unaccompanied also . they bring word that be ill : too ill to quit she room ; and would not suffer they to see she . I scolde the stupid fellow well for listen to that tale , which I would not carry
carry to my master ; resolve to take a whole bevy up to the , at day - light , and storm it literally , unless the prisoner be quietly surrendere to we . she father shall see she , I vow , and vow again , if that be kill on he own doorstone in try to prevent it ! happily , I be spare the journey and the trouble . I have go down - stair at three o'clock to fetch a jug of water ; and be pass through the hall with it in my hand , when a sharp knock at the front door make I jump . 'Oh ! it be Green ,' I say , recollect myself - ' only Green , ' and I go on , intend to send somebody else to open it ; but the knock be repeat : not loud , and still importunately . I put the jug on the banister and hasten to admit he myself . the harvest moon shone clear outside . it be not the attorney . my own sweet little mistress spring on my neck sobb , ' , ! be papa alive ? ' ' yes ,' I cry : ' yes , my angel , he be , be thank , you be safe with we again ! ' she want to run , breathless as she be , up - stair to 's room ; but I compelle she to sit down on a chair , and make she drink , and wash she pale face , chaf it into a faint colour with my apron . then I say I must go first , and tell of she arrival ; implor she to say , she should be happy with young Heathcliff . she star , but soon comprehend why I counsell she to utter the falsehood , she assure I she would not complain . I could not abide to be present at they meeting . I stand outside the chamber - door a quarter of a hour , and hardly venture near the bed , then . all be composed , however : 's despair be as silent as she father 's joy . she support he calmly , in appearance ; and he fix on she feature he raise eye that seem dilat with ecstasy . he die blissfully , : he die so . Kisse she cheek , he murmure , - 'I be go to she ; and you , darl child , shall come to we ! ' and never stir or speak again ; but continue that rapt , radiant gaze , till he pulse imperceptibly stop and he soul depart . none could have notice the exact minute of he death , it be so entirely without a struggle . whether have spend she tear , or whether the grief be too weighty to let they flow , she sit there dry - eye till the sun rise : she sit till noon , and would still have remain brooding over that death , but I insist on she come away and take some repose . it be well I succeed in remove she , for at dinner - time appear the lawyer , have call at to get he instruction how to behave . he have sell himself to : that be the cause of he delay in obey my master 's summon . fortunately , no thought of worldly affair cross the latter 's mind , to disturb he , after he daughter 's arrival . take upon himself to order everything and everybody about the place . he give all the servants but I , notice to quit . he would have carry he delegated authority to the point of insisting that should not be bury beside he wife , but in the chapel , with he family . there be the will , however , to hinder that , and my loud protestation against any infringement of its direction . the funeral be hurry over ; , now , be suffer to stay at the till she father 's corpse have quit it . she tell I that she anguish have at last spurred to incur the risk of liberat she . she hear the man I send dispute at the door , and she gather the sense of 's answer . it drive she desperate . who have be convey up to the little parlour soon after I leave , be terrify into fetch the key before he father re-ascend . he have the cunning to unlock and re-lock the door , without shutt it ; and when he should have go to bed , he beg to sleep with , and he petition be grant for once . steal out before break of day . she da not try the door lest the dog should raise a alarm ; she visit the empty chamber and examine they window ; and , luckily , light on she mother 's , she get easily out of its lattice , and on to the ground , by means of the fir - tree close by . she accomplice suffer for he share in the escape , notwithstand he timid contrivance . chapter XXIX the evening after the funeral , my young lady and I be seat in the library ; now muse mournfully - one of we despairingly - on we loss , now venture conjecture as to the gloomy future . we have just agree the best destiny which could await would be a permission to continue resident at the Grange ; at least during 's life : he be allow to join she there , and I to remain as housekeeper . that seem rather too favourable a arrangement to be hope for ; and yet I do hope , and begin to cheer up under the
the prospect of retain my home and my employment , and , above all , my beloved young mistress ; when a servant - one of the discarded one , not yet depart - rush hastily in , and say ' that ' be come through the court : should he fasten the door in he face ? if we have be mad enough to order that proceeding , we have not time . he make no ceremony of knocking or announce he name : he be master , and avail himself of the master 's privilege to walk straight in , without say a word . the sound of we informant 's voice direct he to the library ; he enter and motion he out , shut the door . it be the same room into which he have be usher , as a guest , eighteen year before : the same moon shone through the window ; and the same autumn landscape lay outside . we have not yet lighte a candle , but all the apartment be visible , even to the portrait on the wall : the splendid head of , and the graceful one of she husband . Heathcliff advanced to the hearth . time have little altered he person either . there be the same man : he dark face rather sallower and more compose , he frame a stone or two heavier , perhaps , and no other difference . have risen with a impulse to dash out , when she see he . ' stop ! ' he say , arrest she by the arm . ' no more runnings away ! where would you go ? I be come to fetch you home ; and I hope you will be a dutiful daughter and not encourage my son to further disobedience . I be embarrass how to punish he when I discover he part in the business : he be such a cobweb , a pinch would annihilate he ; but you will see by he look that he have receive he due ! I bring he down one evening , the day before yesterday , and just set he in a chair , and never touch he afterwards . I send out , and we have the room to ourselves . in two hour , I call to carry he up again ; and since then my presence be as potent on he nerve as a ghost ; and I fancy he see I often , though I be not near . say he wake and shriek in the night by the hour together , and call you to protect he from I ; and , whether you like you precious mate , or not , you must come : he be you concern now ; I yield all my interest in he to you . ' ' why not let continue here ,' I plead , ' and send to she ? as you hate they both , you would not miss they : they can only be a daily plague to you unnatural heart . ' 'I be seek a tenant for the ,' he answer ; ' and I want my child about I , to be sure . besides , that lass owe I she service for she bread . I be not go to nurture she in luxury and idleness after be gone . make haste and get ready , now ; and do not oblige I to compel you . ' 'i shall , ' say . ' be all I have to love in the world , and though you have do what you could to make he hateful to I , and I to he , you can not make we hate each other . and I defy you to hurt he when I be by , and I defy you to frighten I ! ' ' you be a boastful champion , ' reply ; ' but I do not like you well enough to hurt he : you shall get the full benefit of the torment , as long as it last . it be not I who will make he hateful to you - it be he own sweet spirit . he be as bitter as gall at you desertion and its consequence : do not expect thanks for this noble devotion . I hear he draw a pleasant picture to of what he would do if he be as strong as I : the inclination be there , and he very weakness will sharpen he wit to find a substitute for strength . ' 'I know he have a bad nature , ' say : 'he be you son . but I be glad I have a better , to forgive it ; and I know he love I , and for that reason I love he . you have to love you ; and , however miserable you make we , we shall still have the revenge of thinking that you cruelty arise from you greater misery . you be miserable , be you not ? Lonely , like the , and envious like he ? nobody love you - nobody will cry for you when you die ! I would not be you ! ' speak with a kind of dreary triumph : she seem to have make up she mind to enter into the spirit of she future family , and draw pleasure from the grief of she enemy . ' you shall be sorry to be yourself presently , ' say she father - in - law , ' if you stand there another minute . , witch , and get you thing ! ' she scornfully withdraw . in she absence I begin to beg for 's place at the , offer to resign mine to she ; but he would suffer it on
on no account . he bid I be silent ; and then , for the first time , allow himself a glance round the room and a look at the picture . have study 's , he say - 'I shall have that home . not because I need it , but - ' he turn abruptly to the fire , and continue , with what , for lack of a better word , I must call a smile - ' I will tell you what I do yesterday ! I get the sexton , who be digge 's grave , to remove the earth off she coffin lid , and I open it . I think , once , I would have stay there : when I see she face again - it be hers yet ! - he have hard work to stir I ; but he say it would change if the air blow on it , and so I strike one side of the coffin loose , and cover it up : not 's side , damn he ! I wish he have be solder in lead . and I bribe the sexton to pull it away when I be laid there , and slide mine out too ; I will have it make so : and then by the time get to we he will not know which be which ! ' ' you be very wicked , ! ' I exclaim ; ' be you not asham to disturb the dead ? ' 'I disturb nobody , Nelly , ' he reply ; ' and I give some ease to myself . I shall be a great deal more comfortable now ; and you will have a better chance of keep I underground , when I get there . Distur she ? no ! she have disturb I , night and day , through eighteen year - incessantly - remorselessly - till yesternight ; and yesternight I be tranquil . I dreamt I be sleep the last sleep by that sleeper , with my heart stop and my cheek freeze against hers . ' ' and if she have be dissolve into earth , or worse , what would you have dreamt of then ? ' I say . ' of dissolve with she , and be more happy still ! ' he answer . ' do you suppose I dread any change of that sort ? I expect such a transformation on raise the lid - but I be better pleased that it should not commence till I share it . besides , unless I have receive a distinct impression of she passionless feature , that strange feeling would hardly have be remove . it begin oddly . you know I be wild after she die ; and eternally , from dawn to dawn , praie she to return to I she spirit ! I have a strong faith in ghost : I have a conviction that they can , and do , exist among we ! the day she be bury , there come a fall of snow . in the evening I go to the churchyard . it blow bleak as winter - all round be solitary . I do not fear that she fool of a husband would wander up the glen so late ; and no one else have business to bring they there . be alone , and conscious two yard of loose earth be the sole barrier between we , I say to myself - ' I will have she in my arm again ! if she be cold , I will think it be this north wind that chill I ; and if she be motionless , it be sleep . " I get a spade from the tool - house , and begin to delve with all my might - it scrape the coffin ; I fall to work with my hand ; the wood commence cracke about the screw ; I be on the point of attaine my object , when it seem that I hear a sigh from some one above , close at the edge of the grave , and bend down . " if I can only get this off , " I mutter , " I wish they may shovel in the earth over we both ! " and I wrench at it more desperately still . there be another sigh , close at my ear . I appear to feel the warm breath of it displace the sleet - laden wind . I know no living thing in flesh and blood be by ; but , as certainly as you perceive the approach to some substantial body in the dark , though it can not be discerned , so certainly I feel that be there : not under I , but on the earth . a sudden sense of relief flow from my heart through every limb . I relinquish my labour of agony , and turn consol at once : unspeakably consol . she presence be with I : it remain while I re-fill the grave , and lead I home . you may laugh , if you will ; but I be sure I should see she there . I be sure she be with I , and I could not help talk to she . have reach the , I rush eagerly to the door . it be fasten ; and , I remember , that accurse and my wife oppose my entrance . I remember stop to kick the breath out of he , and then hurrie up - stair , to my room and hers . I look round impatiently - I feel she by I - I could Almost see she , and yet I could not ! I ought to have sweat blood then , from the anguish of my yearning - from
from the fervour of my supplication to have but one glimpse ! I have not one . she show herself , as she often be in life , a devil to I ! and , since then , sometimes more and sometimes less , I have be the sport of that intolerable torture ! Infernal ! keep my nerve at such a stretch that , if they have not resemble catgut , they would long ago have relax to the feebleness of 's . when I sit in the house with , it seem that on go out I should meet she ; when I walk on the moor I should meet she come in . when I go from home I hasten to return ; she must be somewhere at the , I be certain ! and when I sleep in she chamber - I be beat out of that . I could not lie there ; for the moment I close my eye , she be either outside the window , or slide back the panel , or enter the room , or even rest she darl head on the same pillow as she do when a child ; and I must open my lid to see . and so I open and close they a hundred time a night - to be always disappoint ! it rack I ! I have often groane aloud , till that old rascal doubt believe that my conscience be play the fiend inside of I . now , since I have see she , I be pacify - a little . it be a strange way of kill : not by inch , but by fractions of hairbreadth , to beguile I with the spectre of a hope through eighteen year ! ' pause and wip he forehead ; he hair clung to it , wet with perspiration ; he eye be fix on the red ember of the fire , the brows not contract , but raise next the temple ; diminish the grim aspect of he countenance , but impart a peculiar look of trouble , and a painful appearance of mental tension towards one absorbing subject . he only half address I , and I maintain silence . I do not like to hear he talk ! after a short period he resume he meditation on the picture , take it down and lean it against the sofa to contemplate it at better advantage ; and while so occupy Catherine enter , announce that she be ready , when she pony should be saddle . ' send that over to - morrow , ' say to I ; then turn to she , he add : ' you may do without you pony : it be a fine evening , and you will need no pony at ; for what journey you take , you own foot will serve you . come along . ' ' good - bye , ! ' whisper my dear little mistress . as she kiss I , she lip felt like ice . ' come and see I , ; do not forget . ' ' take care you do no such thing , ! ' say she new father . ' when I wish to speak to you I will come here . I want none of you prying at my house ! ' he sign she to precede he ; and cast back a look that cut my heart , she obey . I watch they , from the window , walk down the garden . Heathcliff fix 's arm under he : though she dispute the act at first evidently ; and with rapid stride he hurrie she into the alley , whose tree conceal they . I have pay a visit to the , but I have not see she since she leave : hold the door in he hand when I call to ask after she , and would not let I pass . he say be ' thrang , ' and the master be not in . have tell I something of the way they go on , otherwise I should hardly know who be dead and who liive . she think haughty , and do not like she , I can guess by she talk . my young lady ask some aid of she when she first come ; but tell she to follow she own business , and let he daughter - in - law look after herself ; and willingly acquiesce , be a narrow - minded , selfish woman . evince a child 's annoyance at this neglect ; repay it with contempt , and thus enlist my informant among she enemy , as securely as if she have do she some great wrong . I have a long talk with about six week ago , a little before you come , one day when we foregather on the moor ; and this be what she tell I . ' the first thing do , ' she say , 'on she arrival at the , be to run up - stair , without even wish good - evening to I and ; she shut herself into 's room , and remain till morning . then , while the master and be at breakfast , she enter the house , and ask all in a quiver if the doctor might be send for ? she cousin be very ill . ' " we know that ! " answer ; " but he life be not worth a farthing , and I will not spend a farthing on he . " ' " but I can not tell how to do , " she say ; " and if nobody will help I , he will die ! " ' " Walk out of the room , " cry the master , " and let
let I never hear a word more about he ! none here care what become of he ; if you do , act the nurse ; if you do not , lock he up and leave he . " ' then she begin to bother I , and I say I would have enough plague with the tiresome thing ; we each have we tasnks , and hers be to wait on : bid I leave that labour to she . ' how they manage together , I can not tell . I fancy he fret a great deal , and moan hisseln night and day ; and she have precious little rest : one could guess by she white face and heavy eye . she sometimes come into the kitchen all wilder like , and look as if she would fain beg assistance ; but I be not go to disobey the master : I never dare disobey he , Dean ; and , though I think it wrong that should not be send for , it be no concern of mine either to advise or complain , and I always refuse to meddle . once or twice , after we have go to bed , I have happen to open my door again and see she sitting cry on the stair '- top ; and then I have shut myself in quick , for fear of be move to interfere . I do pity she then , I be sure : still I do not wish to lose my place , you know . ' at last , one night she come boldly into my chamber , and frightene I out of my wit , by say , " that he son be die - I be sure he be , this time . get up , instantly , and tell he . " ' have utter this speech , she vanish again . I lay a quarter of a hour listen and trembl . nothing stir - the house be quiet . ' she be mistaken , I say to myself . he be get over it . I need not disturb they ; and I begin to doze . but my sleep be mar a second time by a sharp ringing of the bell - the only bell we have , put up on purpose for ; and the master call to I to see what be the matter , and inform they that he would not have that noise repeat . 'I deliver 's message . he curse to himself , and in a few minute come out with a lighted candle , and proceed to they room . I follow . be seat by the bedside , with she hand fold on she knee . she father - in - law go up , hold the light to 's face , look at he , and touch he ; afterwards he turn to she . ' " now - , " he say , " how do you feel ? " ' she be dumb . ' " how do you feel , ? " he repeat . ' " he be safe , and I be free , " she answer : " I should feel well - but , " she continue , with a bitterness she could not conceal , " you have leave I so long to struggle against death alone , that I feel and see only death ! I feel like death ! " ' and she look like it , too ! I give she a little wine . and , who have be wake by the ringing and the sound of foot , and hear we talk from outside , now enter . be fain , I believe , of the lad 's removal ; see a thought bother : though he be more take up with staring at than think of . but the master bid he get off to bed again : we do not want he help . he afterwards make remove the body to he chamber , and tell I to return to mine , and . Heathcliff remain by herself . ' in the morning , he send I to tell she she must come down to breakfast : she have undressed , and appear go to sleep , and say she be ill ; at which I hardly wonder . I inform , and he reply , - " well , let she be till after the funeral ; and go up now and then to get she what be needful ; and , as soon as she seem better , tell I . "' stay upstairs a fortnight , accord to ; who visit she twice a day , and would have be rather more friendly , but she attempt at increasing kindness be proudly and promptly repell . go up once , to show she 's . he have bequeath the whole of he , and what have be she , moveable property , to he father : the poor creature be threaten , or coax , into that act during she week 's absence , when he uncle di . the land , be a minor , he could not meddle with . however , have claim and keep they in he wife 's right and he also : I suppose legally ; at any rate , , destitute of cash and friend , can not disturb he possession . ' nobody , ' say , ' ever approach she door , except that once , but I ; and nobody ask anything about she . the first occasion of she come down into the house be on a afternoon . she have cry out , when I carry up she dinner , that she could not bear any longer be in the cold ; and I tell
tell she the master be go to , and and I need not hinder she from descending ; so , as soon as she hear 's horse trot off , she make she appearance , don in black , and she yellow curl comb back behind she ear as plain as a Quaker : she could not comb they out . ' and I generally go to chapel on :' the kirk , you know , have no minister now , explain ; and they call the ' or ' place ( I can not say which it be ) at , a chapel . ' have gone , ' she continue , ' but I think proper to bide at home . young folk be always the better for a elder 's over -look ; and , with all he bashfulness , be not a model of nice behaviour . I let he know that he cousin would very likely sit with we , and she have be always use to see the Sabbath respect ; so he have as good leave he gun and bit of indoor work alone , while she stay . he colou up at the news , and cast he eye over he hand and clothes . the train -oil and gunpowder be shove out of sight in a minute . I see he mean to give she he company ; and I guess , by he way , he want to be presentable ; so , laugh , as I durst not laugh when the master be by , I offer to help he , if he would , and joke at he confusion . he grow sullen , and begin to swear . ' now , , ' go on , see I not pleas by she manner , ' you happen think you young lady too fine for ; and happen you be right : but I own I should love well to bring she pride a peg lower . and what will all she learn and she daintiness do for she , now ? she be as poor as you or I : poorer , I will be bound : you be say , and I be do my little all that road . ' allow to give he she aid ; and she flatter he into a good humour ; so , when come , half forget she former insult , he try to make himself agreeable , by the housekeeper 's account . ' walk in , ' she say , 'as chill as a icicle , and as high as a princess . I get up and offer she my seat in the arm-chair . no , she turn up she nose at my civility . rise , too , and bid she come to the settle , and sit close by the fire : he be sure she be starve . ' " I have be starve a month and more , " she answer , rest on the word as scornful as she could . ' and she get a chair for herself , and place it at a distance from both of we . have sit till she be warm , she begin to look round , and discover a number of book on the dresser ; she be instantly upon she foot again , stretch to reach they : but they be too high up . she cousin , after watch she endeavour a while , at last summoned courage to help she ; she hold she frock , and he fill it with the first that come to hand . ' that be a great advance for the lad . she do not thank he ; still , he feel gratify that she have accept he assistance , and venture to stand behind as she examine they , and even to stoop and point out what strike he fancy in certain old picture which they contain ; nor be he daunt by the saucy style in which she jerk the page from he finger : he contente himself with go a bit farther back and look at she instead of the book . she continue reading , or seek for something to read . he attention become , by degree , quite centred in the study of she thick silky curl : she face he could not see , and she could not see he . and , perhaps , not quite awake to what he do , but attract like a child to a candle , at last he proceed from staring to touch ; he put out he hand and strok one curl , as gently as if it be a bird . he might have stick a knife into she neck , she start round in such a taking . ' " get away this moment ! how dare you touch I ? why be you stop there ? " she cry , in a tone of disgust . " I can not endure you ! I will go upstairs again , if you come near I . " ' recoil , look as foolish as he could do : he sit down in the settle very quiet , and she continue turn over she volume another half hour ; finally , Earnshaw cross over , and whisper to I . ' will you ask she to read to we , ? I be stall of do natch ; and I do like - I could like to hear she ! not say I want it , but ask of . " ' " wish you would read to we , ma 'am , " I say , immediately . " he would take it very kind - he would be much obliged . " ' she frown ; and look up , answer - ' " , and the
the whole set of you , will be good enough to understand that I reject any pretence at kindness you have the hypocrisy to offer ! I despise you , and will have nothing to say to any of you ! when I would have give my life for one kind word , even to see one of you face , you all keep off . but I will not complain to you ! I be drive down here by the cold ; not either to amuse you or enjoy you society . " ' " what could I ha ' do ? " begin . " how be I to blame ? " ' " oh ! you be a exception , " answer . " I never miss such a concern as you . " ' " but I offer more than once , and ask , " he say , kind up at she pertness , " I ask to let I wake for you - " ' " be silent ! I will go out of door , or anywhere , rather than have you disagreeable voice in my ear ! " say my lady . ' mutter she might go to hell , for he ! and unslinge he gun , restrain himself from he occupations no longer . he talk now , freely enough ; and she presently see fit to retreat to she solitude : but the frost have set in , and , in spite of she pride , she be force to condescmend to we company , more and more . however , I take care there should be no further scorning at my good nature : ever since , I have be as stiff as herself ; and she have no lover or liker among we : and she do not deserve one ; for , let they say the least word to she , and she will curl back without respect of any one . she will snap at the master himself , and as good as dare he to thrash she ; and the more hurt she get , the more venomous she grow . ' at first , on hear this account from , I determine to leave my situation , take a cottage , and get to come and live with I : but would as soon permit that as he would set up in a independent house ; and I can see no remedy , at present , unless she could marry again ; and that scheme it do not come within my province to arrange . thus end 's story . Notwithstand the doctor 's prophecy , I be rapidly recover strength ; and though it be only the second week in , I propose get out on horseback in a day or two , and ride over to , to inform my landlord that I shall spend the next six month in ; and , if he like , he may look out for another tenant to take the place after . I would not pass another winter here for much . be bright , calm , and frosty . I go to the as I propose : my housekeeper entreate I to bear a little note from she to she young lady , and I do not refuse , for the worthy woman be not conscious of anything odd in she request . the front door stood open , but the jealous gate be fasten , as at my last visit ; I knock and invoke from among the garden - bed ; he unchain it , and I enter . the fellow be as handsome a rustic need be see . I take particular notice of he this time ; but then he do he best apparently to make the least of he advantages . I ask if be at home ? he answer , no ; but he would be in at dinner - time . it be eleven o'clock , and I announce my intention of go in and wait for he ; at which he immediately fling down he tool and accompany I , in the office of watchdog , not as a substitute for the host . we enter together ; be there , make herself useful in prepare some vegetable for the approach meal ; she look more sulky and less spirited than when I have see she first . she hardly raise she eye to notice I , and continue she employment with the same disregard to common form of politeness as before ; never return my bow and good - morning by the slightest acknowledgment . ' she do not seem so amiable ,' I think , 'a . Dean would persuade I to believe . she be a beauty , it be true ; but not a angel . ' Earnshaw surlily by she remove she thing to the kitchen . ' remove they yourself , ' she say , push they from she as soon as she have do ; and retire to a stool by the window , where she begin to carve figure of bird and beast out of the turnip - paring in she lap . I approach she , pretend to desire a view of the garden ; and , as I fancie , adroitly drop 's note on to she knee , unnotice by - but she ask aloud , ' what be that ? ' and chuck it off . 'a letter from you old acquaintance , the housekeeper at the ,' I answer ; annoye at she expose my kind deed , and fearful lest it should be imagine a missive of my own . she would gladly have gather it up at this information , but beat she ; he seize and put it in he waistcoat , say should look at it first .
. , silently turn she face from we , and , very stealthily , draw out she pocket - handkerchief and apply it to she eye ; and she cousin , after struggle awhile to keep down he softer feeling , pull out the letter and fling it on the floor beside she , as ungraciously as he could . catch and peruse it eagerly ; then she put a few question to I concern the inmate , rational and irrational , of she former home ; and gaze towards the hill , murmure in soliloquy : 'I should like to be ride down there ! I should like to be climbe up there ! oh ! I be tired - I be Stalled , ! ' and she lean she pretty head back against the sill , with half a yawn and half a sigh , and lapse into a aspect of abstract sadness : neither car nor know whether we remark she . ' ,' I say , after sit some time mute , ' you be not aware that I be a acquaintance of yours ? so intimate that I think it strange you will not come and speak to I . my housekeeper never weary of talk about and praise you ; and she will be greatly disappointed if I return with no news of or from you , except that you receive she letter and say nothing ! ' she appear to wonder at this speech , and ask , - ' do like you ? ' ' yes , very well ,' I reply , hesitatingly . ' you must tell she , ' she continue , ' that I would answer she letter , but I have no material for writing : not even a book from which I might tear a leaf . ' ' no book ! ' I exclaim . ' how do you contrive to live here without they ? if I may take the liberty to inquire . though provide with a large library , I be frequently very dull at the Grange ; take my book away , and I should be desperate ! ' 'I be always read , when I have they , ' say ; 'and never read ; so he take it into he head to destroy my book . I have not have a glimpse of one for week . only once , I search through 's store of theology , to he great irritation ; and once , , I come upon a secret stock in you room - some and , and some tale and poetry : all old friend . I bring the last here - and you gather they , as a magpie gather silver spoon , for the mere love of stealing ! they be of no use to you ; or else you conceal they in the bad spirit that , as you can not enjoy they , nobody else shall . perhaps you envy counsel to rob I of my treasure ? but I have most of they write on my brain and print in my heart , and you can not deprive I of those ! ' Earnshaw blush crimson when he cousin make this revelation of he private literary accumulation , and stammer a indignant denial of she accusation . ' be desirous of increase he amount of knowledge ,' I say , come to he rescue . ' he be not ENVIOUS , but of you attainment . he will be a clever scholar in a few year . ' ' and he want I to sink into a dunce , meantime , ' answer . ' yes , I hear he try to spell and read to himself , and pretty blunder he make ! I wish you would repeat chase as you do yesterday : it be extremely funny . I hear you ; and I hear you turn over the dictionary to seek out the hard word , and then curse because you could not read they explanations ! ' the young man evidently think it too bad that he should be laugh at for he ignorance , and then laugh at for try to remove it . I have a similar notion ; and , remember 's anecdote of he first attempt at enlighten the darkness in which he have be rear , I observe , - ' but , . , we have each have a commencement , and each stumble and totter on the threshold ; have we teacher scorn instead of aid we , we should stumble and totter yet . ' 'Oh ! ' she reply , 'I do not wish to limit he acquirement : still , he have no right to appropriate what be mine , and make it ridiculous to I with he vile mistake and mispronunciation ! those book , both prose and verse , be consecrate to I by other associations ; and I hate to have they debase and profan in he mouth ! besides , of all , he have select my favourite piece that I love the most to repeat , as if out of deliberate malice . ' 's chest heav in silence a minute : he laboure under a severe sense of mortification and wrath , which it be no easy task to suppress . I rise , and , from a gentlemanly idea of relieive he embarrassment , take up my station in the doorway , survey the external prospect as I stand . he follow my example , and leave the room ; but presently reappear , bear half a dozen volume in he hand , which he throw into 's lap , exclaim , - ' take they ! I never want to hear , or read , or think of they again ! ' 'I will not have they now ,
, ' she answer . 'I shall connect they with you , and hate they . ' she open one that have obviously be often turn over , and read a portion in the draw tone of a beginner ; then laugh , and throw it from she . ' and listen , ' she continue , provokingly , commence a verse of a old ballad in the same fashion . but he self - love would endure no further torment : I hear , and not altogether disapprovingly , a manual cheek give to she saucy tongue . the little wretch have do she utmost to hurt she cousin 's sensitive though uncultivated feeling , and a physical argument be the only mode he have of balance the account , and repay its effect on the inflictor . he afterwards gather the book and hurl they on the fire . I read in he countenance what anguish it be to offer that sacrifice to splee . I fancie that as they consum , he recal the pleasure they have already impart , and the triumph and ever - increase pleasure he have anticipate from they ; and I fancie I guess the incitement to he secret study also . he have be content with daily labour and rough animal enjoyment , till cross he path . shame at she scorn , and hope of she approval , be he first prompter to higher pursuit ; and instead of guard he from one and win he to the other , he endeavour to raise himself have produce just the contrary result . ' yes that be all the good that such a brute as you can get from they ! ' cry , suck she damage lip , and watch the conflagration with indignant eye . ' you would better hold you tongue , now ,' he answer fiercely . and he agitation preclude further speech ; he advance hastily to the entrance , where I make way for he to pass . but ere he have cross the door - stone , , come up the causeway , encounter he , and lay hold of he shoulder ask , - ' what be to do now , my lad ? ' ' naught , natch ,' he say , and break away to enjoy he grief and anger in solitude . gaze after he , and sigh . ' it will be odd if I thwart myself , ' he mutter , unconscious that I be behind he . ' but when I look for he father in he face , I find she every day more ! how the devil be he so like ? I can hardly bear to see he . ' he bend he eye to the ground , and walk moodily in . there be a restless , anxious expression in he countenance . I have never remark there before ; and he look sparer in person . he daughter - in - law , on perceive he through the window , immediately escape to the kitchen , so that I remain alone . 'I be glad to see you out of door again , ,' he say , in reply to my greeting ; ' from selfish motive partly : I do not think I could readily supply you loss in this desolation . I have wonder more than once what bring you here . ' ' a idle whim , I fear , sir , ' be my answer ; 'or else a idle whim be go to spirit I away . I shall set out for next week ; and I must give you warn that I feel no disposition to retain beyond the twelve month I agree to rent it . I believe I shall not live there any more . ' 'Oh , indeed ; you be tired of be banish from the world , be you ? ' he say . ' but if you be come to plead off pay for a place you will not occupy , you journey be useless : I never relent in exact my due from any one . ' 'I be come to plead off nothing about it ,' I exclaim , considerably irritate . ' should you wish it , I will settle with you now , ' and I draw my note - book from my pocket . ' no , no ,' he reply , coolly ; ' you will leave sufficient behind to cover you debt , if you fail to return : I be not in such a hurry . sit down and take you dinner with we ; a guest that be safe from repeat he visit can generally be make welcome . bring the thing in : where be you ? ' reappear , bear a tray of knife and fork . ' you may get you dinner with , ' mutter , aside , ' and remain in the kitchen till he be gone . ' she obey he direction very punctually : perhaps she have no temptation to transgress . live among clown and misanthropist , she probably can not appreciate a better class of people when she meet they . with , grim and saturnine , on the one hand , and , absolutely dumb , on the other , I make a somewhat cheerless meal , and bay adieu early . I would have depart by the back way , to get a last glimpse of and annoy old ; but receive order to lead up my horse , and my host himself escort I to the door , so I could not fulfil my wish . ' how dreary life get over in that house ! ' I reflect , while ride down the road . ' what a realisation of something more romantic than a fairy tale it would
would have be for , have she and I strike up a attachment , as she good nurse desire , and migrate together into the stirring atmosphere of the town ! ' 1802 . - this I be invite to devastate the moor of a friend in the north , and on my journey to he abode , I unexpectedly come within fifteen mile of . the ostler at a roadside public - house be hold a pail of water to refresh my horse , when a cart of very green oat , newly reap , pass by , and he remark , - ' 's frough , nah ! they be allas three wick ' after other folk wi' the harvest . ' ' ? ' I repeat - my residence in that locality have already grow dim and dreamy . 'Ah ! I know . how far be it from this ? ' ' happen fourteen mile of 'er th ' hill ; and a rough road ,' he answer . a sudden impulse seize I to visit . it be scarcely noon , and I conceive that I might as well pass the night under my own roof as in a inn . besides , I could spare a day easily to arrange matter with my landlord , and thus save myself the trouble of invade the neighbourhood again . have rest awhile , I direct my servant to inquire the way to the village ; and , with great fatigue to we beasts , we manage the distance in some three hour . I leave he there , and proceed down the valley alone . the grey church look greyer , and the lonely churchyard lonelier . I distinguished a moor - sheep cropp the short turf on the grave . it be sweet , warm weather - too warm for travelling ; but the heat do not hinder I from enjoy the delightful scenery above and below : have I see it nearer , I be sure it would have temp I to waste a month among its solitude . in winter nothing more dreary , in summer nothing more divine , than those glens shut in by hills , and those bluff , bold swell of heath . I reach the before sunset , and knock for admittance ; but the family have retreat into the back premise , I judge , by one thin , blue wreath , curl from the kitchen chimney , and they do not hear . I ride into the court . under the porch , a girl of nine or ten sat knitting , and a old woman recline on the housestep , smoke a meditative pipe . 'Is ? ' I demand of the dame . ' ? Nay ! ' she answer , ' she do not bide here : shoo be up at th' . ' ' be you the housekeeper , then ? ' I continue . ' Eea , aw keep thg hause , ' she reply . ' well , I be , the master . be there any room to lodge I in , I wonder ? I wish to stay all night . ' 't ' maister ! ' she cry in astonishment . ' , whoiver know yah yowu come ? sud ha ' send word . they be nowt norther dry nor mensful abaht t ' place : nowt there be not ! ' she throw down she pipe and bust in , the girl follow , and I enter too ; soon perceive that she report be true , and , moreover , that I have almost upset she wit by my unwelcome apparition , I bay she be compose . I would go out for a walk ; and , meantime she must try to prepare a corner of a sitting - room for I to sup in , and a bedroom to sleep in . no sweeping and dusting , only good fire and dry sheet be necessary . she seem willing to do she best ; though she thrust the hearth - brush into the grate in mistake for the poker , and malappropriate several other article of she craft : but I retire , confid in she energy for a resting - place against my return . Wuthering be the goal of my propose excursion . a afterthotch bring I back , when I have quit the court . ' all well at the ? ' I inquire of the woman . ' Eea , f'r owt ee knaw ! ' she answer , skurry away with a pan of hot cinder . I would have ask why have desert the , but it be impossible to delay she at such a crisis , so I turn away and make my exit , rambl leisurely along , with the glow of a sink sun behind , and the mild glory of a rise moon in front - one fading , and the other brightening - as I quit the park , and climb the stony by - road branch off to 's dwelling . before I arrive in sight of it , all that remain of day be a beamless amber light along the west : but I could see every pebble on the path , and every blade of grass , by that splendid moon . I have neither to climb the gate nor to knock - it yield to my hand . that be a improveament , I think . and I notice another , by the aid of my nostril ; a fragrance of stock and wallflower waft on the air from amongst the homely fruit - tree . both door and lattice be open ; and yet , as be usually the case in a coal - district , a fine red fire illumin the chimney : the comfort which
which the eye derive from it render the extra heat endurable . but the house of be so large that the inmate have plenty of space for withdraw out of its influence ; and accordingly what inmate there be have statione themselves not far from one of the window . I could both see they and hear they talk before I enter , and look and listen in consequence ; be move theretoo by a mingled sense of curiosity and envy , that grow as I linger . ' Con-trary ! ' say a voice as sweet as a silver bell . ' that for the third time , you dunce ! I be not go to tell you again . Recollect , or I will pull you hair ! ' ' contrary , then ,' answer another , in deep but soften tone . ' and now , kiss I , for minding so well . ' ' no , read it over first correctly , without a single mistake . ' the male speaker begin to read : he be a young man , respectably dress and seat at a table , have a book before he . he handsome feature glow with pleasure , and he eye keep impatiently wander from the page to a small white hand over he shoulder , which recal he by a smart slap on the cheek , whenever its owner detect such sign of inattention . it be owner stand behind ; she light , shine ringlet blend , at interval , with he brown look , as she bend to superintend he study ; and she face - it be lucky he could not see she face , or he would never have be so steady . I could ; and I bit my lip in spite , at have throw away the chance I might have have of do something besides staring at its smiting beauty . the task be done , not free from further blunder ; but the pupil claim a reward , and receive at least five kiss ; which , however , he generously return . then they come to the door , and from they conversation I judge they be about to issue out and have a walk on the moor . I suppose I should be condemn in 's heart , if not by he mouth , to the lowest pit in the infernal region if I show my unfortunate person in he neighbourhood then ; and feel very mean and malignant , I skulk round to seek refuge in the kitchen . there be unobstructed admittance on that side also ; and at the door sit my old friend Nelly Dean , sew and singe a song ; which be often interrupt from within by harsh word of scorn and intolerance , uttere in far from musical accent . 'I would rayther , by th ' haulf , hevg them swear I ' my lug fro'h morn to neeght , nor hearken ye hahsiver ! ' say the tenant of the kitchen , in answer to a unheard speech of 's . ' it be a blazing shame , that I can not oppen t ' bless , but yah set up they glory to sattan , and all t ' flaysome wickedness that iver be bear into th ' warld ! oh ! ye be a raight nowt ; and shoo be another ; and that poor lad will be lose atween ye . poor lad ! ' he add , with a groan ; 'he be witch : I be sartin o not . oh , , judge th'ey , for there 's norther law nor justice among wer ruller ! ' ' no ! or we should be sit in flaming fagot , I suppose , ' retort the singer . ' but wisht , old man , and read you like a , and never mind I . this be " 's " - a bonny tune - it go to a dance . ' be about to recommence , when I advance ; and recognise I directly , she jump to she foot , cry - ' why , bless you , ! how could you think of return in this way ? all have shut up at . you should have give we notice ! ' 'I have arrange to be accommodate there , for as long as I shall stay ,' I answer . 'i depart again to - morrow . and how be you transplant here , . Dean ? tell I that . ' ' leave , and wish I to come , soon after you go to , and stay till you return . but , step in , pray ! have you walk from this evening ? ' ' from the Grange ,' I reply ; ' and while they make I lod room there , I want to finish my business with you master ; because I do not think of have another opportunity in a hurry . ' ' what business , sir ? ' say Nelly , conduct I into the house . 'he be go out at present , and will not return soon . ' ' about the rent ,' I answer . 'Oh ! then it be with . you must settle , ' she observe ; 'or rather with I . she have not learn to manage she affair yet , and I act for she : there be nobody else . ' I look surprised . 'Ah ! you have not hear of 's death , I see , ' she continue . ' Heathcliff dead ! ' I exclaim , astonished . ' how long ago ? ' ' three months since : but sit down , and let I take you hat , and I will tell you all about it .
. stop , you have have nothing to eat , have you ? ' 'I want nothing : I have order supper at home . you sit down too . I never dreamt of he dying ! let I hear how it come to pass . you say you do not expect they back for some time - the young people ? ' 'no - I have to scold they every evening for they late ramble : but they do not care for I . at least , have a drink of we old ale ; it will do you good : you seem weary . ' she hasten to fetch it before I could refuse , and I hear ask whether ' it war not a cry scandal that she should have follower at she time of life ? and then , to get they jock out of ' t ' maister 's cellar ! he fair shaam to ' bide still and see it . ' she do not stay to retaliate , but re-enter in a minute , bear a ream silver pint , whose contents I laud with become earnestness . and afterwards she furnish I with the sequel of 's history . he have a ' queer ' end , as she express it . I be summon to , within a fortnight of you leave we , she say ; and I obey joyfully , for 's sake . my first interview with she grieve and shock I : she have alte so much since we separation . do not explain he reason for take a new mind about my come here ; he only tell I he want I , and he be tired of see : I must make the little parlour my sitting - room , and keep she with I . it be enough if he be oblige to see she once or twice a day . she seem pleased at this arrangement ; and , by degree , I smuggle over a great number of book , and other article , that have form she amusement at the ; and flatter myself we should get on in tolerable comfort . the delusion do not last long . , content at first , in a brief space grow irritable and restless . for one thing , she be forbidden to move out of the garden , and it fret she sadly to be confine to its narrow bounds as spring draw on ; for another , in follow the house , I be force to quit she frequently , and she complain of loneliness : she prefer quarrelling with in the kitchen to sit at peace in she solitude . I do not mind they skirmish : but be often oblige to seek the kitchen also , when the master want to have the house to himself ! and though in the begin she either leave it at he approach , or quietly join in my occupations , and shunn remark or address he - and though he be always as sullen and silent as possible - after a while , she change she behaviour , and become incapable of let he alone : talk at he ; comment on he stupidity and idleness ; express she wonder how he could endure the life he liv - how he could sit a whole evening star into the fire , and do . ' he be just like a dog , be he not , ? ' she once observe , 'or a cart - horse ? he do he work , eat he food , and sleep eternally ! what a blank , dreary mind he must have ! do you ever dream , ? and , if you do , what be it about ? but you can not speak to I ! ' then she look at he ; but he would neither open he mouth nor look again . 'he be , perhaps , dreame now , ' she continue . ' he twitch he shoulder as twitch hers . ask he , . ' ' will ask the master to send you up - stair , if you do not behave ! ' I say . he have not only twitch he shoulder but clench he fist , as if temp to use it . 'I know why never speak , when I be in the kitchen , ' she exclaim , on another occasion . ' he be afraid I shall laugh at he . , what do you think ? he begin to teach himself to read once ; and , because I laugh , he burn he book , and drop it : be he not a fool ? ' ' be not you naughty ? ' I say ; ' answer I that . ' ' perhaps I be , ' she go on ; ' but I do not expect he to be so silly . , if I give you a book , would you take it now ? I will try ! ' she place one she have be peruse on he hand ; he fling it off , and mutter , if she do not give over , he would break she neck . ' well , I shall put it here , ' she say , 'in the table - drawer ; and I be go to bed . ' then she whisper I to watch whether he touch it , and depart . but he would not come near it ; and so I inform she in the morning , to she great disappointment . I see she be sorry for he persevering sulkiness and indolence : she conscience reprove she for frightene he off improve himself : she have do it effectually . but she ingenuity be at work to remedy the injury : while I
I iron , or pursue other such stationary employment as I could not well do in the parlour , she would bring some pleasant volume and read it aloud to I . when be there , she generally pause in a interesting part , and leave the book lie about : that she do repeatedly ; but he be as obstinate as a mule , and , instead of snatching at she bait , in wet weather he take to smoke with ; and they sit like automaton , one on each side of the fire , the elder happily too deaf to understand she wicked nonsense , as he would have call it , the younger do he best to seem to disregard it . on fine evening the latter follow he shooting expedition , and yawn and sigh , and tease I to talk to she , and run off into the court or gare the moment I begin ; and , as a last resource , cry , and say she be tired of live : she life be useless . , who grow more and more disinclined to society , have almost banished from he apartment . Ow to a accident at the commencement of , he become for some day a fixture in the kitchen . he gun burst while out on the hill by himself ; a splinter cut he arm , and he lose a good deal of blood before he could reach home . the consequence be that , perforce , he be condemn to the fireside and tranquillity , till he make it up again . it suite to have he there : at any rate , it make she hate she room up - stairs more than ever : and she would compel I to find out business below , that she might accompany I . on , go to fair with some cattle ; and , in the afternoon , I be busy get up linen in the kitchen . Earnshaw sit , morose as usual , at the chimney corner , and my little mistress be beguil a idle hour with draw picture on the window - pane , varie she amusement by smothered bursts of song , and whisper ejaculation , and quick glance of annoyance and impatience in the direction of she cousin , who steadfastly smoke , and look into the grate . at a notice that I could do with she no longer intercept my light , she remove to the hearthstone . I bestow little attention on she proceedings , but , presently , I hear she begin - 'i have find out , , that I want - that I be glad - that I should like you to be my cousin now , if you have not grow so cross to I , and so rough . ' return no answer . ' , , ! do you hear ? ' she continue . ' get off wi' ye ! ' he grow , with uncompromising gruffness . ' let I take that pipe , ' she say , cautiously advanc she hand and abstract it from he mouth . before he could attempt to recover it , it be break , and behind the fire . he swore at she and seize another . ' stop , ' she cry , ' you must listen to I first ; and I can not speak while those cloud be float in my face . ' ' will you go to the devil ! ' he exclaim , ferociously , ' and let I be ! ' ' no , ' she persist , 'I will not : I can not tell what to do to make you talk to I ; and you be determine not to understand . when I call you stupid , I do not mean anything : I do not mean that I despise you . come , you shall take notice of I , : you be my cousin , and you shall own I . ' 'I shall have natch to do wi' you and you mucky pride , and you damned mocking trick ! ' he answer . 'I will go to hell , body and soul , before I look sideways after you again . side out of ' t ' gate , now , this minute ! ' frown , and retreat to the window - seat chew she lip , and endeavour , by hum a eccentric tune , to conceal a grow tendency to sob . ' you should be friend with you cousin , ,' I interrupt , ' since she repent of she sauciness . it would do you a great deal of good : it would make you another man to have she for a companion . ' 'A companion ! ' he cry ; ' when she hate I , and do not think I fit to wipe she shoon ! Nay , if it make I a king , I would not be scorned for seek she good - will any more . ' ' it be not I who hate you , it be you who hate I ! ' weep , no longer disguise she trouble . ' you hate I as much as do , and more . ' ' you be a damned liar , ' begin : ' why have I make he angry , by take you part , then , a hundred time ? and that when you sneer at and despise I , and - on plague I , and I will step in yonder , and say you worry I out of the kitchen ! ' 'I do not know you take my part , ' she answer , dry she eye ; ' and I be miserable and bitter at everybody ; but now I thank
thank you , and beg you to forgive I : what can I do besides ? ' she return to the hearth , and frankly extend she hand . he blacken and scowl like a thunder - cloud , and keep he fists resolutely clench , and he gaze fix on the ground . , by instinct , must have divine it be obdurate perversity , and not dislike , that prompt this dog conduct ; for , after remain a instant undecided , she stoop and impress on he cheek a gentle kiss . the little rogue think I have not see she , and , draw back , she take she former station by the window , quite demurely . I shook my head reprovingly , and then she blush and whisper - ' well ! what should I have do , ? he would not shake hand , and he would not look : I must show he some way that I like he - that I want to be friend . ' whether the kiss convince , I can not tell : he be very careful , for some minute , that he face should not be see , and when he do raise it , he be sadly puzzl where to turn he eye . employ herself in wrapping a handsome book neatly in white paper , and have tie it with a bit of ribbon , and address it to ' . , ' she desire I to be she ambassadress , and convey the present to its destin recipient . ' and tell he , if he will take it , I will come and teach he to read it right , ' she say ; ' and , if he refuse it , I will go upstairs , and never tease he again . ' I carry it , and repeat the message ; anxiously watch by my employer . would not open he finger , so I lay it on he knee . he do not strike it off , either . I return to my work . lean she head and arm on the table , till she hear the slight rustle of the covering be remove ; then she steal away , and quietly seat herself beside she cousin . he tremble , and he face glow : all he rudeness and all he surly harshness have desert he : he could not summon courage , at first , to utter a syllable in reply to she question look , and she murmure petition . ' say you forgive I , , do . you can make I so happy by speak that little word . ' he mutter something inaudible . ' and you will be my friend ? ' add , interrogatively . ' Nay , you will be asham of I every day of you life , ' he answer ; ' and the more asham , the more you know I ; and I can not bide it . ' ' so you will not be my friend ? ' she say , smile as sweet as honey , and creep close up . I overhear no further distinguishable talk , but , on look round again , I perceive two such radiant countenance bend over the page of the accept book , that I do not doubt the treaty have be ratify on both side ; and the enemy be , thenceforth , swear ally . the work they study be full of costly picture ; and those and they position have charm enough to keep they unmoved till come home . he , poor man , be perfectly aghast at the spectacle of seat on the same bench with , lean she hand on he shoulder ; and confound at he favourite 's endurance of she proximity : it affect he too deeply to allow a observation on the subject that night . he emotion be only revealead by the immense sigh he draw , as he solemnly spread he large Bible on the table , and overlay it with dirty bank - note from he pocket - book , the produce of the day 's transaction . at length he summon from he seat . ' Tak ' these in to t ' maister , lad ,' he say , ' and bide there . I be gang up to my own rahm . this hoile 's neither mensful nor seemly for we : we mun side out and seearch another . ' ' come , ,' I say , 'we must " side out " too : I have do my ironing . be you ready to go ? ' ' it be not eight o'clock ! ' she answer , rise unwillingly . ' , I will leave this book upon the chimney - piece , and I will bring some more to - morrow . ' ' Ony book that yah leave , I shall tak ' into th ' hahse , ' say , 'and it will be mitch if yah find th'ey agean ; soa , yah may plase yerseln ! ' threaten that he library should pay for hers ; and , smile as she pass , go singe up - stair : lighter of heart , I venture to say , than ever she have be under that roof before ; except , perhaps , during she earliest visit to . the intimacy thus commence grow rapidly ; though it encounter temporary interruption . be not to be civilize with a wish , and my young lady be no philosopher , and no paragon of patience ; but both they mind tend to the same point - one loving and desire to esteem , and the other loving and desire to be esteem - they contrive in the end to reach it . you see ,
, , it be easy enough to win 's heart . but now , I be glad you do not try . the crown of all my wish will be the union of those two . I shall envy no one on they wedding day : there will not be a happier woman than myself in ! on the morrow of that , be still unable to follow he ordinary employment , and therefore remain about the house , I speedily find it would be impracticable to retain my charge beside I , as heretofore . she get downstairs before I , and out into the garden , where she have see she cousin perform some easy work ; and when I go to bid they come to breakfast , I see she have persuade he to clear a large space of ground from currant and gooseberry bushes , and they be busy plan together a importation of plant from the . I be terrify at the devastation which have be accomplish in a brief half - hour ; the black - currant tree be the apple of 's eye , and she have just fix she choice of a flower - bed in the midst of they . ' there ! that will be all show to the master ,' I exclaim , ' the minute it be discover . and what excuse have you to offer for take such liberty with the garden ? we shall have a fine explosion on the head of it : see if we do not ! , I wonder you should have no more wit than to go and make that mess at she bidding ! ' 'I have forget they be 's , ' answer , rather puzzl ; ' but I will tell he I do it . ' we always eat we meal with . I hold the mistress 's post in make tea and carve ; so I be indispensable at table . usually sit by I , but to - day she steal nearer to ; and I presently see she would have no more discretion in she friendship than she have in she hostility . ' now , mind you do not talk with and notice you cousin too much , ' be my whispered instruction as we enter the room . ' it will certainly annoy , and he will be mad at you both . ' 'I be not go to , ' she answer . the minute after , she have sidle to he , and be stick primrose in he plate of porridge . he da not speak to she there : he da hardly look ; and yet she go on teasing , till he be twice on the point of be provoke to laugh . I frown , and then she glance towards the master : whose mind be occupy on other subject than he company , as he countenance evince ; and she grow serious for a instant , scrutinize he with deep gravity . afterwards she turn , and recommence she nonsense ; at last , utter a smother laugh . start ; he eye rapidly survey we face , meet it with she accustom look of nervousness and yet defiance , which he abhor . ' it be well you be out of my reach ,' he exclaim . ' what fiend possess you to stare back at I , continually , with those infernal eye ? down with they ! and do not remind I of you existence again . I think I have cure you of laughing . ' ' it be I , ' mutter . ' what do you say ? ' demand the master . look at he plate , and do not repeat the confession . look at he a bit , and then silently resum he breakfast and he interrupt musing . we have nearly finished , and the two young people prudently shift wider asunder , so I anticipate no further disturbance during that sit : when appear at the door , reveal by he quivering lip and furious eye that the outrage commit on he precious shrub be detect . he must have see and she cousin about the spot before he examine it , for while he jaw work like those of a cow chew its cud , and render he speech difficult to understand , he begin :- 'i mun hev' my wage , and I min goa ! I he aim to dee wheare I would sarve fur sixty year ; and I thowt I have lug my book up into t ' garret , and all my bit of ' stuff , and they suld hev' t ' kitchen to theirseln ; for t ' sake o' quietness . it wur hard to gie up my awn hearthstun , but I thowt I could do that ! but nah , shoo be taan my garden fro' I , and by thg heart , maister , I can not stand it ! may bend to th' yoak a ye will - I noan use to 't , and a old man do not sooin get used to new barthen . I would rayther arn my bite a ' my sup wi' a hammer in th ' road ! ' ' now , now , idiot ! ' interrupt , 'cut it short ! what be you grievance ? I will interfere in no quarrel between you and . she may thrust you into the coal - hole for anything I care . ' ' it be noan Nelly ! ' answer . 'I suld not shift for Nelly - nasty ill nowt as shoo be . thank ! Shoo can not stale t ' sowl of ' nob 'dy ! Shoo wer niver soa handsome , but what a body muld look at she ' bout
bout winking . it be yon flaysome , graceless quean , that be witch we lad , wi' she bold een and she forrard way - till - ! it fair brust my heart ! he be forget all I have do for he , and make on he , and goan and rive up a whole row of ' t ' grandest currant - tree I ' t ' garden ! ' and here he lament outright ; unman by a sense of he bitter injury , and 's ingratitude and dangerous condition . ' be the fool drink ? ' ask . ' , be it you he have find fault with ? ' 'I have pull up two or three bushes , ' reply the young man ; ' but I be go to set th'ey again . ' ' and why have you pull they up ? ' say the master . Catherine wisely put in she tongue . ' we want to plant some flowers there , ' she cry . 'I be the only person to blame , for I wish he to do it . ' ' and who the give you leave to touch a stick about the place ? ' demand she father - in - law , much surprised . ' and who order you to obey she ? ' he add , turn to . the latter be speechless ; he cousin reply - ' you should not grudge a few yard of earth for I to ornament , when you have take all my land ! ' ' you land , insolent slut ! you never have any , ' say . ' and my money , ' she continue ; return he angry glare , and meantime bite a piece of crust , the remnant of she breakfast . ' Silence ! ' he exclaim . ' get do , and begone ! ' ' and 's land , and he money , ' pursue the reckless thing . ' and I be friend now ; and I shall tell he all about you ! ' the master seem confound a moment : he grow pale , and rise up , eye she all the while , with a expression of mortal hate . ' if you strike I , will strike you , ' she say ; 'so you may as well sit down . ' ' if do not turn you out of the room , I will strike he to hell , ' thunder . ' Damnable witch ! dare you pretend to rouse he against I ? off with she ! do you hear ? Fl she into the kitchen ! I will kill she , , if you let she come into my sight again ! ' try , under he breath , to persuade she to go . ' drag she away ! ' he cry , savagely . ' be you stay to talk ? ' and he approach to execute he own command . ' he will not obey you , wick man , any more , ' say ; ' and he will soon detest you as much as I do . ' ' Wisht ! wisht ! ' mutter the young man , reproachfully ; 'I will not hear you speak so to he . have do . ' ' but you will not let he strike I ? ' she cry . ' come , then ,' he whisper earnestly . it be too late : Heathcliff have catch hold of she . ' now , you go ! ' he say to . ' Accurse witch ! this time she have provoke I when I could not bear it ; and I will make she repent it for ever ! ' he have he hand in she hair ; attempt to release she look , entreat he not to hurt she that once . 's black eye flash ; he seem ready to tear Catherine in piece , and I be just work up to risk come to the rescue , when of a sudden he finger relaxed ; he shift he grasp from she head to she arm , and gaze intently in she face . then he draw he hand over he eye , stand a moment to collect himself apparently , and turn anew to , say , with assume calmness - ' you must learn to avoid put I in a passion , or I shall really murder you some time ! go with , and keep with she ; and confine you insolence to she ear . as to , if I see he listen to you , I will send he seek he bread where he can get it ! you love will make he a outcast and a beggar . Nelly , take she ; and leave I , all of you ! leave I ! ' I lead my young lady out : she be too glad of she escape to resist ; the other follow , and have the room to himself till dinner . I have counsel to dine up - stair ; but , as soon as he perceive she vacant seat , he send I to call she . he speak to none of we , eat very little , and go out directly afterwards , intimat that he should not return before evening . the two new friend establish themselves in the house during he absence ; where I hear sternly cheek he cousin , on she offer a revelation of she father - in - law 's conduct to he father . he say he would not suffer a word to be utter in he disparagement : if he be the , it do not signify ; he would stand by he ; and he would rather she would abuse himself ,
, as she use to , than begin on . be wax cross at this ; but he find mean to make she hold she tongue , by ask how she would like he to speak ill of she father ? then she comprehend that take the master 's reputation home to himself ; and be attach by tie stronger than reason could break - chain , forge by habit , which it would be cruel to attempt to loosen . she show a good heart , thenceforth , in avoid both complaint and expression of antipathy concern Heathcliff ; and confess to I she sorrow that she have endeavoure to raise a bad spirit between he and : indeed , I do not believe she have ever breathe a syllable , in the latter 's hearing , against she oppressor since . when this slight disagreement be over , they be friend again , and as busy as possible in they several occupation of pupil and teacher . I come in to sit with they , after I have do my work ; and I feel so soothed and comforte to watch they , that I do not notice how time get on . you know , they both appear in a measure my child : I have long be proud of one ; and now , I be sure , the other would be a source of equal satisfaction . he honest , warm , and intelligent nature shook off rapidly the clouds of ignorance and degradation in which it have be breed ; and 's sincere commendation act as a spur to he industry . he brighten mind brighten he feature , and add spirit and nobility to they aspect : I could hardly fancy it the same individual I have beheld on the day I discover my little lady at , after she expedition to the Crag . while I admire and they laboure , dusk draw on , and with it return the master . he come upon we quite unexpectedly , enter by the front way , and have a full view of the whole three , ere we could raise we head to glance at he . well , I reflect , there be never a pleasanter , or more harmless sight ; and it will be a burn shame to scold they . the red fire - light glow on they two bonny head , and reveal they face animate with the eager interest of child ; for , though he be twenty - three and she eightee , each have so much of novelty to feel and learn , that neither experience nor evince the sentiment of sober disenchant maturity . they lift they eye together , to encounter : perhaps you have never remark that they eye be precisely similar , and they be those of . the present Catherine have no other likeness to she , except a breadth of forehead , and a certain arch of the nostril that make she appear rather haughty , whether she will or not . with the resemblance be carry farther : it be singular at all time , then it be particularly strike ; because he sense be alert , and he mental faculty wake to unwont activity . I suppose this resemblance disarm : he walk to the hearth in evident agitation ; but it quickly subsid as he look at the young man : or , I should say , alte its character ; for it be there yet . he take the book from he hand , and glance at the open page , then return it without any observation ; merely sign away : she companion linger very little behind she , and I be about to depart also , but he bid I sit still . ' it be a poor conclusion , be it not ? ' he observ , have brood awhile on the scene he have just witness : 'an absurd termination to my violent exertion ? I get lever and mattock to demolish the two house , and train myself to be capable of work like , and when everything be ready and in my power , I find the will to lift a slate off either roof have vanish ! my old enemie have not beaten I ; now would be the precise time to revenge myself on they representative : I could do it ; and none could hinder I . but where be the use ? I do not care for strike : I can not take the trouble to raise my hand ! that sound as if I have be labour the whole time only to exhibit a fine trait of magnanimity . it be far from be the case : I have lose the faculty of enjoy they destruction , and I be too idle to destroy for nothing . ' Nelly , there be a strange change approach ; I be in its shadow at present . I take so little interest in my daily life that I hardly remember to eat and drink . those two who have leave the room be the only object which retain a distinct material appearance to I ; and that appearance cause I pain , amount to agony . about she I will not speak ; and I do not desire to think ; but I earnestly wish she be invisible : she presence invoke only madden sensation . he move I differently : and yet if I could do it without see insane , I would never see he again ! you will perhaps think I rather inclin to become so ,' he add , make a effort to smile , ' if I try to describe the thousand form of past associations and idea he awaken or embody . but you will not talk of what I tell
tell you ; and my mind be so eternally seclude in itself , it be temp at last to turn it out to another . ' five minute ago seem a personification of my youth , not a human being ; I feel to he in such a variety of way , that it would have be impossible to have accost he rationally . in the first place , he start likeness to connect he fearfully with she . that , however , which you may suppose the most potent to arrest my imagination , be actually the least : for what be not connect with she to I ? and what do not recall she ? I can not look down to this floor , but she feature be shape in the flag ! in every cloud , in every tree - fill the air at night , and catch by glimpse in every object by day - I be surround with she image ! the most ordinary face of man and woman - my own feature - mock I with a resemblance . the entire world be a dreadful collection of memoranda that she do exist , and that I have lose she ! well , 's aspect be the ghost of my immortal love ; of my wild endeavour to hold my right ; my degradation , my pride , my happiness , and my anguish - ' but it be frenzy to repeat these thought to you : only it will let you know why , with a reluctance to be always alone , he society be no benefit ; rather a aggravation of the constant torment I suffer : and it partly contribute to render I regardless how he and he cousin go on together . I can give they no attention any more . ' ' but what do you mean by a , ? ' I say , alarme at he manner : though he be neither in danger of lose he sense , nor die , accord to my judgment : he be quite strong and healthy ; and , as to he reason , from childhood he have a delight in dwelling on dark thing , and entertaine odd fancy . he might have have a monomania on the subject of he departed idol ; but on every other point he wits be as sound as mine . 'I shall not know that till it come ,' he say ; 'I be only half conscious of it now . ' ' you have no feeling of illness , have you ? ' I ask . ' no , Nelly , I have not ,' he answer . ' then you be not afraid of death ? ' I pursue . ' afraid ? no ! ' he reply . 'I have neither a fear , nor a presentiment , nor a hope of death . why wshould I ? with my hard constitution and temperate mode of living , and unperilous occupation , I ink to , and probably shall , remain above ground till there be scarcely a black hair on my head . and yet I can not continue in this condition ! I have to remind myself to breathe - almost to remind my heart to beat ! and it be like bend back a stiff spring : it be by compulsion that I do the slightest act not prompt by one thought ; and by compulsion that I notice anything alive or dead , which be not associate with one universal idea . I have a single wish , and my whole being and faculty be year to attain it . they have year towards it so long , and so unwaveringly , that I be convince it will be reach - and soon - because it have devoure my existence : I be swallow up in the anticipation of its fulfilment . my confession have not relieve I ; but they may account for some otherwise unaccountable phase of humour which I show . of ! it be a long fight ; I wish it be over ! ' he begin to pace the room , mutter terrible thing to himself , till I be inclin to believe , as he say do , that conscience have turn he heart to a earthly hell . I wonder greatly how it would end . though he seldom before have reveal this state of mind , even by look , it be he habitual mood , I have no doubt : he assert it himself ; but not a soul , from he general bearing , would have conjecture the fact . you do not when you see he , : and at the period of which I speak , he be just the same as then ; only fonder of continue solitude , and perhaps still more laconic in company . for some day after that evening shunn meet we at meal ; yet he would not consent formally to exclude and . he have a aversion to yield so completely to he feeling , choose rather to absent himself ; and eat once in twenty - four hour seem sufficient sustenance for he . one night , after the family be in bed , I hear he go downstairs , and out at the front door . I do not hear he re-enter , and in the morning I find he be still away . we be in then : the weather be sweet and warm , the grass as green as showers and sun could make it , and the two dwarf apple - tree near the southern wall in full bloom . after breakfast , insist on my bring a chair and sit with my work under the fir -tree at the end of the house ; and she beguil , who have perfectly recover
recover from he accident , to dig and arrange she little garden , which be shift to that corner by the influence of 's complaint . I be comfortably revell in the spring fragrance around , and the beautiful soft blue overhead , when my young lady , who have run down near the gate to procure some primrose root for a border , return only half laden , and inform we that be come in . ' and he speak to I , ' she add , with a perplexed countenance . ' what do he say ? ' ask . ' he tell I to bego as fast as I could , ' she answer . ' but he look so different from he usual look that I stop a moment to stare at he . ' ' how ? ' he inquire . ' why , almost bright and cheerful . no , almose nothing - very much excited , and wild , and glad ! ' she reply . ' night - walk amuse he , then ,' I remark , affect a careless manner : in reality as surprised as she be , and anxious to ascertain the truth of she statement ; for to see the master look glad would not be a every - day spectacle . I fram a excuse to go in . stand at the open door ; he be pale , and he tremble : yet , certainly , he have a strange joyful glitter in he eye , that alte the aspect of he whole face . ' will you have some breakfast ? ' I say . ' you must be hungry , rambl about all night ! ' I want to discover where he have be , but I do not like to ask directly . ' no , I be not hungry , ' he answer , avert he head , and speak rather contemptuously , as if he guess I be try to divine the occasion of he good humour . I feel perplex : I do not know whether it be not a proper opportunity to offer a bit of admonition . 'I do not think it right to wander out of door ,' I observe , ' instead of be in bed : it be not wise , at any rate this moist season . I daresay you will catch a bad cold or a fever : you have something the matter with you now ! ' ' nothing but what I can bear , ' he reply ; ' and with the greatest pleasure , provide you will leave I alone : get in , and do not annoy I . ' I obey : and , in passing , I notice he breathe as fast as a cat . ' yes ! ' I reflect to myself , 'we shall have a fit of illness . I can not conceive what he have be do . ' that noon he sit down to dinner with we , and receive a heape - up plate from my hand , as if he intend to make amend for previous fasting . 'I have neither cold nor fever , Nelly ,' he remark , in allusion to my morning 's speech ; ' and I be ready to do justice to the food you give I . ' he take he knife and fork , and be go to commence eat , when the inclination appear to become suddenly extinct . he lay they on the table , look eagerly towards the window , then rise and go out . we see he walk to and for in the garden while we conclude we meal , and say he would go and ask why he would not dine : he think we have grieve he some way . ' well , be he come ? ' cry , when she cousin return . ' Nay ,' he answer ; ' but he be not angry : he seem rarely pleased indeed ; only I make he impatient by speak to he twice ; and then he bid I be off to you : he wonder how I could want the company of anybody else . ' I set he plate to keep warm on the fender ; and after a hour or two he re-enter , when the room be clear , in no degree calmer : the same unnatural - it be unnatural - appearance of joy under he black brows ; the same bloodless hue , and he tooth visible , now and then , in a kind of smile ; he frame shivering , not as one shiver with chill or weakness , but as a tight - stretch cord vibrate - a strong thrilling , rather than trembling . I will ask what be the matter , I think ; or who should ? and I exclaim - 'have you hear any good news , ? you look uncommonly animated . ' ' where should good news come from to I ? ' he say . 'I be animate with hunger ; and , seemingly , I must not eat . ' ' you dinner be here ,' I return ; ' why will not you get it ? ' 'I do not want it now ,' he mutter , hastily : 'I will wait till supper . and , Nelly , once for all , let I beg you to warn and the other away from I . I wish to be trouble by nobody : I wish to have this place to myself . ' ' be there some new reason for this banishment ? ' I inquire . ' tell I why you be so queer , ? where be you last night ? I be not put the question through idle curiosity , but - '
' ' you be put the question through very idle curiosity , ' he interrupt , with a laugh . ' yet I will answer it . last night I be on the threshold of hell . to -day , I be within sight of my heaven . I have my eye on it : hardly three foot to sever I ! and now you would better go ! you will neither see nor hear anything to frighten you , if you refrain from prying . ' have sweep the hearth and wip the table , I depart ; more perplexed than ever . he do not quit the house again that afternoon , and no one intrude on he solitude ; till , at eight o'clock , I deem it proper , though unsummoned , to carry a candle and he supper to he . he be lean against the ledge of a open lattice , but not look out : he face be turn to the interior gloom . the fire have smoulder to ash ; the room be fill with the damp , mild air of the cloudy evening ; and so still , that not only the murmur of the beck down be distinguishable , but it be ripple and its gurgling over the pebble , or through the large stone which it could not cover . I utter a ejaculation of discontent at see the dismal grate , and commence shutt the casement , one after another , till I come to he . ' must I close this ? ' I ask , in order to rouse he ; for he would not stir . the light flash on he feature as I speak . oh , , I can not express what a terrible start I get by the momentary view ! those deep black eye ! that smile , and ghastly paleness ! it appear to I , not , but a goblin ; and , in my terror , I let the candle bend towards the wall , and it leave I in darkness . ' yes , close it , ' he reply , in he familiar voice . ' there , that be pure awkwardness ! why do you hold the candle horizontally ? be quick , and bring another . ' I hurry out in a foolish state of dread , and say to - ' the master wish you to take he a light and rekindle the fire . ' for I da not go in myself again just then . rattle some fire into the shovel , and go : but he bring it back immediately , with the supper -tray in he other hand , explain that be go to bed , and he want nothing to eat till morning . we hear he mount the stair directly ; he do not proceed to he ordinary chamber , but turn into that with the panel bed : it be window , as I mention before , be wide enough for anybody to get through ; and it strike I that he plot another midnight excursion , of which he have rather we have no suspicion . ' be he a ghoul or a vampire ? ' I muse . I have read of such hideous incarnate demon . and then I set myself to reflect how I have tend he in infancy , and watch he grow to , and follow he almost through he whole course ; and what absurd nonsense it be to yield to that sense of horror . ' but where do he come from , the little dark thing , harbour by a good man to he bane ? ' mutter , as I doze into unconsciousness . and I begin , half dream , to weary myself will imagine some fit parentage for he ; and , repeat my waking meditations , I track he existence over again , with grim variation ; at last , picture he death and funeral : of which , all I can remember be , be exceedingly vex at have the task of dictate a inscription for he monument , and consult the sexton about it ; and , as he have no surname , and we could not tell he age , we be oblige to contend ourselves with the single word , ' . ' that come true : we be . if you enter the kirkyard , you will read , on he headstone , only that , and the date of he death . restore I to common sense . I rise , and go into the garden , as soon as I could see , to ascertain if there be any footmark under he window . there be none . ' he have stay at home ,' I think , ' and he will be all right to - day . ' I prepare breakfast for the household , as be my usual custom , but tell and to get theirs ere the master come down , for he lay late . they prefer take it out of door , under the tree , and I set a little table to accommodate they . on my re-entrance , I find below . he and be converse about some far business ; he give clear , minute direction concern the matter discuss , but he speak rapidly , and turn he head continually aside , and have the same excited expression , even more exaggerated . when quit the room he take he seat in the place he generally choose , and I put a basin of coffee before he . he draw it nearer , and then rest he arm on the table , and look at the opposite wall , as I suppose , survey one particular portion , up and down , with glittering , restless eye
eye , and with such eager interest that he stop breathe during half a minute together . ' come now ,' I exclaim , push some bread against he hand , ' eat and drink that , while it be hot : it have be wait near a hour . ' he do not notice I , and yet he smile . I would rather have see he gnash he tooth than smile so . ' ! master ! ' I cry , ' do not , for 's sake , stare as if you see a unearthly vision . ' ' do not , for 's sake , shout so loud , ' he reply . ' turn round , and tell I , be we by ourselves ? ' ' of course , ' be my answer ; 'or course we be . ' still , I involuntarily obey he , as if I be not quite sure . with a sweep of he hand he clear a vacant space in front among the breakfast thing , and lean forward to gaze more at he ease . now , I perceive he be not look at the wall ; for when I regard he alone , it seem exactly that he gaze at something within two yard ' distance . and whatever it be , it communicate , apparently , both pleasure and pain in exquisite extrem : at least the anguished , yet rapture , expression of he countenance suggest that idea . the fancied object be not fix , either : he eye pursue it with unwearied diligence , and , even in speak to I , be never wean away . I vainly remind he of he protract abstinence from food : if he stir to touch anything in compliance with my entreaty , if he stretch he hand out to get a piece of bread , he finger clench before they reach it , and remain on the table , forgetful of they aim . I sit , a model of patience , try to attract he absorbed attention from its engrossing speculation ; till he grow irritable , and get up , ask why I would not allow he to have he own time in take he meal ? and say that on the next occasion I need not wait : I might set the thing down and go . have utter these word he leave the house , slowly saunter down the garden path , and disappear through the gate . the hour creep anxiously by : another evening come . I do not retire to rest till late , and when I do , I could not sleep . he return after midnight , and , instead of go to bed , shut himself into the room beneath . I listen , and toss about , and , finally , dress and descende . it be too irksome to lie there , harass my brain with a hundred idle misgiving . I distinguished 's step , restlessly measure the floor , and he frequently break the silence by a deep inspiration , resembl a groan . he mutter detach word also ; the only one I could catch be the name of , couple with some wild term of endearment or suffering ; and speak as one would speak to a person present ; low and earnest , and wring from the depth of he soul . I have not courage to walk straight into the apartment ; but I desire to divert he from he reverie , and therefore fall foul of the kitchen fire , stir it , and begin to scrape the cinder . it draw he forth sooner than I expect . he open the door immediately , and say - ' Nelly , come here - be it morne ? come in with you light . ' ' it be strik four ,' I answer . ' you want a candle to take up - stair : you might have light one at this fire . ' ' no , I do not wish to go up - stair ,' he say . ' come in , and kindle I a fire , and do anything there be to do about the room . ' 'I must blow the coal red first , before I can carry any ,' I reply , get a chair and the bellow he roam to and fro , meantime , in a state approach distraction ; he heavy sigh succeed each other so thick as to leave no space for common breathing between . ' when day break I will send for , ' he say ; 'I wish to make some legal inquirie of he while I can bestow a thought on those matters , and while I can act calmly . I have not write my will yet ; and how to leave my property I can not determine . I wish I could annihilate it from the face of the earth . ' 'I would not talk so , ,' I interpose . ' let you will be a while : you will be spare to repent of you many injustice yet ! I never expect that you nerve would be disorder : they be , at present , marvellously so , however ; and almost entirely through you own fault . the way you have pass these three last day might knock up a . do take some food , and some repose . you need only look at yourself in a glass to see how you require both . you cheek be hollow , and you eye blood - shot , like a person starve with hunger and go blind with loss of sleep . ' ' it be not my fault that I can not eat or rest ,' he reply . 'I assure you
you it be through no settled designs . I will do both , as soon as I possibly can . but you might as well bid a man struggle in the water rest within arm ' length of the shore ! I must reach it first , and then I will rest . well , never mind : as to repent of my injustice , I have do no injustice , and I repent of nothing . I be too happy ; and yet I be not happy enough . my soul 's bliss kill my body , but do not satisfy itself . ' ' happy , master ? ' I cry . ' strange happiness ! if you would hear I without be angry , I might offer some advice that would make you happier . ' ' what be that ? ' he ask . ' give it . ' ' you be aware , ,' I say , ' that from the time you be thirteen year old you have liv a selfish , unchristian life ; and probably hardly have a in you hand during all that period . you must have forget the contents of the book , and you may not have space to search it now . could it be hurtful to send for some one - some minister of any denomination , it do not matter which - to explain it , and show you how very far you have er from its precept ; and how unfit you will be for its heaven , unless a change take place before you die ? ' 'I be rather obliged than angry , Nelly , ' he say , ' for you remind I of the manner in which I desire to be bury . it be to be carry to the churchyard in the evening . you and , if you please , accompany I : and mind , particularly , to notice that the sexton obey my direction concern the two coffin ! no minister need come ; nor need anything be say over I . - I tell you I have nearly attaine my heaven ; and that of other be altogether unvalued and uncovered by I . ' ' and suppose you persever in you obstinate fast , and die by that mean , and they refuse to bury you in the precinct of the kirk ? ' I say , shock at he godless indifference . ' how would you like it ? ' ' they will not do that ,' he reply : ' if they do , you must have I remove secretly ; and if you neglect it you shall prove , practically , that the dead be not annihilate ! ' as soon as he hear the other member of the family stirring he retire to he den , and I breathe freer . but in the afternoon , while and be at they work , he come into the kitchen again , and , with a wild look , bid I come and sit in the house : he want somebody with he . I decline ; tell he plainly that he strange talk and manner frightene I , and I have neither the nerve nor the will to be he companion alone . 'I believe you think I a fiend ,' he say , with he dismal laugh : ' something too horrible to live under a decent roof . ' then turn to , who be there , and who draw behind I at he approach , he add , half sneeringly , - ' will you come , chuck ? I will not hurt you . no ! to you I have make myself worse than the devil . well , there be one who will not shrink from my company ! by ! she be relentless . oh , damn it ! it be unutterably too much for flesh and blood to bear - even mine . ' he solicit the society of no one more . at dusk he go into he chamber . through the whole night , and far into the morning , we hear he groan and murmur to himself . be anxious to enter ; but I bid he fetch , and he should go in and see he . when he come , and I request admittance and try to open the door , I find it lock ; and bid we be damn . he be better , and would be leave alone ; so the doctor go away . the follow evening be very wet : indeed , it pour down till day - dawn ; and , as I take my morning walk round the house , I observe the master 's window swing open , and the rain drive straight in . he can not be in bed , I think : those shower would drench he through . he must either be up or out . but I will make no more ado , I will go boldly and look . ' have succeed in obtain entrance with another key , I run to unclose the panel , for the chamber be vacant ; quickly push they aside , I pee in . be there - laid on he back . he eye meet mine so keen and fierce , I start ; and then he seem to smile . I could not think he dead : but he face and throat be wash with rain ; the bed - clothes drip , and he be perfectly still . the lattice , flapp to and , have graze one hand that rest on the sill ; no blood trickle from the broken skin , and when I put my finger to it , I could doubt no more : he be dead and stark ! I hasp the
the window ; I comb he black long hair from he forehead ; I try to close he eye : to extinguish , if possible , that frightful , life - like gaze of exultation before any one else beheld it . they would not shut : they seem to sneer at my attempt ; and he part lip and sharp white tooth sneer too ! take with another fit of cowardice , I cry out for . shuffle up and make a noise , but resolutely refuse to meddle with he . 'Th ' divil 's harry off he soul , ' he cry , ' and he may hev' he carcass into t ' bargin , for atch I care ! ! what a wick 'un he look , girn at death ! ' and the old sinner grin in mockery . I think he intend to cut a caper round the bed ; but suddenly compose himself , he fall on he knee , and raise he hand , and return thanks that the lawful master and the ancient stock be restore to they rights . I feel stun by the awful event ; and my memory unavoidably recur to former time with a sort of oppressive sadness . but poor , the most wronged , be the only one who really suffer much . he sit by the corpse all night , weep in bitter earnest . he press its hand , and kiss the sarcastic , savage face that every one else shrank from contemplating ; and bemoan he with that strong grief which spring naturally from a generous heart , though it be tough as tempere steel . be perplex to pronounce of what disorder the master di . I conceal the fact of he have swallow nothing for four day , fear it might lead to trouble , and then , I be persuade , he do not abstain on purpose : it be the consequence of he strange illness , not the cause . we bury he , to the scandal of the whole neighbourhood , as he wish . and I , the sexton , and six man to carry the coffin , comprehend the whole attendance . the six man depart when they have let it down into the grave : we stay to see it cover . , with a streaming face , dug green sod , and lay they over the brown mould himself : at present it be as smooth and verdant as its companion mound - and I hope it be tenant sleep as soundly . but the country folk , if you ask they , would swear on the Bible that he walk : there be those who speak to have meet he near the church , and on the moor , and even within this house . idle tales , you will say , and so say I . yet that old man by the kitchen fire affirm he have see two on th'ey look out of he chamber window on every rainy night since he death :- and a odd thing happen to I about a month ago . I be go to the one evening - a dark evening , threaten thunder - and , just at the turn of the , I encounter a little boy with a sheep and two lambs before he ; he be cry terribly ; and I suppose the lambs be skittish , and would not be guid . ' what be the matter , my little man ? ' I ask . ' there be and a woman yonder , under t ' nab ,' he blubber , 'un' I darnut pass 'em . ' I see nothing ; but neither the sheep nor he would go on so I bid he take the road lower down . he probably raise the phantoms from thinking , as he traverse the moor alone , on the nonsense he have hear he parent and companion repeat . yet , still , I do not like be out in the dark now ; and I do not like be leave by myself in this grim house : I can not help it ; I shall be glad when they leave it , and shift to the . ' they be go to the , then ? ' I say . ' yes , ' answer , 'as soon as they be married , and that will be on 's . ' ' and who will live here then ? ' ' why , will take care of the house , and , perhaps , a lad to keep he company . they will live in the kitchen , and the rest will be shut up . ' ' for the use of such ghost as choose to inhabit it ? ' I observ . ' no , , ' say Nelly , shak she head . 'I believe the dead be at peace : but it be not right to speak of they with levity . ' at that moment the garden gate swing to ; the rambler be return . 'they be afraid of nothing ,' I grumble , watch they approach through the window . ' together , they would brave and all he legion . ' as they step on to the door - stone , and halt to take a last look at the moon - or , more correctly , at each other by she light - I feel irresistibly impelled to escape they again ; and , press a remembrance into the hand of , and disregard she expostulation at my rudeness , I vanish through the kitchen as they open the house - door ; and so should have confirm in he opinion of he fellow - servant 's gay indiscretion , have he not fortunately recognise I for a respectable character
