Adam BEDE by one I the Workshop with a single drop of ink for a mirror , the egyptian sorcerer undertake to reveal to any chance comer far - reache vision of the past . this be what I undertake to do for you , reader . with this drop of ink at the end of my pen , I will show you the roomy workshop of , carpenter and builder , in the village of , as it appear on the eighteenth of , in the year of we 1799 . the afternoon sun be warm on the five workman there , busy upon door and window - frame and wainscoting . a scent of pine - wood from a tentlike pile of plank outside the open door mingle itself with the scent of the elder - bushes which be spread they summer snow close to the open window opposite ; the slant sunbeam shone through the transparent shaving that fly before the steady plane , and light up the fine grain of the oak panelling which stand prop against the wall . on a heap of those soft shaving a rough , grey shepherd dog have make himself a pleasant bed , and be lie with he nose between he fore - paw , occasionally wrinkl he brows to cast a glance at the tallest of the five workman , who be carve a shield in the centre of a wooden mantelpiece . it be to this workman that the strong barytone belong which be hear above the sound of plane and hammer singe -- , my soul , and with the sun thy daily stage of duty run ; shake off dull sloth ... here some measurement be to be take which require more concentrated attention , and the sonorous voice subsid into a low whistle ; but it presently break out again with renew vigour -- let all thy converse be sincere , thy conscience as the noonday clear . such a voice could only come from a broad chest , and the broad chest belong to a large - boned , muscular man nearly six foot high , with a back so flat and a head so well poise that when he draw himself up to take a more distant survey of he work , he have the air of a soldier stand at ease . the sleeve roll up above the elbow show a arm that be likely to win the prize for feat of strength ; yet the long supple hand , with its broad finger - tip , look ready for work of skill . in he tall stalwartness be a , and justifi he name ; but the jet - black hair , make the more noticeable by its contrast with the light paper cap , and the keen glance of the dark eye that shine from under strongly mark , prominent and mobile eyebrow , indicate a mixture of Celtic blood . the face be large and roughly hewn , and when in repose have no other beauty than such as belong to a expression of good - humoured honest intelligence . it be clear at a glance that the next workman be 's brother . he be nearly as tall ; he have the same type of feature , the same hue of hair and complexion ; but the strength of the family likeness seem only to render more conspicuous the remarkable difference of expression both in form and face . 's broad shoulder have a slight stoop ; he eye be grey ; he eyebrow have less prominence and more repose than he brother 's ; and he glance , instead of be keen , be confiding and benign . he have throw off he paper cap , and you see that he hair be not thick and straight , like 's , but thing and wavy , allow you to discern the exact contour of a coronal arch that predominate very decidedly over the brow . the idle tramp always feel sure they could get a copper from ; they scarcely ever speak to . the concert of the tool and 's voice be at last broken by , who , lift the door at which he have be work intently , place it against the wall , and say , " there ! I have finish my door to - day , anyhow . " the workman all look up ; , a burly , red - hair man know as , pause from he planing , and say to , with a sharp glance of surprise , " what ! Dost think thee 'st finish the door ? " " aye , sure , " say , with answer surprise ; " what be awant t o't ? " a loud roar of laughter from the other three workman make look round confusedly . do not join in the laughter , but there be a slight smile on he face as he say , in a gentler tone than before , " why , thee 'st forget the panel . " the laughter burst out afresh as clap he hand to he head , and colour over brow and crown . " Hoorray ! " shoute a small lithe fellow call , run forward and seize the door . " we will hang up th ' door at fur end of ' th ' shop a ' write of not ' , the , he work . ' here , , lend 's hould of ' th ' red pot . " " Nonsense ! " say . " let it alone , . you will mayhap be make such a slip yourself some day ; you will laugh of ' th ' other side of ' you mouth then . " " catch I at it , . it will be a good while afore
afore my head 's full of ' th' Methodies , " say . " , but it be often full of ' drink , and that be worse . " , however , have now get the " red pot " in he hand , and be about to begin write he inscription , make , by way of preliminary , a imaginary s in the air . " let it alone , will you ? " Adam call out , lay down he tool , strid up to , and seize he right shoulder . " let it alone , or I will shake the soul out of ' you body . " shook in 's iron grasp , but , like a plucky small man as he be , he do not mean to give in . with he leave hand he snatch the brush from he powerless right , and make a movement as if he would perform the feat of writing with he left . in a moment turn he round , seize he other shoulder , and , push he along , pin he against the wall . but now speak . " let be , Addy , let be . will be joke . why , he be I ' the right to laugh at I -- I can to help laugh at myself . " " I sha not loose he till he promise to let the door alone , " say . " come , , lad , " say , in a persuasive tone , " do not let 's have a quarrel about it . you know will have he way . you may be well try to turn a waggon in a narrow lane . you will leave the door alone , and make a end of n't . " " I fright at , " say , " but I donto mind sayin ' as I will let 't alone at you askin ' , . " " come , that be wise of you , , " say , laugh and relax he grasp . they all return to they work now ; but , have have the worst in the bodily contest , be bent on retrieve that humiliation by a success in sarcasm . " which be ye thinkin ' on , , " he begin -- " the pretty parson 's face or she sarmunt , when ye forget the panel ? " " come and hear she , , " say , good - humouredly ; " she be go to preach on the green to - night ; happen ye would get something to think on yourself then , instead of ' those wick song you be so fond on . ye might get religion , and that 'uld be the best day 's earning y ' ever make . " " all i ' good time for that , ; I will think about that when I be a - goin ' to settle I ' life ; bachelor do not want such heavy earnin 's . I shall do the coortin ' a ' the religion both together , as ye do , ; but ye would na ha ' I get convert a ' chop in atween ye a ' the pretty preacher , a ' carry she aff ? " " no fear of ' that , ; she be neither for you nor for I to win , I doubt . only you come and hear she , and you will not speak lightly on she again . " " well , I be half a mind t ' ha ' a look at she to - night , if there be not good company at thg . what will she take for she text ? happen ye can tell I , Seth , if so be as I should to come up I ' time of r't . will lot be -- what come ye out for to see ? a prophetess ? yea , I say unto you , and more than a prophetess -- a uncommon pretty young woman . " " come , , " say , rather sternly , " you let the word of ' the alone ; you be go too far now . " " what ! be ye a - turnin ' roun ' , ? I think ye war dead again th ' woman preachin ' , a while agoo ? " " Nay , I be not turnin ' noway . I say nuy about the woman preaching ' . I say , you let the alone : you have get a jest - book , ha not you , as you be rare and proud on ? keep you dirty finger to that . " " why , y ' be gettin ' as big a saint as . Y's be goin ' to th' preachin ' to - night , I should think . ye will do finely t ' lead the singin ' . but I don ' know what 's ull say at he gran 's favright a - turnin' . " " never do you bother yourself about I , . I be not a - go to turn any more nor you be -- though it be like enough you will turn to something worse . 's get more sense nor to meddle wi' people 's do as they like in religion . that be between themselves and , as he be say to I many a time . " " aye , aye ; but he be none so fond of ' you dissenter , for all that . " " maybe ; I be none so fond of ' 's thick ale , but I do not hinder you from make a fool o' yourself with i't . "
" there be a laugh at this thrust of 's , but say , very seriously . " Nay , nay , , thee mustna say as anybody 's religion be like thick ale . Thee dostna believe but what the dissenter and the have get the root of ' the matter as well as the church folk . " " Nay , , lad ; I be not for laugh at no man 's religion . let them follow they conscience , that be all . only I think it 'uld be better if they conscience 'uld let them stay quiet I ' the church -- there be a deal to be learn there . and there be such a thing as be oversperitial ; we must have something beside I ' this world . look at the canal , a ' thg aqueduc 's , a ' th ' coal - pit engines , and 's mill there at ; a man must learn summat beside to make they thing , I reckon . but t ' hear some of ' they preacher , you would think as a man must be do nothing all 's life but shutt 's eye and look what be agoe on inside he . I know a man must have the love of ' in he soul , and the 's 's word . but what do the say ? why , it say as put he sperrit into the workman as build the tabernacle , to make he do all the carved work and thing as want a nice hand . and this be my way of ' look at it : there be the sperrit o' in all thing and all time -- weekday as well as -- and I ' the great work and invention , and I ' the figuring and the mechanic . and help we with we headpiece and we hand as well as with we soul ; and if a man do bit of ' job out of ' work hour -- build a oven for 's wife to save she from go to the bakehouse , or scrat at he bit of ' garden and make two potatoe grow istead of ' one , he be doin ' more good , and he be just as near to , as if he be run after some preacher and a - praying and a - groan . " " well do , ! " say , who have pause from he planing to shift he plank while be speak ; " that be the best sarmunt I have hear this long while . by th ' same teak , my wife be be a - plaguin ' on I to build she a oven this twelvemont . " " there be reason in what thee say 'st , , " observe , gravely . " but thee know 'st thyself as it be hear the preacher thee find 'st so much fault with have turn many a idle fellow into a industrious un . it be the preacher as empty th ' alehouse ; and if a man get religion , he will do he work none the worse for that . " " of n'y he will lave the panel out of ' th ' door sometimes , eh , ? " say . " ah , , you have get a joke again ' I as will last you you life . but it isna religion as be I ' fault there ; it be , as be allay a wool - gather chap , and religion hasna cure he , the more be the pity . " " Ne 'er hee I , , " say , " y ' be a down - right good - hear chap , panel or no panel ; an' ye don to set up you bristle at every bit of ' fun , like some of ' you kin , as be mayhap cliverer . " " Seth , lad , " say , take no notice of the sarcasm against himself , " thee must to take I unkind . I be to drive at thee in what I say just now . some have get one way o ' look at thing and some be get another . " " Nay , nay , , thee mean 'st I no unkindness , " say , " I know that well enough . the e't like thy dog Gyp -- thee bark 'st at I sometimes , but thee allays lick 'st my hand after . " all hand work on in silence for some minute , until the church clock begin to strike six . before the first stroke have die away , have loose he plane and be reach he jacket ; have leave a screw half drive in , and throw he screwdriver into he tool - basket ; , who , true to he name , have keep silence throughout the previous conversation , have flung down he hammer as he be in the act of lift it ; and , too , have straighten he back , and be put out he hand towards he paper cap . Adam alone have go on with he work as if nothing have happen . but obserive the cessation of the tool , he look up , and say , in a tone of indignation , " look there , now ! I can not abide to see man throw away they tool I ' that way , the minute the clock begin to strike , as if they take no pleasure I ' they work and be afraid of ' do a stroke too much . " look a little conscious , and begin to be slower in he preparation for go , but break silence , and say , " aye
aye , aye , lad , ye talk like a young un . when y ' be six - a '- forty like I , istid of ' six - a '- twenty , ye win to be so flush of ' workin ' for nuy . " " Nonsense , " say , still wrathful ; " what be age get to do with it , I wonder ? ye arena get stiff yet , I reckon . I hate to see a man 's arm drop down as if he be shoot , before the clock 's fairly struck , just as if he would never a bit of ' pride and delight in 's work . the very grindstone ' ull go on turn a bit after you loose it . " " Bodderation , ! " exclaim ; " lave a chap aloon , will 'ee ? ye war afind faut wi's preacher a while agoo --y ' be fond enough of ' preachin ' yoursen . ye may like work better nor play , but I like play better nor work ; that will ' commodate ye -- it lave ye th ' more to do . " with this exit speech , which he consider effective , shouldere he basket and leave the workshop , quickly follow by and . linger , and look wistfully at , as if he expect he to say something . " Shalt go home before thee go 'st to the preaching ? " ask , look up . " Nay ; I have get my hat and thing at 's . I sha not be home before go for ten . I will happen see safe home , if she be willing . there be nobody come with she from 's , thee know 'st . " " then I will tell mother not to look for thee , " say . " Thee art to go to 's thyself to - night ? " say rather timidly , as he turn to leave the workshop . " Nay , I be go to th ' school . " have keep he comfortable bed , only lift up he head and watch more closely as he notice the other workman depart . but no sooner do put he ruler in he pocket , and begin to twist he apron round he waist , than run forward and look up in he master 's face with patient expectation . if have have a tail he would doubtless have wag it , but be destitute of that vehicle for he emotion , he be like many other worthy personage , destin to appear more phlegmatic than nature have make he . " what ! ready for the basket , eh , ? " say , with the same gentle modulation of voice as when he speak to . jump and give a short bark , as much as to say , " of course . " poor fellow , he have not a great range of expression . the basket be the one which on workday hold 's and 's dinner ; and no official , walk in procession , could look more resolutely unconscious of all acquaintance than with he basket , trot at he master 's heel . on leave the workshop lock the door , take the key out , and carry it to the house on the other side of the woodyard . it be a low house , with smooth grey thatch and buff walls , look pleasant and mellow in the evening light . the lead window be bright and speckless , and the door - stone be as clean as a white boulder at ebb tide . on the door - stone stand a clean old woman , in a dark - stripe linen gown , a red kerchief , and a linen cap , talk to some speckle fowl which appear to have be draw towards she by a illusory expectation of cold potatoe or barley . the old woman 's sight seem to be dim , for she do not recognize Adam till he say , " here be the key , Dolly ; lay it down for I in the house , will you ? " " aye , sure ; but wunna ye come in , ? be I ' th ' house , and 's ull be back anon ; he would be glad t ' ha ' ye to supper wi 'm , I will be 's warrand . " " no , Dolly , thank you ; I be off home . good evening . " hasten with long stride , close to he heel , out of the workyard , and along the highroad lead away from the village and down to the valley . as he reach the foot of the slope , a elderly horseman , with he portmanteau strap behind he , stop he horse when have pass he , and turn round to have another long look at the stalwart workman in paper cap , leather breech , and dark - blue worsted stocking . , unconscious of the admiration he be exciting , presently strike across the field , and now break out into the tune which have all day long be run in he head : let all thy converse be sincere , thy conscience as the noonday clear ; for 's all - see eye survey thy secret thought , thy work and way . chapter ii the a quarter to seven there be a unusual appearance of excitement in the village of , and through the whole length of its little street , from the Donnithorne arm to the churchyard gate , the inhabitant have evidently be draw out of they house by something more than the pleasure of lounging in the evening sunshine . the stand at
at the entrance of the village , and a small farmyard and stackyard which flank it , indicate that there be a pretty take of land attach to the inn , give the traveller a promise of good feed for himself and he horse , which might well conseal he for the ignorance in which the weather - beaten sign leave he as to the heraldic bearing of that ancient family , the Donnithorne . , the landlord , have be for some time stand at the door with he hand in he pocket , balance himself on he heel and toe and look towards a piece of unenclosed ground , with a maple in the middle of it , which he know to be the destination of certain grave - look man and woman whom he have observe pass at interval . 's person be by no means of that common type which can be allow to pass without description . on a front view it appear to consist principally of two sphere , bear about the same relation to each other as the earth and the moon : that be to say , the lower sphere might be say , at a rough guess , to be thirteen time larger than the upper which naturally perform the function of a mere satellite and tributary . but here the resemblance cease , for 's head be not at all a melancholy - look satellite nor be it a " spotty globe , " as have irreverently call the moon ; on the contrary , no head and face could look more sleek and healthy , and its expression -- which be chiefly confin to a pair of round and ruddy cheek , the slight knot and interruption form the nose and eye be scarcely worth mention -- be one of jolly contentment , only tempere by that sense of personal dignity which usually make itself feel in he attitude and bear . this sense of dignity could hardly be consider excessive in a man who have be butler to " the family " for fifteen year , and who , in he present high position , be necessarily very much in contact with he inferior . how to reconcile he dignity with the satisfaction of he curiosity by walk towards the green be the problem that have be revolve in he mind for the last five minute ; but when he have partly solve it by take he hand out of he pocket , and thrust they into the armhole of he waistcoat , by throw he head on one side , and provide himself with a air of contemptuous indifference to whatever might fall under he notice , he thought be divert by the approach of the horseman whom we lately see pausing to have another look at we friend , and who now pull up at the door of the Arms . " take off the bridle and give he a drink , ostler , " say the traveller to the lad in a smock - frock , who have come out of the yard at the sound of the horse 's hoof . " why , what be up in you pretty village , landlord ? " he continue , get down . " there seem to be quite a stir . " " it be a ' preaching , sir ; it be be hageve hout as a young woman 's a - go to preach on the Green , " answer , in a treble and wheezy voice , with a slightly mincing accent . " will you please to step in , sir , a ' tek somethink ? " " no , I must be get on to . I only want a drink for my horse . and what do you parson say , I wonder , to a young woman preach just under he nose ? " " , sir , do not live here ; he live at , over the hill there . the parsonage here be a tumble - down place , sir , not fit for gentry to live in . he come here to preach of a afternoon , sir , a ' put up he hoss here . it be a grey cob , sir , a ' he set great store by't . he be allays put up he hoss here , sir , iver since before I he the . I be not this countryman , you may tell by my tongue , sir . they be cur 'ous talker I ' this country , sir ; the gentry 's hard work to hunderstand th'ey . I be bring hup among the gentry , sir , a ' get the turn of ' they tongue when I be a bye . why , what do you think the folk here say for ' hev not you ?'-- the gentry , you know , say , ' haheve not you '-- well , the people about here say ' han na yey . ' it be what they call the dileck as be speak hereabout , sir . that be what I have hear say many a time ; it be the dileck , say he . " " aye , aye , " say the stranger , smile . " I know it very well . but you have not get many about here , surely -- in this agricultural spot ? I should have think there would hardly be such a thing as a to be find about here . you be all farmer , be not you ? the can seldom lay much hold on they . " " why , sir , there be a pretty lot of ' workmen round about , sir . there be as own the timber - yard over there , he undertek a good
good bit of ' build a ' repair . a ' there be the stone - pit be not far off . there be plenty of emply I ' this countryside , sir . a ' there be a fine batch o' Methodiss at Treddles 'on -- that be the market town about three mile off -- you will maybe ha ' come through it , sir . there be pretty nigh a score of th'ey on the green now , as come from there . that be where we people get it from , though there be only two man of 'em in all : that be , the wheelwright , and , a young man as work at the carpenterin '. " " the preacher come from , then , do she ? " " Nay , sir , she come out o' , pretty nigh thirty mile off . but she be a - visitin ' hereabout at 's at the -- it be they barn a ' big walnut - tree , right away to the left , sir . she be own niece to 's wife , a ' they will be fine a ' vex at she for make a fool of herself I ' that way . but I have hear as there be no holding these Methodiss when the maggit 's once get I ' they head : many of th'ey go stark starin ' mad wi' they religion . though this young woman 's quiet enough to look at , by what I can make out ; I have not see she myself . " " well , I wish I have time to wait and see she , but I must get on . I have be out of my way for the last twenty minute to have a look at that place in the valley . it be 's , I suppose ? " " yes , sir , that be , that be . Fine hoak there , be not there , sir ? I should know what it be , sir , for I have liv butler there a - go I ' fifteen year . it be as be th ' heir , sir -- 's grandson . he will be comin ' of hage this 'ay - 'arvest , sir , a ' we shall haheve fine doin 's . he own all the land about here , sir , do . " " well , it be a pretty spot , whoever may own it , " say the traveller , mount he horse ; " and one meet some fine strapping fellow about too . I meet as fine a young fellow as ever I see in my life , about half a hour ago , before I come up the hill -- a carpenter , a tall , broad - shouldered fellow with black hair and black eye , march along like a soldier . we want such fellow as he to lick the french . " " aye , sir , that be , that be , I will be bound -- 's son everybody know he hereabout . he be a uncommon clever stiddy fellow , a ' wonderful strong . bless you , sir -- if you will hexcuse I for say so -- he can walk forty mile a - day , a ' lift a matter of ' sixty ston ' . he be a uncommon favourite wi' the gentry , sir : and mek a fine fuss wi' he . but he be a little lift up a ' peppery - like . " " well , good evening to you , landlord ; I must get on . " " you servant , sir ; good evenin ' . " the traveller put he horse into a quick walk up the village , but when he approach the Green , the beauty of the view that lay on he right hand , the singular contrast present by the group of villager with the knot of near the maple , and perhaps yet more , curiosity to see the young female preacher , prove too much for he anxiety to get to the end of he journey , and he pause . the green lay at the extremity of the village , and from it the road branch off in two direction , one lead farther up the hill by the church , and the other win gently down towards the valley . on the side of the Green that lead towards the church , the broken line of thatched cottage be continue nearly to the churchyard gate ; but on the opposite northwestern side , there be nothing to obstruct the view of gently swell meadow , and wood valley , and dark mass of distant hill . that rich undulating district of to which belonge lie close to a grim outskirt of , overlook by its barren hill as a pretty blooming sister may sometimes be see link in the arm of a rug , tall , swarthy brother ; and in two or three hour ' ride the traveller might exchange a bleak treeless region , intersect by line of cold grey stone , for one where he road wound under the shelter of wood , or up swelling hill , muff with hedgerow and long meadow - grass and thick corn ; and where at every turn he come upon some fine old country - seat nestle in the valley or crown the slope , some homestead with its long length of barn and its cluster of golden rick , some grey steeple look out from a pretty confusion of tree and thatch and dark - red tile . it be just such a picture as this last that have make to the traveller as he begin to mount the gentle slope lead
lead to its pleasant upland , and now from he station near the green he have before he in one view nearly all the other typical feature of this pleasant land . High up against the horizon be the huge conical mass of hill , like giant mound intend to fortify this region of corn and grass against the keen and hungry wind of the north ; not distant enough to be clothed in purple mystery , but with sombre greenish side visibly speck with sheep , whose motion be only reveal by memory , not detect by sight ; woo from day to day by the change hour , but respond with no change in themselves -- leave for ever grim and sull after the flush of morning , the win gleam of the , the parting crimson glory of the ripening summer sun . and directly below they the eye rest on a more advanced line of hang wood , divide by bright patch of pasture or furrow crop , and not yet deepen into the uniform leafy curtain of high summer , but still show the warm tints of the young oak and the tender green of the ash and lime . then come the valley , where the wood grow thicker , as if they have roll down and hurrie together from the patch leave smooth on the slope , that they might take the better care of the tall mansion which lifte its parapet and send it be faint blue summer smoke among they . Doubtless there be a large sweep of park and a broad glassy pool in front of that mansion , but the swell slope of meadow would not let we traveller see they from the village green . he see instead a foreground which be just as lovely -- the level sunlight lie like transparent gold among the gently curve stem of the feathered grass and the tall red sorrel , and the white ambel of the hemlock line the bushy hedgerow . it be that moment in summer when the sound of the scythey be whet make we cast more lingering look at the flower - sprinkle tress of the meadow . he might have see other beautie in the landscape if he have turn a little in he saddle and look eastward , beyond 's pasture and woodyard towards the green corn-field and walnut - tree of the ; but apparently there be more interest for he in the liive group close at hand . every generation in the village be there , from old " " in he brown worst night - cap , who be bend nearly double , but seem tough enough to keep on he leg a long while , lean on he short stick , down to the baby with they little round head loll forward in quilted linen cap . now and then there be a new arrival ; perhaps a slouch labourer , who , have eat he supper , come out to look at the unusual scene with a slow bovine gaze , willing to hear what any one have to say in explanation of it , but by no means excit enough to ask a question . but all take care not to join the on the Green , and identify themselves in that way with the expectant audience , for there be not one of they that would not have disclaim the imputation of have come out to hear the " preacher woman " -- they have only come out to see " what war a - goin ' on , like . " the man be chiefly gather in the neighbourhood of the blacksmith 's shop . but do not imagine they gather in a knot . Villagers never swarm : a whisper be unknown among they , and they seem almost as incapable of a undertone as a cow or a stag . you true rustic turn he back on he interlocutor , throw a question over he shoulder as if he mean to run away from the answer , and walk a step or two farther off when the interest of the dialogue culminate . so the group in the vicinity of the blacksmith 's door be by no means a close one , and form no screen in front of , the blacksmith himself , who stand with he black brawny arm fold , lean against the door - post , and occasionally send forth a bellowing laugh at he own joke , give they a mark preference over the sarcasm of , who have renounce the pleasure of the for the sake of see life under a new form . but both style of wit be treat with equal contempt by . 's leathern apron and subdue griminess can leave no one in any doubt that he be the village shoemaker ; the thrust out of he ching and stomach and the twirling of he thumb be more subtle indication , intend to prepare unwary strangers for the discovery that they be in the presence of the parish clerk . " , " as he be irreverently call by he neighbour , be in a state of simmering indignation ; but he have not yet open he lip except to say , in a resounding bass undertone , like the tuning of a violoncello , " , of the ; for he mercy endureth for ever ; and the of : for he mercy endureth for ever " -- a quotation which may seem to have slight bearing on the present occasion , but , as with every other anomally , adequate knowledge will show it to be a natural sequence . be inwardly maintain the dignity of the in the face of this scandalous irruption of , and as that dignity be bound up with he own sonorous utterance of the response , he
he argument naturally suggest a quotation from the psalm he have read the last afternoon . the stronger curiosity of the woman have draw they quite to the edge of the Green , where they could examine more closely the Quakerlike costume and odd deportment of the female . underneath the maple there be a small cart , which have be bring from the wheelwright 's to serve as a pulpit , and round this a couple of bench and a few chair have be place . some of the be rest on these , with they eye close , as if wrapt in prayer or meditation . other choose to continue stand , and have turn they face towards the villager with a look of melancholy compassion , which be highly amusing to , the blacksmith 's buxom daughter , know to she neighbour as 's , who wonder " why the folk war amakin ' face a that 'n . " 's Bess be the object of peculiar compassion , because she hair , be turn back under a cap which be set at the top of she head , expose to view a ornament of which she be much prouder than of she red cheek -- namely , a pair of large round ear-ring with false garnet in they , ornament condemn not only by the , but by she own cousin and nameake 's , who , with much cousinly feel , often wish " they ear - ring " might come to good . 's , though retain she maiden appellation among she familiar , have long be the wife of , and possess a handsome set of matronly jewel , of which it be enough to mention the heavy baby she be rock in she arm , and the sturdy fellow of five in knee - breech , and red leg , who have a rusty milk -can round he neck by way of drum , and be very carefully avoid by 's small terrier . this young olive - branch , notorious under the name of 's 's , be of a inquire disposition , uncheck by any false modesty , have advanced beyond the group of woman and child , and be walk round the , look up in they face with he mouth wide open , and beat he stick against the milk - can by way of musical accompaniment . but one of the elderly woman bend down to take he by the shoulder , with a air of grave remonstrance , 's 's first kick out vigorously , then take to he heel and seek refuge behind he father 's leg . " ye gallow young dog , " say , with some paternal pride , " if ye don to keep that stick quiet , I will tek it from ye . what dy 'e mane by kickin 's foulk ? " " Here ! Gie he here to I , , " say ; " I will tie hir up a ' shoe he as I do th ' hoss . well , , " he continue , as that personage saunter up towards the group of man , " how be ye t ' naight ? be ye coom t ' help groon ? they say folk allays groon when they be hearkenin ' to th' , as if they war bad I ' th ' inside . I mane to groon as loud as you cow do th ' other naight , a ' then the praicher ' ull think I be I ' th ' raight way . " " I would advise you not to be up to no nonsense , , " say , with some dignity ; " Poyser would not like to hear as he wife 's niece be treat any way disrespectful , for all he may not be fond of she take on herself to preach . " " aye , a ' she be a pleasant - look un too , " say . " I will stick up for the pretty woman preachin ' ; I know they would persuade I over a deal sooner nor th ' ugly man . I should to wonder if I turn afore the night 's out , a ' begin to coort the preacher , like . " " why , 's look rether too high , I should think , " say . " this woman 's kin would not like she to demean herself to a common carpenter . " " ! " say , with a long treble intonation , " what be folk 's kin get to do with i't ? not a chip . 's wife may turn she nose up a ' forget bygone , but this , they tell I , 's as poor as iver she be -- work at a mill , a 's much ado to keep hersen . a strapping young carpenter as be a ready - make , like , would to be a bad match for she . why , Poyser make as big a fuss wi' as if he war a nevvy of ' they own . " " idle talk ! idle talk ! " say . " Adam an' 's two man ; you win to fit they two wi' the same last . " " maybe , " say , contemptuously , " but be the lad for I , though he war a twice o'er . I be fair beat , for I have be teasin ' he iver sin ' we have be workin ' together , a ' he bear I no more malice nor a lamb . a ' he be a stout - hear feller too , for when we see the old tree all afire a - comin ' across the field one night , a '
' we think as it war a boguy , make no more ado , but he up t o't as bold as a constable . why , there he come out of ' will 's ; an' there be Will hisself , lookin ' as meek as if he could to knock a nail of ' the head for fear of ' hurto not . a ' there be the pretty preacher woman ! my eye , she have get she bonnet off . I mun go a bit nearer . " of the man follow 's lead , and the traveller push he horse on to the Green , as walk rather quickly and in advance of she companion towards the cart under the maple - tree . while she be near 's tall figure , she look short , but when she have mount the cart , and be away from all comparison , she see above the middle height of woman , though in reality she do not exceed it -- a effect which be due to the slimness of she figure and the simple line of she black stuff dress . the stranger be strike with surprise as he see she approach and mount the cart --surprise , not so much at the feminine delicacy of she appearance , as at the total absence of self - consciousness in she demeanour . he have make up he mind to see she advance with a measure step and a demure solemnity of countenance ; he have feel sure that she face would be mantle with the smile of conscious saintship , or else charge with denunciatory bitterness . he know but two type of -- the ecstatic and the bilious . but walk as simply as if she be go to market , and see as unconscious of she outward appearance as a little boy : there be no blush , no tremulousness , which say , " I know you think I a pretty woman , too young to preach " ; no casting up or down of the eyelid , no compression of the lip , no attitude of the arm that say , " but you must think of I as a saint . " she hold no book in she ungloved hand , but let they hang down lightly cross before she , as she stand and turn she grey eye on the people . there be no keenness in the eyes ; they see rather to be shed love than make observation ; they have the liquid look which tell that the mind be full of what it have to give out , rather than impress by external object . she stand with she left hand towards the descende sun , and leafy bough screen she from its ray ; but in this sober light the delicate colouring of she face seem to gather a calm vividness , like flower at evening . it be a small oval face , of a uniform transparent whiteness , with a egg - like line of cheek and ching , a full but firm mouth , a delicate nostril , and a low perpendicular brow , surmount by a rise arch of parting between smooth lock of pale reddish hair . the hair be draw straight back behind the ear , and cover , except for a inch or two above the brow , by a net Quaker cap . the eyebrow , of the same colour as the hair , be perfectly horizontal and firmly pencill ; the eyelash , though no darker , be long and abundant -- nothing be leave blurred or unfinished . it be one of those face that make one think of white flower with light touch of colour on they pure petal . the eye have no peculiar beauty , beyond that of expression ; they look so simple , so candid , so gravely loving , that no accusing scowl , no light sneer could help melt away before they glance . give a long cough , as if he be clear he throat in order to come to a new understanding with himself ; Cranage lift up he leather skull - cap and scratch he head ; and wonder how have the pluck to think of court she . " a sweet woman , " the stranger say to himself , " but surely nature never mean she for a preacher . " perhaps he be one of those who think that nature have theatrical property and , with the considerate view of facilitating art and psychology , " make up , " she character , so that there may be no mistake about they . but begin to speak . " dear friend , " she say in a clear but not loud voice " let we pray for a blessing . " she close she eye , and hang she head down a little continue in the same moderate tone , as if speak to some one quite near she : " saviour of sinner ! when a poor woman laden with sins , go out to the well to draw water , she find sit at the well . she know not ; she have not seek ; she mind be dark ; she life be unholy . but thou didst speak to she , Thou didst teach she , Thou didst show she that she life lay open before , and yet thou wast ready to give she that bless which she have never seek . , thou be in the midst of we , and thou knowest all man : if there be any here like that poor woman -- if they mind be dark , they life unholy -- if they have come out not seek , not desire to be teach ; deal with they accord to the free mercy
mercy which thou didst show to she to they , , open they ear to my message , bring they sins to they minds , and make they thirst for that salvation which thou be ready to give . " , art with thy people still : they see Thee in the night - watch , and they heart burn within they as thou talkest with they by the way . and thou be near to those who have not know Thee : open they eye that they may see -- see Thee weep over they , and say ' ye will not come unto I that ye might have life '-- see hang on the cross and say , ' Father , forgive they , for they know not what they do '--see as thou will come again in glory to judge they at the last . amen . " open she eye again and pause , look at the group of villager , who be now gather rather more closely on she right hand . " dear friend , " she begin , raise she voice a little , " you have all of you be to church , and I think you must have hear the clergyman read these word : ' the Spirit of the be upon I , because he hath anoint I to preach the gospel to the poor . ' speak those word -- he say he come to preach the Gospel to the poor . I do not know whether you ever think about those word much , but I will tell you when I remember first hear they . it be on just such a sort of evening as this , when I be a little girl , and my aunt as bring I up take I to hear a good man preach out of door , just as we be here . I remember he face well : he be a very old man , and have very long white hair ; he voice be very soft and beautiful , not like any voice I have ever hear before . I be a little girl and scarcely know anything , and this old man seem to I such a different sort of a man from anybody I have ever see before that I think he have perhaps come down from the sky to preach to we , and I say , ' aunt , will he go back to the sky to - night , like the picture in the ? ' " that man of be , who spend he life in do what we bless do -- preach the to the poor -- and he enter into he rest eight year ago . I come to know more about he year after , but I be a foolish thoughtless child then , and I remember only one thing he tell we in he sermon . he tell we as ' ' mean ' good news . ' the Gospel , you know , be what the tell we about . " think of that now ! do really come down from heaven , as I , like a silly child , think do ; and what he come down for be to tell good news about to the poor . why , you and I , dear friend , be poor . we have be bring up in poor cottage and have be rear on oat - cake , and live coarse ; and we have not be to school much , nor read book , and we do not know much about anything but what happen just round we . we be just the sort of people that want to hear good news . for when anybody be well off , they do not much mind about hear news from distant part ; but if a poor man or woman 's in trouble and have hard work to make out a living , they like to have a letter to tell them they have get a friend as will help th'ey . to be sure , we can not help know something about , even if we have never hear the , the good news that we saviour bring we . for we know everything come from : do not you say almost every day , ' this and that will happen , please , ' and ' we shall begin to cut the grass soon , please to send we a little more sunshine ' ? we know very well we be altogether in the hand of . we do not bring ourselves into the world , we can not keep ourselves alive while we be sleep ; the daylight , and the wind , and the corn , and the cow to give we milk -- everything we have come from . and he give we we soul and put love between parent and child , and husband and wife . but be that as much as we want to know about ? we see he be great and mighty , and can do what he will : we be lost , as if we be struggle in great water , when we try to think of he . " but perhaps doubt come into you mind like this : can take much notice of we poor people ? perhaps he only make the world for the great and the wise and the rich . it do not cost he much to give we we little handful of victual and bit of clothing ; but how do we know he care for we any more than we care for the worm and thing in the garden , so as we rear we carrot and onion ? will take care of we when we die ? and have he any comfort for we when we be lame
lame and sick and helpless ? perhaps , too , he be angry with we ; else why do the blight come , and the bad harvest , and the fever , and all sort of pain and trouble ? for we life be full of trouble , and if send we good , he seem to send bad too . how be it ? how be it ? " ah , dear friend , we be in sad want of good news about ; and what do other good news signify if we have not that ? for everything else come to a end , and when we die we leave it all . but last when everything else be gone . what shall we do if he be not we friend ? " then tell how the good news have be bring , and how the mind of towards the poor have be make manifest in the life of , dwell on its lowliness and its act of mercy . " so you see , dear friend , " she go on , " spend he time almost all in do good to poor people ; he preach out of door to they , and he make friend of poor workman , and teach they and take pain with they . not but what he do good to the rich too , for he be full of love to all man , only he see as the poor be more in want of he help . so he cure the lame and the sick and the blind , and he work miracle to feed the hungry because , he say , he be sorry for they ; and he be very kind to the little child and comforte those who have lose they friend ; and he speak very tenderly to poor sinner that be sorry for they sins . " ah , would not you love such a man if you see he -- if he be here in this village ? what a kind heart he must have ! what a friend he would be to go to in trouble ! how pleasant it must be to be teach by he . " well , dear friend , who be this man ? be he only a good man -- a very good man , and no more -- like we dear , who have be take from we ?... he be the of --'in the image of the , ' the say ; that mean , just like , who be the beginning and end of all thing -- the we want to know about . so then , all the love that show to the poor be the same love that have for we . we can understand what feel , because he come in a body like ours and speak word such as we speak to each other . we be afraid to think what be before -- the who make the world and the sky and the thunder and lightning . we could never see he ; we could only see the thing he have make ; and some of these thing be very terrible , so as we might well tremble when we think of he . but we bless saviour have show we what be in a way we poor ignorant people can understand ; he have show we what 's heart be , what be he feeling towards we . " but let we see a little more about what come on earth for . another time he say , 'I come to seek and to save that which be lose ' ; and another time , 'I come not to call the righteous but sinner to repentance . ' " the Lost !...sinner !... ah , dear friend , do that mean you and I ? " Hitherto the traveller have be chain to the spot against he will by the charm of 's mellow treble tone , which have a variety of modulation like that of a fine instrument touch with the unconscious skill of musical instinct . the simple thing she say see like novelty , as a melody strike we with a new feeling when we hear it sung by the pure voice of a boyish chorister ; the quiet depth of conviction with which she speak see in itself a evidence for the truth of she message . he see that she have thoroughly arrest she hearer . the villager have press nearer to she , and there be no longer anything but grave attention on all face . she speak slowly , though quite fluently , often pause after a question , or before any transition of idea . there be no change of attitude , no gesture ; the effect of she speech be produce entirely by the inflection of she voice , and when she come to the question , " will take care of we when we die ? " she utter it in such a tone of plaintive appeal that the tear come into some of the hardest eye . the stranger have cease to doubt , as he have do at the first glance , that she could fix the attention of she rougher hearer , but still he wonder whether she could have that power of rouse they more violent emotion , which must surely be a necessary seal of she vocation as a preacher , until she come to the word , " lose !--Sinner ! " when there be a great change in she voice and manner . she have make a long pause before the exclamation , and the pause seem to be fill by agitating thought that show themselves in she feature . she pale face become paler ; the circle under she eye deepen , as they do when tear half - gather
gather without falling ; and the mild loving eye take a expression of appal pity , as if she have suddenly discern a destroy angel hover over the head of the people . she voice become deep and muffled , but there be still no gesture . nothing could be less like the ordinary type of the than . she be not preach as she hear other preach , but speak directly from she own emotion and under the inspiration of she own simple faith . but now she have enter into a new current of feeling . she manner become less calm , she utterance more rapid and agitated , as she try to bring home to the people they guil they wilful darkness , they state of disobedience to -- as she dwelt on the hatefulness of sin , the holiness , and the suffering of the saviour , by which a way have be open for they salvation . at last it seem as if , in she yearning desire to reclaim the lost sheep , she could not be satisfied by address she hearer as a body . she appeal first to one and then to another , beseech they with tear to turn to while there be yet time ; pain to they the desolation of they soul , lose in sin , feed on the husk of this miserable world , far away from they Father ; and then the love of the saviour , who be wait and watch for they return . there be many a responsive sigh and groan from she fellow - Methodist , but the village mind do not easily take fire , and a little smouldering vague anxiety that might easily die out again be the utmost effect Dinah 's preaching have wrotch in they at present . yet no one have retire , except the child and " old , " who be too deaf to catch many word , have some time ago go back to he inglenook . be feel very uncomfortable , and almost wish he have not come to hear ; he think what she say would haunt he somehow . yet he could not help like to look at she and listen to she , though he dread every moment that she would fix she eye on he and address he in particular . she have already address , who be now hold the baby to relieve he wife , and the big soft - hear man have rub away some tear with he fist , with a confused intention of be a better fellow , go less to the down by the - pit , and clean himself more regularly of a . in front of stand 's , who have show a unwonted quietude and fixity of attention ever since have begin to speak . not that the matter of the discourse have arrest she at once , for she be lose in a puzzling speculation as to what pleasure and satisfaction there could be in life to a young woman who wear a cap like 's . give up this inquiry in despair , she take to study 's nose , eye , mouth , and hair , and wonder whether it be better to have such a sort of pale face as that , or fat red cheek and round black eye like she own . but gradually the influence of the general gravity tell upon she , and she become conscious of what be say . the gentle tone , the loving persuasion , do not touch she , but when the more severe appeal come she begin to be frightened . poor have always be consider a naughty girl ; she be conscious of it ; if it be necessary to be very good , it be clear she must be in a bad way . she could not find she place at church as could , she have often be titter when she " curchey " to ; and these religious deficiencies be accompany by a corresponding slackness in the minor moral , for belong unquestionably to that unsoaped lazy class of feminine character with whom you may venture to " eat a egg , a apple , or a nut . " all this she be generally conscious of , and hithertoo have not be greatly asham of it . but now she begin to feel very much as if the constable have come to take she up and carry she before the justice for some undefined offence . she have a terrified sense that , whom she have always think of as very far off , be very near to she , and that be close by look at she , though she could not see he . for have that belief in visible manifestation of , which be common among the , and she communicate it irresistibly to she hearer : she make they feel that he be among they bodily , and might at any moment show himself to they in some way that would strike anguish and penitence into they heart . " see ! " she exclaim , turn to the left , with she eye fix on a point above the head of the people . " see where we bless stand and weep and stretch out he arm towards you . hear what he say : ' how often would I have gather you as a he gathereth she chicken under she wing , and ye would not !' ... and ye would not , " she repeat , in a tone of pleading reproach , turn she eye on the people again . " see the print of the nails on he dear hand and foot . it be you sins that make they ! ah ! how pale and wear he look ! he have go
go through all that great agony in the garden , when he soul be exceed sorrowful even unto death , and the great drop of sweat fell like blood to the ground . they spat upon he and buffet he , they scour he , they mock he , they lay the heavy cross on he bruise shoulders . then they nai he up . ah , what pain ! he lip be parch with thirst , and they mock he still in this great agony ; yet with those parch lip he pray for they , ' Father , forgive they , for they know not what they do . ' then a horror of great darkness fall upon he , and he feel what sinner feel when they be for ever shut out from . that be the last drop in the cup of bitterness . ' my , my ! ' he cry , ' why hast thou forsake I ? ' " all this he bear for you ! for you -- and you never think of he ; for you -- and you turn you back on he ; you do not care what he have go through for you . yet he be not weary of toiling for you : he have risen from the dead , he be pray for you at the right hand of --' Father , forgive they , for they know not what they do . ' and he be upon this earth too ; he be among we ; he be there close to you now ; I see he wounded body and he look of love . " here turn to , whose bonny youth and evident vanity have touch she with pity . " poor child ! poor child ! he be beseech you , and you do not listen to he . you think of ear - ring and fine gown and cap , and you never think of the saviour who die to save you precious soul . you cheek will be shrivell one day , you hair will be grey , you poor body will be thin and totter ! then you will begin to feel that you soul be not save ; then you will have to stand before dress in you sins , in you evil temper and vain thought . and , who stand ready to help you now , will not help you then ; because you will not have he to be you saviour , he will be you judge . now he look at you with love and mercy and say , ' come to I that you may have life ' ; then he will turn away from you , and say , ' depart from I into ever - last fire ! ' " 's wide - open black eye begin to fill with tear , she great red cheek and lip become quite pale , and she face be distort like a little child 's before a burst of crying . " ah , poor blind child ! " go on , " think if it should happen to you as it once happen to a servant of in the day of she vanity . she think of she lace cap and save all she money to buy them ; she think nothing about how she might get a clean heart and a right spirit -- she only want to have better lace than other girl . and one day when she put she new cap on and look in the glass , she see a bleeding face crown with thorn . that face be look at you now " -- here point to a spot close in front of -- " ah , tear off those folly ! cast they away from you , as if they be stinge adder . they be stinge you -- they be poiso you soul -- they be drag you down into a dark bottomless pit , where you will sink for ever , and for ever , and for ever , further away from light and . " could bear it no longer : a great terror be upon she , and wrench she ear-ring from she ear , she throw they down before she , sobb aloud . she father , , frightene lest he should be " laid hold on " too , this impression on the rebellious Bess strike he as nothing less than a miracle , walk hastily away and begin to work at he anvil by way of reassure himself . " folk mun ha ' hoss - shoe , praiching ' or no praiching ' : the divil can to lay hould of ' I for that , " he mutter to himself . but now begin to tell of the joy that be in store for the penitent , and to describe in she simple way the divine peace and love with which the soul of the believer be fill -- how the sense of 's love turn poverty into riche and satisfy the soul so that no uneasy desire vex it , no fear alarm it : how , at last , the very temptation to sin be extinguished , and heaven be begin upon earth , because no cloud pass between the soul and , who be its eternal sun . " dear friend , " she say at last , " brothers and sister , whom I love as those for whom my have die , believe I , I know what this great blessedness be ; and because I know it , I want you to have it too . I be poor , like you : I have to get my living with my hand ; but no lord nor lady can be so happy as I , if they have not get the love
love of in they soul . think what it be -- not to hate anything but sin ; to be full of love to every creature ; to be frightene at nothing ; to be sure that all thing will turn to good ; not to mind pain , because it be we Father 's will ; to know that nothing -- no , not if the earth be to be burn up , or the water come and dry we -- nothing could part we from who love we , and who fill we soul with peace and joy , because we be sure that whatever he will be holy , just , and good . " dear friend , come and take this blessedness ; it be offer to you ; it be the good news that come to preach to the poor . it be not like the rich of this world , so that the more one get the less the rest can have . be without end ; he love be without end -- " it be stream the whole creation reach , so plenteous be the store ; enough for all , enough for each , enough for evermore . have be speak at least a hour , and the redden light of the parting day seem to give a solemn emphasis to she closing word . the stranger , who have be interested in the course of she sermon as if it have be the development of a drama -- for there be this sort of fascination in all sincere unpremeditated eloquence , which open to one the inward drama of the speaker 's emotion -- now turn he horse aside and pursue he way , while say , " let we s a little , dear friend " ; and as he be still win down the slope , the voice of the reach he , rise and fall in that strange blending of exultation and sadness which belong to the cadence of a hymn . iii after the Preaching in less than a hour from that time , be walk by 's side along the hedgerow - path that skirt the pasture and green corn-field which lay between the village and the . have take off she little Quaker bonnet again , and be hold it in she hand that she might have a freer enjoyment of the cool evening twilight , and could see the expression of she face quite clearly as he walk by she side , timidly revolve something he want to say to she . it be a expression of unconscious placid gravity -- of absorption in thought that have no connection with the present moment or with she own personality -- a expression that be most of all discouraging to a lover . she very walk be discourage : it have that quiet elasticity that ask for no support . feel this dimly ; he say to himself , " she be too good and holy for any man , let alone I , " and the word he have be summon rush back again before they have reach he lip . but another thought give he courage : " there be no man could love she better and leave she freer to follow the 's work . " they have be silent for many minute now , since they have do talk about ; see almost to have forget 's presence , and she pace be become so much quicker that the sense of they be only a few minute ' walk from the yard - gate of the farm at last give Seth courage to speak . " you have quite make up you mind to go back to o' , ? " " yes , " say , quietly . " I be call there . it be borne in upon my mind while I be meditat on night , as , who be in a decline , be in need of I . I see she as plain as we see that bit of thin white cloud , lifte up she poor thing hand and beckon to I . and this morning when I open the for direction , the first word my eye fell on where , ' and after we have see the vision , immediately we endeavoure to go into . ' if it be not for that clear showing of the 's , I should be loath to go , for my heart yearn over my aunt and she little one , and that poor wander lamb . I have be much draw out in prayer for she of late , and I look on it as a token that there may be mercy in store for she . " " grant it , " say . " for I doubt 's heart be so set on she , he will never turn to anybody else ; and yet it 'uld go to my heart if he be to marry she , for I can to think as she would make he happy . it be a deep mystery -- the way the heart of man turn to one woman out of all the rest he have see I ' the world , and make it easier for he to work seven year for , like do for , sooner than have any other woman for th 's ask . I often think of they word , ' and serve seven year for ; and they seem to he but a few day for the love he have to she . ' I know those word 'uld come true with I , Dinah , if so be you would give I hope as I might win you after seven year be over . I know you think a husband 'uld be take up too much of ' you thought
thought , because say , ' she that be marry careth for the thing of the world how she may please she husband ' ; and may happen you will think I overbold to speak to you about it again , after what you tell I of ' you mind last . but I have be think it over again by night and by day , and I have pray not to be blind by my own desire , to think what be only good for I must be good for you too . and it seem to I there be more text for you marrying than ever you can find against it . for say as plain as can be in another place , 'I while that the younger woman marry , bear child , guide the house , give none occasion to the adversary to speak reproachfully ' ; and then ' two be better than one ' ; and that hold good with marriage as well as with other thing . for we should be o' one heart and of ' one mind , . we both serve the same master , and be strive after the same gift ; and I would never be the husband to make a claim on you as could interfere with you do the work have fit you for . I would make a shift , and fend indoor and out , to give you more liberty -- more than you can have now , for you have get to get you own living now , and I be strong enough to work for we both . " when have once begin to urge he suit , he go on earnestly and almost hurriedly , lest Dinah should speak some decisive word before he have pour forth all the argument he have prepare . he cheek become flushed as he go on he mild grey eye fill with tear , and he voice tremble as he speak the last sentence . they have reach one of those very narrow pass between two tall stone , which perform the office of a stile in , and pause as she turn towards and say , in she tender but calm treble note , " , I thank you for you love towards I , and if I could think of any man as more than a brother , I think it would be you . but my heart be not free to marry . that be good for other woman , and it be a great and a bless thing to be a wife and mother ; but have distribute to every man , as the hath call every man , so let he walk . ' have call I to minister to other , not to have any joy or sorrow of my own , but to rejoice with they that do rejoice , and to weep with those that weep . he have call I to speak he word , and he have greatly own my work . it could only be on a very clear show that I could leave the breth and sister at , who be favour with very little of this world 's good ; where the tree be few , so that a child might count they , and there be very hard live for the poor in the winter . it have be give I to help , to comfort , and strengthen the little flock there and to call in many wanderer ; and my soul be fill with these thing from my rising up till my lie down . my life be too short , and 's work be too great for I to think of make a home for myself in this world . I have not turn a deaf ear to you word , , for when I see as you love be give to I , I think it might be a leading of Providence for I to change my way of life , and that we should be fellow - helper ; and I spread the matter before the . but whenever I try to fix my mind on marriage , and we live together , other thought always come in -- the time when I have pray by the sick and die , and the happy hour I have have preaching , when my heart be fill with love , and the be give to I abundantly . and when I have open the for direction , I have always light on some clear word to tell I where my work lay . I believe what you say , , that you would try to be a help and not a hindrance to my work ; but I see that we marriage be not 's will -- he draw my heart another way . I desire to live and die without husband or child . I seem to have no room in my soul for want and fear of my own , it have pleas to fill my heart so full with the want and suffering of he poor people . " be unable to reply , and they walk on in silence . at last , as they be nearly at the yard - gate , he say , " well , Dinah , I must seek for strength to bear it , and to endure as see who be invisible . but I feel now how weak my faith be . it seem as if , when you be go , I could never joy in anything any more . I think it be something pass the love of woman as I feel for you , for I could be content without you marry I if I could go and live at and be near you . I trust as the strong love have give I towards
towards you be a leading for we both ; but it seem it be only mean for my trial . perhaps I feel more for you than I ought to feel for any creature , for I often can not help say of you what the hymn say -- in darkest shade if she appear , my dawning be begin ; she be my soul 's bright morning - star , and she my rise sun . that may be wrong , and I be to be teach better . but you would not be displease with I if thing turn out so as I could leave this country and go to live at ? " " no , ; but I counsel you to wait patiently , and not lightly to leave you own country and kindr . do nothing without the 's clear bidding . it be a bleak and barren country there , not like this land of you have be use to . we must not be in a hurry to fix and choose we own lot ; we must wait to be guid . " " but you would let I write you a letter , , if there be anything I want to tell you ? " " yes , sure ; let I know if you be in any trouble . you will be continually in my prayer . " they have now reach the yard - gate , and say , " I will not go in , , so farewell . " he pause and hesitat after she have give he she hand , and then say , " there be no knowing but what you may see thing different after a while . there may be a new lead . " " let we leave that , . it be good to live only a moment at a time , as I have read in one of 's book . it be not for you and I to lay plan ; we have nothing to do but to obey and to trust . farewell . " press he hand with rather a sad look in she loving eye , and then pass through the gate , while turn away to walk lingeringly home . but instead of take the direct road , he choose to turn back along the field through which he and have already pass ; and I think he blue linen handkerchief be very wet with tear long before he have make up he mind that it be time for he to set he face steadily homeward . he be but three - and - twenty , and have only just learn what it be to love -- to love with that adoration which a young man give to a woman whom he feel to be greater and better than himself . love of this sort be hardly distinguishable from religious feeling . what deep and worthy love be so , whether of woman or child , or art or music . we caress , we tender word , we still rapture under the influence of autumn sunset , or pillare vista , or calm majestic statue , or symphony all bring with they the consciousness that they be mere wave and ripple in a unfathomable ocean of love and beauty ; we emotion in its keenest moment pass from expression into silence , we love at it be highest flood rush beyond its object and lose itself in the sense of divine mystery . and this bless gift of venerating love have be give to too many humble craftsman since the world begin for we to feel any surprise that it should have exist in the soul of a carpenter half a century ago , while there be yet a lingering after - glow from the time when and he fellow - labourer feed on the hip and haw of the hedge , after exhaust limb and lung in carry a divine message to the poor . that afterglow have long fade away ; and the picture we be apt to make of in we imagination be not a amphitheatre of green hill , or the deep shade of broad - leave sycamore , where a crowd of rough man and weary - hear woman drank in a faith which be a rudimentary culture , which link they thought with the past , lifte they imagination above the sordid detail of they own narrow life , and suffuse they soul with the sense of a pitying , loving , infinite presence , sweet as summer to the houseless needy . it be too possible that to some of my reader may mean nothing more than low - pitch gable up dingy street , sleek grocer , sponge preacher , and hypocritical jargon -- element which be regard as a exhaustive analysis of in many fashionable quarter . that would be a pity ; for I can not pretend that and be anything else than -- not indeed of that modern type which read quarterly review and attend in chapel with pillared porticoe , but of a very old - fashioned kind . they believe in present miraacle , in instantaneous conversion , in revelation by dream and vision ; they draw lot , and seek for guidance by open the at hazard ; have a literal way of interpret the Scripture , which be not at all sanction by approve commentator ; and it be impossible for I to represent they diction as correct , or they instruction as liberal . still -- if I have read religious history aright -- faith , hope , and charity have not always be find in a direct ratio with a sensibility to the three concord , and it be possible -- thank ! -- to have very erroneous theories and very sublime feeling . the raw bacon which clumsy
clumsy spare from she own scanty store that she may carry it to she neighbour 's child to " stop the fit , " may be a piteously inefficacious remedy ; but the generous stirring of neighbourly kindness that prompt the deed have a beneficent radiation that be not lost . consider these thing , we can hardly think and beneath we sympathy , accustom as we may be to weep over the loftier sorrow of heroine in satin boot and crinoline , and of hero ride fiery horse , themselves ride by still more fiery passion . poor Seth ! he be never on horseback in he life except once , when he be a little lad , and take he up behind , tell he to " hold on tight " ; and instead of burste out into wild accuse apostroph to and destiny , he be resolve , as he now walk homeward under the solemn starlight , to repress he sadness , to be less bent on have he own will , and to live more for other , as do . and a valley with a brook run through it , full almost to overflow with the late rain , overhng by low stooping willows . across this brake a plank be throw , and over this plank be pass with he undoubting step , follow close by with the basket ; evidently make he way to the thatch house , with a stack of timber by the side of it , about twenty yard up the opposite slope . the door of the house be open , and a elderly woman be look out ; but she be not placidly contemplate the evening sunshine ; she have be watch with dim eye the gradually enlarge speck which for the last few minute she have be quite sure be she darling son Adam . love she son with the love of a woman to whom she first - born have come late in life . she be a anxious , spare , yet vigorous old woman , clean as a snowdrop . she grey hair be turn neatly back under a pure linen cap with a black band round it ; she broad chest be cover with a buff neckerchief , and below this you see a sort of short bedgown make of blue - checker linen , tie round the waist and descende to the hip , from whence there be a considerable length of linsey - woolsey petticoat . for be tall , and in other point too there be a strong likeness between she and she son . she dark eye be somewhat dim now -- perhaps from too much crying -- but she broadly mark eyebrow be still black , she tooth be sound , and as she stand knitt rapidly and unconsciously with she work - harden hand , she have as firmly upright a attitude as when she be carry a pail of water on she head from the spring . there be the same type of frame and the same keen activity of temperament in mother and son , but it be not from she that get he well - fill brow and he expression of large - hear intelligence . family likeness have often a deep sadness in it . nature , that great tragic dramatist , knit we together by bone and muscle , and divide we by the subtler web of we brain ; blend yearning and repulsion ; and ty we by we heart - string to the being that jar we at every movement . we hear a voice with the very cadence of we own utter the thought we despise ; we see eye -- ah , so like we mother 's !-- avert from we in cold alienation ; and we last darling child startle we with the air and gesture of the sister we part from in bitterness long year ago . the father to whom we owe we best heritage -- the mechanical instinct , the keen sensibility to harmony , the unconscious skill of the modelling hand -- gall we and put we to shame by he daily error ; the long - lose mother , whose face we begin to see in the glass as we own wrinkle come , once fret we young soul with she anxious humour and irrational persistence . it be such a fond anxious mother 's voice that you hear , as say , " well , my lad , it be go seven by ' clock . the e't allay stay till the last child 's bear . want thy supper , I will warrand . where 's ? go arter some o 's chapellin ' , I reckon ? " " aye , aye , 's at no harm , mother , thee mayst be sure . but where 's father ? " say quickly , as he enter the house and glance into the room on the left hand , which be use as a workshop . " have not he do the coffin for ? there be the tuff stand just as I leave it this morning . " " do the coffin ? " say , follow he , and knitt uninterruptedly , though she look at she son very anxiously . " Eh , my lad , he go aff to Treddle 'on this forenoon , a 's niver come back . I doubt he be get to th' ' ' again . " a deep flush of anger pass rapidly over 's face . he say nothing , but throw off he jacket and begin to roll up he shirt - sleeve again . " what be goin ' to do , ? " say the mother , with a tone and look of alarm . " Thee wouldstna go to work again , wi'out ha
ha 'in thy bit of ' supper ? " , too angry to speak , walk into the workshop . but he mother throw down she knitting , and , hurrie after he , take hold of he arm , and say , in a tone of plaintive remonstrance , " Nay , my lad , my lad , thee munna go wi'out thy supper ; there be the tater wi' the gravy in 'em , just as thee like 'st 'em . I save th'ey of ' purpose for thee . come a ' ha ' thy supper , come . " " let be ! " say impetuously , shak she off and seize one of the plank that stand against the wall . " it be fine talk about have supper when here be a coffin promise to be ready at by seven o'clock to - morrow morning , and ink to ha 's be there now , and not a nail struck yet . my throat 's too full to swallow victual . " " why , thee canstna get the coffin ready , " say . " the e't work thyself to death . it 'uld take thee all night to d o't . " " what signify how long it take I ? be not the coffin promise ? can they bury the man without a coffin ? I would work my right hand off sooner than deceive people with lie I ' that way . it make I mad to think o not . I shall overrin these doings before long . I have stand enough of th'ey . " poor do not hear this threat for the first time , and if she have be wise she would have go away quietly and say nothing for the next hour . but one of the lesson a woman most rarely learn be never to talk to a angry or a drunken man . sit down on the chopping bench and begin to cry , and by the time she have cry enough to make she voice very piteous , she burst out into word . " Nay , my lad , my lad , thee wouldstto go away a ' break thy mother 's heart , a ' leave thy feyther to ruin . Thee wouldstna ha ' th'ey carry I to th' churchyard , a ' thee not to follow I . I shan to rest I ' my grave if I do not to see thee at th ' last ; an' how be they to let thee know as I be a -dyin ' , if the e't go a - workin ' I ' distant part , ang Seth belike gone arter thee , and thy feyther not able to hold a pen for 's hand shakin ' , besides not knowin ' where thee art ? Thee mun forgie thy feyther -- thee mun na be so bitter again ' he . he war a good feyther to thee afore he take to th ' drink . he be a clever workman , a ' teach thee thy trade , remember , a 's niver gen I a blow nor so much as a ill word -- no , not even in 's drink . ha's be go to the workhus -- thy own feyther -- a ' he as be a fine - grow man an' handy at everythin ' amost as thee art thysen , five - a '- twenty ' ear ago , when thee wast a baby at the breast . " 's become louder , and chok with sob -- a sort of wail , the most irritating of all sound where real sorrow be to be borne and real work to be do . break in impatiently . " now , mother , do not cry and talk so . have not I get enough to vex I without that ? what be th's use o' tell I thing as I only think too much on every day ? if I do to think on th'ey , why should I do as I do , for the sake of ' keep thing together here ? but I hate to be talk where it be no use : I like to keep my breath for do i'stead o ' talk . " " I know thee dost thing as nobody else 'uld do , my lad . but the e't allay so hard upo ' thy feyther , . Thee think 'st nothing too much to do for Seth : thee snapp 'st I up if iver I find faut wi' th ' lad . but the e't so anger wi's thy feyther , more nor wi' anybody else . " " that be better than speak soft and let thing go the wrong way , I reckon , be not it ? if I be not sharp with he he would sell every bit of ' stuff I ' th ' yard and spend it on drink . I know there be a duty to be do by my father , but it be not my duty to encourage he in run headlong to ruin . and what have get to do with it ? the lad do no harm as I know of . but leave I alone , mother , and let I get on with the work . " da not say any more ; but she get up and call , think to conseal herself somewhat for 's refusal of the supper she have spread out in the loving expectation of look at he while he eat it , by feed 's dog with extra liberality . but be watch he master with wrinkled brow and ears erect , puzzl at this unusual course of thing ; and though he glance at when she call he , and move
move he fore - paws uneasily , well know that she be invite he to supper , he be in a divided state of mind , and remain seat on he haunch , again fix he eye anxiously on he master . Adam notice Gyp's mental conflict , and though he anger have make he less tender than usual to he mother , it do not prevent he from caring as much as usual for he dog . we be apt to be kinder to the brute that love we than to the woman that love we . be it because the brute be dumb ? " go , Gyp ; go , lad ! " say , in a tone of encourage command ; and , apparently satisfied that duty and pleasure be one , follow into the house - place . but no sooner have he lick up he supper than he go back to he master , while sit down alone to cry over she knitting . women who be never bitter and resentful be often the most querulous ; and if be as wise as he be repute to be , I feel sure that when he compare a contentious woman to a continual dropping on a very rainy day , he have not a vixen in he eye -- a fury with long nails , acrid and selfish . Depend upon it , he mean a good creature , who have no joy but in the happiness of the loved one whom she contribute to make uncomfortable , put by all the tid - bit for they and spend nothing on herself . such a woman as , for example -- at once patient and complain , self - renounce and exact , brood the livelong day over what happen yesterday and what be likely to happen to - morrow , and cry very readily both at the good and the evil . but a certain awe mingle itself with she idolatrous love of , and when he say , " leave I alone , " she be always silenced . so the hour pass , to the loud ticking of the old day - clock and the sound of 's tool . at last he call for a light and a dratch of water ( beer be a thing only to be drink on holiday ) , and venture to say as she take it in , " supper 's ready for thee , when thee like 'st . " " thee sit up , mother , " say , in a gentle tone . he have work off he anger now , and whenever he wish to be especially kind to he mother , he fall into he strongest native accent and dialect , with which at other time he speech be less deeply tinge . " I will see to Father when he come home ; maybe he win to come at all to - night . I shall be easier if the e't I ' bed . " " Nay , I will bide till come . he win to be long now , I reckon . " it be then past nine by the clock , which be always in advance of the day , and before it have struck ten the latch be lift and enter . he have hear the sound of the tool as he be approach . " why , mother , " he say , " how be it as 's work so late ? " " it be none of ' thy feyther as be a - workin ' -- thee might know that well anoor if thy head warna full of ' chapellin '-- it be thy brother as do iveryth , for there 's niver nobody else I ' th ' way to do nothin '. " be go on , for she be not at all afraid of , and usually pour into he ear all the querulousness which be repress by she awe of . have never in he life speak a harsh word to he mother , and timid people always wreak they peevishness on the gentle . but , with a anxious look , have pass into the workshop and say , " Addy , how be this ? what ! 's forget the coffin ? " " aye , lad , th' old tale ; but I shall get it do , " say , look up and cast one of he bright keen glance at he brother . " why , what be the matter with thee ? the e't in trouble . " 's eye be red , and there be a look of deep depression on he mild face . " yes , , but it be what must be borne , and can not be help . why , thee 'st never be to the school , then ? " " School ? no , that screw can wait , " say , hammer away again . " let I take my turn now , and do thee go to bed , " say . " no , lad , I would rather go on , now I be in harness . the e't help I to carry it to 'on when it be done . I will call thee up at sunrise . go and eat thy supper , and shut the door so as I may not hear mother 's talk . " know that always mean what he say , and be not to be persuade into meane anything else . so he turn , with rather a heavy heart , into the house - place . " 's niver touch a bit o' victual sin ' home he be come , " say . " I reckon thee 'st he thy supper at some of ' thy Methody folk .
. " " Nay , mother , " say , " I have have no supper yet . " " come , then , " say , " but eat the tater , for 's ull happen ate 'em if I leave 'em stannin ' . he love a bit of ' tater a ' gravy . but he be be so sore a ' anger , he would not eat 'em , for all I would pute th'ey by of ' purpose for he . a ' he be be a - threatenin ' to go away again , " she go on , whimper , " an' I be fast sure he will go some dawnin ' afore I be up , a ' niver let I know aforehand , a ' he will niver come back again when once he be gone . An' I would better niver ha ' have a son , as be like no other body 's son for the deftness a ' thg handiness , an' so look on by thg grit folk , a ' tall a ' upright like a poplar - tree , a ' I to be part from he a ' niver see be no more . " " come , mother , don to grieve thyself in vain , " say , in a soothing voice . " not half so good reason to think as ' ull go away as to think he will stay with thee . he may say such a thing when he be in wrath -- and he be get excuse for be wrathful sometimes -- but he heart 'uld never let he go . think how he be stand by we all when it be be none so easy -- pay he savings to free I from go for a soldier , a ' turnin ' he earnin 's into wood for father , when he be get plenty of ' use for he money , and many a young man like he 'uld ha ' be married and settled before now . he will never turn round and knock down he own work , and forsake they as it be be the labour of he life to stand by . " " to talk to I about 's marr 'in ' , " say , cry afresh . " he be set 's heart on that , as ' ull niver save a penny , ang ' ull toss up she head at 's old mother . a ' to think as he might ha's , a ' be take partner , a ' be a big man wi' workman under he , like -- 's tell I so of 'er and of 'er again -- if it warna as he be set 's heart on that bit of a wench , as be o's no more use nor the gillyflower on the wall . a ' he so wise at bookin ' a ' figurin ' , a ' not to know no better nor that ! " " but , mother , thee know 'st we can to love just where other folk 'uld have we . there be nobody but can control the heart of man . I could ha ' wish myself as could ha ' make another choice , but I would not reproach he for what he can not help . and I be not sure but what he try to o'ercome it . but it be a matter as he do not like to be speak to about , and I can only pray to the to bless and direct he . " " aye , the e't allay ready enough at prayin ' , but I don to see as thee get much wig thy prayin ' . Thee wotto get double earnin 's o ' this side Yule . will niver make thee half the man thy brother be , for all they be a - makin ' a preacher on thee . " " it be partly truth thee speak 'st there , mother , " say , mildly ; " 's far before I , a be do more for I than I can ever do for he . distribute talents to every man accord as he see good . but thee mustna undervally prayer . prayer mayto bring money , but it bring we what no money can buy -- a power to keep from sin and be content with 's , whatever he may please to send . if thee wouldst pray to to help thee , and trust in he goodness , thee wouldst to be so uneasy about thing . " " Unaisy ? I be I ' th ' right of not to be unaisy . it be well see on THEE what it be niver to be unaisy . the e't gi' away all thy earnin 's , a ' niver be unaisy as thee 'st nothin ' laid up again ' a rainy day . if have be as aisy as thee , he would niver ha ' have no money to pay for thee . take no thought for the morrow -- take no thought -- that be what the e't allay sayin ' ; a ' what come o not ? why , as have to take thought for thee . " " those be the word of ' the , , " say . " they do not mean as we should be idle . they mean we should not be overanxious and worret ourselves about what will happen to - morrow , but do we duty and leave the rest to 's . " " aye , aye , that be the way wi' thee : thee allay make a peck of ' thy own word out of ' a pint of ' the 's . I do
do n to see how the e't to know as ' take no thought for the morrow ' mean all that . a ' when the 's such a big book , a ' thee canst read all thr o't , a ' ha ' the pick of ' the tex , I can to think why thee dost to pick better word as donna mean so much more nor they say . do to pick a that 'n ; I can understan ' the tex as he be allays a - sayin ' , ' help they as help theirsen . ' " " Nay , mother , " say , " that be no text of ' the . it come out of a book as pick up at the stall at . it be write by a know man , but overworldly , I doubt . however , that say 's partly true ; for the Bible tell we we must be worker together with . " " well , how be I to know ? it sound like a tex . but what be th ' matter wi' th ' lad ? the e't hardly atin' a bit of ' supper . mean to ha ' no more nor that bit of ' oat - cake ? a ' thee lookst as white as a flick of ' new bacon . what be th ' matter wi' thee ? " " nothing to mind about , mother ; I be not hungry . I will just look in at again , and see if he will let I go on with the coffin . " " ' a drop of ' warm broth ? " say , whose motherly feel now get the better of she " nattering " habit . " I will set two - three stick a - light in a minute . " " Nay , mother , thank thee ; the e't very good , " say , gratefully ; and encourage by this touch of tenderness , he go on : " let I pray a bit with thee for , and , and all of we -- it will comfort thee , happen , more than thee thinkst . " " well , I have nothin ' to say again ' it . " , though dispose always to take the negative side in she conversation with , have a vague sense that there be some comfort and safety in the fact of he piety , and that it somehow relieve she from the trouble of any spiritual transaction on she own behalf . so the mother and son knelt down together , and pray for the poor wander father and for those who be sorrow for he at home . and when he come to the petition that might never be call to set up he tent in a far country , but that he mother might be cheer and comforte by he presence all the day of she pilgrimage , 's ready tear flow again , and she weep aloud . when they rise from they knee , go to again and say , " will only lie down for a hour or two , and let I go on the while ? " " no , , no . make mother go to bed , and go thyself . " have dry she eye , and now follow Seth , hold something in she hand . it be the brown - and - yellow platter contain the baked potatoe with the gravy in they and bit of meat which she have cut and mix among they . those be dear time , when wheaten bread and fresh meat be delicacy to work people . she set the dish down rather timidly on the bench by 's side and say , " Thee canst pick a bit while the e't workin ' . I will bring thee another drop of ' water . " " aye , mother , do , " say , kindly ; " I be get very thirsty . " in half a hour all be quiet ; no sound be to be hear in the house but the loud ticking of the old day - clock and the ringing of 's tool . the night be very still : when open the door to look out at twelve o'clock , the only motion seem to be in the glowing , twinkl star ; every blade of grass be asleep . Bodily haste and exertion usually leave we thought very much at the mercy of we feeling and imagination ; and it be so to - night with . while he muscle be work lustily , he mind see as passive as a spectator at a diorama : scene of the sad past , and probably sad future , float before he and give place one to the other in swift succession . he see how it would be to - morrow morning , when he have carry the coffin to and be at home again , have he breakfast : he father perhaps would come in asham to meet he son 's glance -- would sit down , look older and more tottering than he have do the morning before , and hang down he head , examine the floor - quarry ; while would ask he how he suppose the coffin have be get ready , that he have slink off and leave undone -- for be always the first to utter the word of reproach , although she cry at 's severity towards he father . " so it will go on , worsen and worse , " think ; " there be no slipping uphill again , and no stand still when once you have begin to slip down . " and then the day come back to he when
when he be a little fellow and use to run by he father 's side , proud to be take out to work , and prouder still to hear he father boast to he fellow - workmen how " the little chap have a uncommon notion of ' carpentering . " what a fine active fellow he father be then ! when people ask whose little lad he be , he have a sense of distinction as he answer , " I be 's lad . " he be quite sure everybody know -- do not he make the wonderful pigeon - house at parsonage ? those be happy day , especially when , who be three year the younger , begin to go out work too , and begin to be a teacher as well as a learner . but then come the day of sadness , when be someway on in he teens , and begin to loiter at the public - house , and begin to cry at home , and to pour forth she plaint in the hearing of she son . remembe well the night of shame and anguish when he first see he father quite wild and foolish , shout a song out fitfully among he drunken companion at the " . " he have run away once when he be only eighteen , make he escape in the morning twilight with a little blue bundle over he shoulder , and he " mensuration book " in he pocket , and say to himself very decidedly that he could bear the vexation of home no longer -- he would go and seek he fortune , set up he stick at the crossway and bend he step the way it fall . but by the time he get to , the thought of he mother and Seth , leave behind to endure everything without he , become too importunate , and he resolution fail he . he come back the next day , but the misery and terror he mother have go through in those two day have haunt she ever since . " no ! " say to himself to - night , " that must never happen again . it 'uld make a poor balance when my doings be cast up at the last , if my poor old mother stand of ' the wrong side . my back 's broad enough and strong enough ; I should be no better than a coward to go away and leave the trouble to be borne by they as be not half so able . ' they that be strong ought to bear the infirmity of those that be weak , and not to please themselves . ' there be a text want no candle to sho wot ; it shine by its own light . it be plain enough you get into the wrong road I ' this life if you run after this and that only for the sake of ' make thing easy and pleasant to yourself . a pig may peak he nose into the trough and think of ' nothing outside it ; but if you have get a man 's heart and soul in you , you can not be easy a - make you own bed an's leave the rest to lie on the stone . Nay , nay , I will never slip my neck out of ' the yoke , and leave the load to be draw by the weak un . be a sore cross to I , a be likely to be for many a long year to come . what then ? I have get ' health , and the limb , and the sperrit to bear it . " at this moment a smart rap , as if with a willow wand , be give at the house door , and , instead of barking , as might have be expect , give a loud howl . , very much start , go at once to the door and open it . nothing be there ; all be still , as when he open it a hour before ; the leave be motionless , and the light of the star show the placid field on both side of the brook quite empty of visible life . walk round the house , and still see nothing except a rat which dart into the woodshed as he pass . he go in again , wonder ; the sound be so peculiar that the moment he hear it it call up the image of the willow wand strike the door . he could not help a little shudder , as he remember how often he mother have tell he of just such a sound come as a sign when some one be die . be not a man to be gratuitously superstitious , but he have the blood of the peasant in he as well as of the artisan , and a peasant can no more help believe in a traditional superstition than a horse can help trembl when he see a camel . besides , he have that mental combination which be at once humble in the region of mystery and keen in the region of knowledge : it be the depth of he reverence quite as much as he hard common sense which give he he disinclination to doctrinal religion , and he often check 's argumentative spiritualism by say , " Eh , it be a big mystery ; thee know 'st but little about it . " and so it happen that be at once penetrating and credulous . if a new building have fall down and he have be tell that this be a divine judgment , he would have say , " May be ; but the bearing of ' the roof and wall be not right , else it
it would not ha ' come down " ; yet he believe in dream and prognostic , and to he dying day he bate he breath a little when he tell the story of the stroke with the willow wand . I tell it as he tell it , not attempt to reduce it to its natural element -- in we eagerness to explain impressions , we often lose we hold of the sympathy that comprehend they . but he have the best antidote against imaginative dread in the necessity for get on with the coffin , and for the next ten minute he hammer be ringing so uninterruptedly , that other sound , if there be any , might well be overpower . a pause come , however , when he have to take up he ruler , and now again come the strange rap , and again how . be at the door without the loss of a moment ; but again all be still , and the starlight show there be nothing but the dew - laden grass in front of the cottage . Adam for a moment think uncomfortably about he father ; but of late year he have never come home at dark hour from , and there be every reason for believe that he be then sleep off he drunkenness at the " . " besides , to , the conception of the future be so inseparable from the painful image of he father that the fear of any fatal accident to he be exclude by the deeply infixed fear of he continual degradation . the next thought that occur to he be one that make he slip off he shoe and tread lightly upstairs , to listen at the bedroom door . but both and he mother be breathe regularly . come down and set to work again , say to himself , " I will not open the door again . it be no use stare about to catch sight of a sound . maybe there be a world about we as we can not see , but th ' ear 's quicker than the eye and catch a sound for m't now and then . some people think they get a sight of not too , but they be mostly folk whose eye be not much use to 'em at anything else . for my part , I think it be better to see when you perpendicular 's true than to see a ghost . " such thought as these be apt to grow stronger and stronger as daylight quench the candle and the bird begin to s . by the time the red sunlight shone on the brass nails that form the initial on the lid of the coffin , any lingering forebod from the sound of the willow wand be merge in satisfaction that the work be done and the promise redeem . there be no need to call , for he be already move overhead , and presently come downstairs . " now , lad , " say , as make he appearance , " the coffin 's do , and we can take it over to , and be back again before half after six . I will take a mouthful of ' oat - cake , and then we will be off . " the coffin be soon propp on the tall shoulders of the two brothers , and they be make they way , follow close by , out of the little woodyard into the lane at the back of the house . it be but about a mile and a half to over the opposite slope , and they road wound very pleasantly along lane and across field , where the pale woodbine and the dog - rose be scent the hedgerow , and the bird be twitter and trill in the tall leafy bough of oak and elm . it be a strangely mingled picture -- the fresh youth of the summer morning , with its peace and loveliness , the stalwart strength of the two brother in they rusty work clothes , and the long coffin on they shoulders . they pause for the last time before a small farmhouse outside the village of . by six o'clock the task be do the coffin nail down , and and be on they way home . they choose a shorter way homeward , which would take they across the field and the brook in front of the house . have not mention to what have happen in the night , but he still retain sufficient impression from it himself to say , " Seth , lad , if be not come home by the time we have have we breakfast , I think it will be as well for thee to go over to and look after he , and thee canst get I the brass wire I want . never mind about lose a hour at thy work ; we can make that up . what dost say ? " " I be willing , " say . " but see what cloud have gather since we set out . I be think we shall have more rain . it will be a sore time for th ' haymak if the meadow be flood again . the brook 's fine and full now : another day 's rain 'uld cover the plank , and we should have to go round by the road . " they be come across the valley now , and have enter the pasture through which the brook run . " why , what be that sticke against the willow ? " continue , begin to walk faster . 's heart rise to he mouth : the vague anxiety about he father be change into a great dread . he make no answer to , but run forward proceed
proceed by , who begin to bark uneasily ; and in two moment he be at the bridge . this be what the oman mean , then ! and the grey - haire father , of whom he have think with a sort of hardness a few hour ago , as certain to live to be a thorn in he side be perhaps even then struggle with that watery death ! this be the first thought that flash through 's conscience , before he have time to seize the coat and drag out the tall heavy body . be already by he side , help he , and when they have it on the bank , the two son in the first moment knelt and look with mute awe at the glazed eye , forgett that there be need for action -- forget everything but that they father lay dead before they . Adam be the first to speak . " I will run to , " he say , in a loud whisper . " I will be back to thee in a minute . " poor Lisbeth be busy prepare she son ' breakfast , and they porridge be already steam on the fire . she kitchen always look the pink of cleanliness , but this morning she be more than usually bend on make she hearth and breakfast - table look comfortable and invite . " the lad 's ull be fine a ' hungry , " she say , half - aloud , as she stir the porridge . " it be a good step to , an' it be hungry air of 'er the hill -- wus ' that heavy coffin too . Eh ! it be heavier now , wi ' poor I not . Howiver , I have make a drap more porridge nor common this mornin ' . the feyther 's ull happen come in arter a bit . not as he will eat much porridge . he swaller sixpenn'orth of ' ale , a ' save a hap'orth of ' por-ridge -- that be he way of ' layin ' by money , as I have tell he many a time , a ' be likely to tell he again afore the day 's out . Eh , poor mon , he take it quiet enough ; there be no denyin ' that . " but now hear the heavy " thud " of a run footstep on the turf , and , turn quickly towards the door , she see enter , look so pale and overwhelme that she scream aloud and rush towards he before he have time to speak . " Hush , mother , " say , rather hoarsely , " do not be frightened . Father have tumble into the water . Belike we may bring he round again . and I be go to carry he in . get a blanket and make it hot as the fire . " in reality be convinc that he father be dead but he know there be no other way of repress he mother 's impetuous wailing grief than by occupy she with some active task which have hope in it . he run back to , and the two son lift the sad burden in heart - stricken silence . the wide - open glazed eye be grey , like 's , and have once look with mild pride on the boy before whom have live to hang he head in shame . 's chief feeling be awe and distress at this sudden snatch away of he father 's soul ; but 's mind rush back over the past in a flood of relenting and pity . when death , the great Reconciler , have come , it be never we tenderness that we repent of , but we severity . the rector before twelve o'clock there have be some heavy storm of rain , and the water lay in deep gutter on the side of the gravel walk in the garden of ; the great Provence rose have be cruelly toss by the wind and beat by the rain , and all the delicate - stem border flower have be dash down and stain with the wet soil . a melancholy morning -- because it be nearly time hay - harvest should begin , and instead of that the meadow be likely to be flood . but people who have pleasant home get indoor enjoyment that they would never think of but for the rain . if it have not be a wet morning , would not have be in the dining - room play at chess with he mother , and he love both he mother and chess quite well enough to pass some cloudy hour very easily by they help . let I take you into that dining - room and show you the , rector of , of , and of , a pluralist at whom the severest church reformer would have find it difficult to look sour . we will enter very softly and stand still in the open doorway , without awak the glossy - brown setter who be stretch across the hearth , with she two puppy beside she ; or the pug , who be do , with he black muzzle aloft , like a sleepy president . the room be a large and lofy one , with a ample mullion oriel window at one end ; the wall , you see , be new , and not yet paint ; but the furniture , though originally of a expensive sort , be old and scanty , and there be no drapery about the window . the crimson cloth over the large dining - table be very threadbare , though it contrast pleasantly enough with the dead hue of the plaster on the wall ; but on this cloth there
there be a massive silver waiter with a decanter of water on it , of the same pattern as two larger one that be propp up on the sideboard with a coat of arm conspicuous in they centre . you suspect at once that the inhabitant of this room have inherit more blood than wealth , and would not be surprised to find that have a finely cut nostril and upper lip ; but at present we can only see that he have a broad flat back and a abundance of powdered hair , all thrown backward and tie behind with a black ribbon -- a bit of conservatism in costume which tell you that he be not a young man . he will perhaps turn round by and by , and in the meantime we can look at that stately old lady , he mother , a beautiful aged brunette , whose rich - ton complexion be well set off by the complex wrapping of pure white cambric and lace about she head and neck . she be as erect in she comely embonpoint as a statue of Ceres ; and she dark face , with its delicate aquiline nose , firm proud mouth , and small , intense , black eye , be so keen and sarcastic in its expression that you instinctively substitute a pack of card for the chess -man and imagine she tell you fortune . the small brown hand with which she be lift she queen be laden with pearl , diamonds , and turquoise ; and a large black veil be very carefully adjust over the crown of she cap , and fall in sharp contrast on the white fold about she neck . it must take a long time to dress that old lady in the morning ! but it seem a law of nature that she should be dress so : she be clearly one of those child of royalty who have never doubt they right divine and never meet with any one so absurd as to question it . " there , Dauphin , tell I what that be ! " say this magnificent old lady , as she deposit she queen very quietly and fold she arm . " I should be sorry to utter a word disagreeable to you feeling . " " ah , you witch - mother , you sorceress ! how be a man to win a game off you ? I should have sprinkle the board with holy water before we begin . you have not win that game by fair means , now , so do not pretend it . " " yes , yes , that be what the beaten have always say of great conqueror . but see , there be the sunshine fal on the board , to show you more clearly what a foolish move you make with that pawn . come , shall I give you another chance ? " " no , mother , I shall leave you to you own conscience , now it be clear up . we must go and plash up the mud a little , mus ' not we , ? " this be address to the brown setter , who have jump up at the sound of the voice and lay she nose in a insinuating way on she master 's leg . " but I must go upstairs first and see . I be call away to 's funeral just when I be go before . " " it be of no use , child ; she can not speak to you . say she have one of she worst headach this morning . " " oh , she like I to go and see she just the same ; she be never too ill to care about that . " if you know how much of human speech be mere purposeless impulse or habit , you will not wonder when I tell you that this identical objection have be make , and have receive the same kind of answer , many hundred time in the course of the fifteen year that 's sister have be a invalid . Splendo old lady , who take a long time to dress in the morning , have often slight sympathy with sickly daughter . but while be still seat , lean back in he chair and strok 's head , the servant come to the door and say , " if you please , sir , wish to speak with you , if you be at liberty . " " let he be show in here , " say , take up she knitting . " I always like to hear what have get to say . he sho will be dirty , but see that he wipe they . " in two minute appear at the door with very deferential bow , which , however , were far from conciliating , who give a sharp bark and run across the room to reconnoitre the stranger 's leg ; while the two puppy , regard 's prominent calf and rib worsted stocking from a more sensuous point of view , plunge and grow over they in great enjoyment . , turn round he chair and say , " well , , anything the matter at , that you have come over this damp morning ? sit down , sit down . never mind the dog ; give they a friendly kick . here , , you rascal ! " it be very pleasant to see some man turn round ; pleasant as a sudden rush of warm air in winter , or the flash of firelight in the chill dusk . be one of those man . he bear the same sort of resemblance to he mother that we love memory of a friend 's face often bear to the face itself :
: the line be all more generous , the smile brighter , the expression heartier . if the outline have be less finely cut , he face might have be call jolly ; but that be not the right word for its mixture of bonhomie and distinction . " thank you Reverence , " answer , endeavour to look unconcerned about he leg , but shake they alternately to keep off the puppy ; " I will stand , if you please , as more become . I hope I see you an' well , a ' -- a ' , I hope 's as well as usual . " " yes , , thank you . you see how bloom my mother look . she beat we younger people hollow . but what be the matter ? " " why , sir , I have to come to to deliver some work , and I think it but right to call and let you know the goin - on as there 's be i ' the village , such as I han to see I ' my time , and I have live in it man and boy sixty year come , and collect th' du for before you Reverence come into the parish , and be at the ringin ' of ' every bell , and the diggin ' of ' every grave , and sung I ' the choir long afore come from nobody know where , wi' he counter-singin ' and fine anthem , as put everybody out but himself -- one takin ' it up after another like sheep a - bleatin ' I ' th ' fold . I know what belong to bein ' a parish clerk , and I know as I should be wantin ' I ' respect to you Reverence , a ' church , a ' king , if I be t ' allow such goin - on wi'out speakin ' . I be take by surprise , a ' know nothin ' on it beforehand , an' I be so flustered , I be clean as if I would lose my tool . I hanna slep ' more nor four hour this night as be past a ' gone ; an' then it be nothin ' but nightmare , as ti I worse nor wakin '. " " why , what in the world be the matter , ? have the thiefe be at the church lead again ? " " thief ! no , sir -- a ' yet , as I may say , it be thieve , a ' a -thievin ' the church , too . it be the as be like to get th ' upper hand I ' th ' parish , if you an's , , do to think well to say the word a ' forbid it . not as I be a -dictatin ' to you , sir ; I be not forgettin ' myself so far as to be wise above my betters . Howiver , whether I be wise or no , that be neither here nor there , but what I have get to say i say -- as the young woman as be at 's be a - preaching ' a ' a - prayin ' on the green last night , as sure as I be a - stannin ' afore you Reverence now . " " Preach on the Green ! " say , look surprised but quite serene . " what , that pale pretty young woman I have see at 's ? I see she be a Methodist , or , or something of that sort , by she dress , but I do not know she be a preacher . " " it be a true word as I say , sir , " rejoin , compresse he mouth into a semicircular form and pause long enough to indicate three note of exclamation . " she preach on the green last night ; a ' she be laid hold of 's , as the girl 's be I ' fit welly iver sin '. " " well , be a hearty - look lass ; I daresay she will come round again , . do anybody else go into fit ? " " no , sir , I can to say as they do . but there be no knowin ' what will come , if we be t ' have such preaching 's as that a - goin ' on ivery week -- there will be no livin ' I ' th ' village . for they Methodiss make folk believe as if they take a mug of ' drink extry , a ' make theirselves a bit comfortable , they will have to go to hell of r't as sure as they be bear . I be not a tipplin ' man nor a drunkard -- nobody can say it on I -- but I like a extry quart at or time , as be nat'ral when we be goin ' the round a -singin ' , a ' folk offe r't you for nothing ' ; or when I be a -collectin ' the du ; an' I like a pint wi' my pipe , a ' a neighbourly chat at 's now a ' then , for I be bring up I ' the , thank , a ' ha ' be a parish clerk this two - a '- thirty year : I should know what the church religion be . " " well , what be you advice , ? what do you think should be do ? " " well , you Reverence , I be not for takin ' any measure again ' the young woman . she be well enough if she would let alone preachin ' ; an' I hear as
as she be a - goin ' away back to she own country soon . she be 's own niece , an' I wish to say what be anyways disrespectful of ' th ' family at thg , as I have measure for shoe , little a ' big , welly iver sin' I have be a shoemaker . but there be that , sir as be the rampageousest Methodis as can be , an' I make no doubt it be he as stir up th' young woman to preach last night , ang he will be a - bringin ' other folk to preach from , if he comb be not cut a bit ; an' I think as he should be let know as he isto t ' have the makin ' a ' mendin ' of ' church cart a ' impleman 's , let alone stayin ' I ' that house a ' yard as be 's . " " well , but you say yourself , , that you never know any one come to preach on the green before ; why should you think they will come again ? the do not come to preach in little villag like , where there be only a handful of labourer , too tired to listen to they . they might almost as well go and preach on the . will be no preacher himself , I think . " " Nay , sir , he be no gift at stringin ' the word together wi'out book ; he would be stuck fast like a cow I ' wet clay . but he be get tongue enough to speak disrespectful about 's neebor , for he say as I be a blind Pharisee -- a - usin ' the I ' that way to find nick - name for folk as be he elder a ' better !-- and what be worse , he be be hear to say very unbecomin ' word about you Reverence ; for I could bring they as 'uld swear as he call you a ' dumb dog , ' a ' a ' idle shepherd . ' you will forgi 'e I for sayin ' such thing over again . " " better not , better not , . let evil word die as soon as they be speak . will might be a great deal worse fellow than he be . he use to be a wild drunken rascal , neglect he work and beat he wife , they tell I ; now he be thrifty and decent , and he and he wife look comfortable together . if you can bring I any proof that he interfere with he neighbour and create any disturbance , I shall think it my duty as a clergyman and a magistrate to interfere . but it would not become wise people like you and I to be make a fuss about trifle , as if we think the be in danger because let he tongue wag rather foolishly , or a young woman talk in a serious way to a handful of people on the Green . we must 's live and let live , ' , in religion as well as in other thing . you go on do you duty , as parish clerk and sexton , as well as you have always do it , and make those capital thick boot for you neighbour , and thing will not go far wrong in , depend upon it . " " you Reverence be very good to say so ; an' I be sensable as , you not livin ' I ' the parish , there be more upo ' my shoulders . " " to be sure ; and you must mind and not lower the Church in people 's eye by seem to be frightene about it for a little thing , . I shall trust to you good sense , now to take no notice at all of what will Maskery say , either about you or I . you and you neighbour can go on take you pot of beer soberly , when you have do you day 's work , like good churchman ; and if do not like to join you , but to go to a prayer - meeting at instead , let he ; that be no business of yours , so long as he do not hinder you from do what you like . and as to people say a few idle word about we , we must not mind that , any more than the old church - steeple mind the rook caw about it . will come to church every afternoon , and do he wheelwright 's business steadily in the weekday , and as long as he do that he must be let alone . " " ah , sir , but when he come to church , he sit a ' shakes he head , a ' look as sour a ' as coxy when we be a -singin ' as I should like to fetch he a rap across the jowl -- forgi 'e I -- an' , a ' you Reverence too , for speakin ' so afore you . a ' he say as we singin ' be no better nor the cracklin ' of ' thorn under a pot . " " well , he be get a bad ear for music , . when people have wooden head , you know , it can not be help . he will not bring the other people in round to he opinion , while you go on singing as well as you do . " " yes , sir , but it turn a man 's stomach t ' hear the Scripture misuse I ' that way . I know as much of ' the word
word of ' the as he do , a ' could say the Psalms right through I ' my sleep if you be to pinch I ; but I know better nor to take them to say my own say wig . I might as well take the Sacriment - cup home and use it at meal . " " that be a very sensible remark of yours , ; but , as I say before ---- " while be speak , the sound of a booted step and the clink of a spur be hear on the stone floor of the entrance - hall , and move hastily aside from the doorway to make room for some one who pause there , and say , in a ring tenor voice , " -- may he come in ? " " come in , come in , godson ! " answer , in the deep half - masculine tone which belong to the vigorous old woman , and there enter a young gentleman in a riding - dress , with he right arm in a sling ; whereupon follow that pleasant confusion of laughing interjection , and hand - shaking , and " how be you be ? " mingl with joyous short bark and wagging of tail on the part of the canine member of the family , which tell that the visitor be on the best term with the visit . the young gentleman be , know in , variously , as " the young squire , " " the heir , " and " the captain . " he be only a captain in the , but to the tenant he be more intensely a captain than all the young gentleman of the same rank in he Majesty 's regular -- he outshine they as the planet outshine the . if you want to know more particularly how he look , call to you remembrance some tawny - whisker , brown - locked , clear - complexioned young whom you have meet with in a foreign town , and be proud of as a fellow-countryman -- well - wash , high - breed , white - hand , yet look as if he could deliver well from ' the left shoulder and floor he man : I will not be so much of a tailor as to trouble you imagination with the difference of costume , and insist on the striped waistcoat , long - tail coat , and low top - boot . turn round to take a chair , say , " but do not let I interrupt 's business -- he have something to say . " " Humbly begge you Honour 's pardon , " say , bow low , " there be one thing I have to say to he Reverence as other thing have drive out o' my head . " " out with it , , quickly ! " say . " Belike , sir , you hear as 's dead -- drownd this morning , or more like overnight , I ' the , again ' the bridge right I ' front of ' the house . " " ah ! " exclaim both the gentleman at once , as if they be a good deal interested in the information . " a ' have be to I this morning to say he wish I to tell you Reverence as he brother begge of you particular t ' allow he father 's grave to be dug by the , because he mother 's set she heart on it , on account of a dream as she have ; an' they would ha ' come theirselves to ask you , but they have so much to see after with the crowner , a ' that ; a ' they mother 's take on so , a ' want th'ey to make sure of ' the spot for fear somebody else should take it . a ' if you Reverence see well and good , I will send my boy to tell them as soon as I get home ; an' that be why I make bold to trouble you wi' it , he Honou be present . " " to be sure , , to be sure , they shall have it . I will ride round to Adam myself , and see he . send you boy , however , to say they shall have the grave , lest anything should happen to detain I . and now , good morning , ; go into the kitchen and have some ale . " " poor old Thias ! " say , when be gone . " I be afraid the drink help the brook to dry he . I should have be glad for the load to have be take off my friend 's shoulders in a less painful way . that fine fellow have be prop up he father from ruin for the last five or six year . " " he be a regular trump , be , " say . " when I be a little fellow , and be a strapping lad of fifteen , and teach I carpenter , I use to think if ever I be a rich sultan , I would make my grand - vizier . and I believe now he would bear the exaltation as well as any poor wise man in a eastern story . if ever I live to be a large - acr man instead of a poor devil with a mortgaged allowance of pocket - money , I will have for my right hand . he shall manage my wood for I , for he seem to have a better notion of those thing than any man I ever meet with ; and I know he would make twice the money of they that my grandfather do
do , with that miserable old to manage , who understand no more about timber than a old carp . I have mention the subject to my grandfather once or twice , but for some reason or other he have a dislike to , and I can do nothing . but come , you Reverence , be you for a ride with I ? it be splendo out of door now . we can go to 's together , if you like ; but I want to call at the farm on my way , to look at the whelp Poyser be keep for I . " " you must stay and have lunch first , , " say . " it be nearly two . Carroll will bring it in directly . " " I want to go to the too , " say , " to have another look at the little who be stay there . tell I she be preach on the green last night . " " oh , by ! " say , laugh . " why , she look as quiet as a mouse . there be something rather strike about she , though . I positively feel quite bashful the first time I see she -- she be sit stoope over she sew in the sunshine outside the house , when I ride up and call out , without notice that she be a stranger , 'Is at home ? ' I declare , when she get up and look at I and just say , ' he be in the house , I believe : I will go and call he ,' I feel quite ashamed of have speak so abruptly to she . she look like in a dress . it be a type of face one rarely see among we common people . " " I should like to see the young woman , , " say . " make she come here on some pretext or other . " " I do not know how I can manage that , mother ; it will hardly do for I to patronize a preacher , even if she would consent to be patronize by a idle shepherd , as will call I . you should have come in a little sooner , , to hear 's denunciation of he neighbour . the old fellow want I to excommunicate the wheelwright , and then deliver he over to the civil arm -- that be to say , to you grandfather -- to be turn out of house and yard . if I choose to interfere in this business , now , I might get up as pretty a story of hatred and persecution as the need desire to publish in the next number of they magazine . it would not take I much trouble to persuade and half a dozen other bull - head fellow that they would be do a acceptable service to the Church by hunt out of the village with rope-end and pitchfork ; and then , when I have furnish they with half a sovereign to get gloriously drunk after they exertion , I should have put the climax to as pretty a farce as any of my brother clergy have set go in they parish for the last thirty year . " " it be really insolent of the man , though , to call you a ' idle shepherd ' and a ' dumb dog , ' " say . " I should be inclin to check he a little there . you be too easy - temper , . " " why , mother , you do not think it would be a good way of sustain my dignity to set about vindicat myself from the aspersion of ? besides , I be not so sure that they be aspersion . I be a lazy fellow , and get terribly heavy in my saddle ; not to mention that I be always spend more than I can afford in brick and mortar , so that I get savage at a lame beggar when he ask I for sixpence . those poor lean cobbler , who think they can help to regenerate mankind by set out to preach in the morning twilight before they begin they day 's work , may well have a poor opinion of I . but come , let we have we luncheon . be not Kate come to lunch ? " " tell to take she lunch upstairs , " say ; " she can not leave . " " oh , very well . to say i will go up and see presently . you can use you right arm quite well now , , " continue , observe that have take he arm out of the sling . " yes , pretty well ; but insist on my keep it up constantly for some time to come . I hope I shall be able to get away to the regiment , though , in the beginning of . it be a desperately dull business be shut up at the chase in the summer month , when one can neither hunt nor shoot , so as to make one 's self pleasantly sleepy in the evening . however , we be to astonish the echoe on the 30th of . my grandfather have give I carte blanche for once , and I promise you the entertainment shall be worthy of the occasion . the world will not see the grand epoch of my majority twice . I think I shall have a lofy throne for you , , or rather two , one on the lawn and another in the ballroom , that you may sit and look down upon we like a Olympian goddess . " " I mean to bring out my best brocade , that I wear
wear at you christening twenty year ago , " say . " ah , I think I shall see you poor mother flitt about in she white dress , which look to I almost like a shroud that very day ; and it be she shroud only three month after ; and you little cap and christen dress be bury with she too . she have set she heart on that , sweet soul ! thank you take after you mother 's family , . if you have be a puny , wiry , yellow baby , I would not have stood godmother to you . I should have be sure you would turn out a Donnithorne . but you be such a broad - face , broad - chest , loud - scream rascal , I know you be every inch of you a Tradgett . " " but you might have be a little too hasty there , mother , " say , smile . " do not you remember how it be with 's last pup ? one of they be the very image of its mother , but it have two or three of its father 's trick notwithstanding . be clever enough to cheat even you , mother . " " Nonsense , child ! never make a ferret in the shape of a mastiff . you will never persuade I that I can not tell what man be by they outside . if I do not like a man 's look , depend upon it I shall never like he . I do not want to know people that look ugly and disagreeable , any more than I want to taste dish that look disagreeable . if they make I shudder at the first glance , I say , take they away . a ugly , piggish , or fishy eye , now , make I feel quite ill ; it be like a bad smell . " " talk of eye , " say , " that remind I that I have get a book I mean to bring you , . it come down in a parcel from the other day . I know you be fond of queer , wizardlike story . it be a volume of poem , ' Lyrical Ballads . ' most of they seem to be twaddl stuff , but the first be in a different style --' the ' be the title . I can hardly make head or tail of it as a story , but it be a strange , strike thing . I will send it over to you ; and there be some other book that you may like to see , -- pamphlet about and , whatever they may be . I can not think what the fellow means by send such thing to I . I have write to he to desire that from henceforth he will send I no book or pamphlet on anything that end in . " " well , I do not know that I be very fond of ism myself ; but I may as well look at the pamphlet ; they let one see what be go on . I have a little matter to attend to , , " continue , rise to leave the room , " and then I shall be ready to set out with you . " the little matter that have to attend to take he up the old stone staircase ( part of the house be very old ) and make he pause before a door at which he knock gently . " come in , " say a woman 's voice , and he enter a room so darken by blind and curtain that , the thin middle - aged lady stand by the bedside , would not have have light enough for any other sort of work than the knitting which lay on the little table near she . but at present she be do what require only the dimmest light -- sponge the aching head that lay on the pillow with fresh vinegar . it be a small face , that of the poor sufferer ; perhaps it have once be pretty , but now it be worn and sallow . come towards she brother and whisper , " do not speak to she ; she can not bear to be speak to to - day . " 's eye be close , and she brow contract as if from intense pain . go to the bedside and take up one of the delicate hand and kiss it , a slight pressure from the small finger tell he that it be worth - while to have come upstairs for the sake of do that . he linger a moment , look at she , and then turn away and leave the room , tread very gently -- he have take off he boot and put on slipper before he come upstairs . whoever remember how many thing he have decline to do even for himself , rather than have the trouble of put on or take off he boot , will not think this last detail insignificant . and 's sister , as any person of family within ten mile of could have testify , be such stupid , uninteresting woman ! it be quite a pity handsome , clever Mrs . Irwine should have have such commonplace daughter . that fine old lady herself be worth drive ten mile to see , any day ; she beauty , she well - preserve faculty , and she old - fashioned dignity make she a graceful subject for conversation in turn with the 's health , the sweet new pattern in cotton dress , the news from , and 's lawsuit , which be frett poor to death . but no one ever think of mention
mention the , except the poor people in village , who regard they as deep in the science of medicine , and speak of they vaguly as " the gentlefolk . " if any one have ask old who give he he flannel jacket , he would have answer , " the gentlefolk , last winter " ; and widow dwelt much on the virtue of the " stuff " the gentlefolk give she for she cough . under this name too , they be use with great effect as a means of taming refractory child , so that at the sight of poor 's sallow face , several small urchin have a terrified sense that she be cognizant of all they worst misdemeanour , and know the precise number of stone with which they have intend to hit 's duck . but for all who see they through a less mythical medium , the be quite superfluous existence -- inartistic figure crowd the canva of life without adequate effect . , indeed , if she chronic headach could have be account for by a pathetic story of disappointed love , might have have some romantic interest attach to she : but no such story have either be know or invent concern she , and the general impression be quite in accordance with the fact , that both the sister be old maid for the prosaic reason that they have never receive a eligible offer . nevertheless , to speak paradoxically , the existence of insignificant people have very important consequence in the world . it can be show to affect the price of bread and the rate of wage , to call forth many evil temper from the selfish and many heroism from the sympathetic , and , in other way , to play no small part in the tragedy of life . and if that handsome , generous - blooded clergyman , the , have not have these two hopelessly maiden sister , he lot would have be shape quite differently : he would very likely have take a comely wife in he youth , and now , when he hair be get grey under the powder , would have have tall son and bloom daughter -- such possession , in short , as man commonly think will repay they for all the labour they take under the sun . as it be -- have with all he three livings no more than seven hundred a - year , and see no way of keep he splendid mother and he sickly sister , not to reckon a second sister , who be usually speak of without any adjective , in such ladylike ease as become they birth and habit , and at the same time provide for a family of he own -- he remain , you see , at the age of eight - and - forty , a bachelor , not make any merit of that renunciation , but say laughingly , if any one allude to it , that he make it a excuse for many indulgence which a wife would never have allow he . and perhaps he be the only person in the world who do not think he sister uninteresting and superfluous ; for he be one of those large - hear , sweet - blooded nature that never know a narrow or a grudge thought ; , if you will , with no enthusiasm , no self - scour sense of duty ; but yet , as you have see , of a sufficiently subtle moral fibre to have a unwearying tenderness for obscure and monotonous suffering . it be he large - hear indulgence that make he ignore he mother 's hardness towards she daughter , which be the more striking from its contrast with she do fondness towards himself ; he hold it no virtue to fry at irremediable fault . see the difference between the impression a man make on you when you walk by he side in familiar talk , or look at he in he home , and the figure he make when see from a lofty historical level , or even in the eyes of a critical neighbour who think of he as a embodied system or opinion rather than as a man . , the " travel preacher " statione at , have include in a general statement concern the clergy in the surround district , whom he describe as man give up to the lust of the flesh and the pride of life ; hunt and shoot , and adorn they own house ; ask what shall we eat , and what shall we drink , and wherewithal shall we be clothed ?-- careless of dispense the bread of life to they flock , preach at best but a carnal and soul - benumbing morality , and trafficke in the soul of man by receive money for discharge the pastoral office in parish where they do not so much as look on the face of the people more than once a - year . the ecclesiastical historian , too , look into parliamentary report of that period , find honourable member zealous for the Church , and untainted with any sympathy for the " tribe of canting , " make statement scarcely less melancholy than that of . and it be impossible for I to say that be altogether bely by the generic classification assign he . he really have no very lofy aim , no theological enthusiasm : if i be closely questioned , I should be obliged to confess that he feel no serious alarms about the soul of he parishioner , and would have think it a mere loss of time to talk in a doctrinal and awaken manner to old " , " or even to the blacksmith . if he have be in the habit of speak theoretically ,
, he would perhaps have say that the only healthy form religion could take in such minds be that of certain dim but strong emotion , suffuse themselves as a hallow influence over the family affections and neighbourly duty . he think the custom of baptism more important than its doctrine , and that the religious benefit the peasant draw from the church where he fathers worship and the sacred piece of turf where they lay bury were but slightly dependent on a clear understanding of the or the sermon . clearly the rector be not what be call in these day a " earnest " man : he be fonder of church history than of divinity , and have much more insight into man 's character than interest in they opinion ; he be neither laborious , nor obviously self - denying , nor very copious in alm -giving , and he theology , you perceive , be lax . he mental palate , indeed , be rather pagan , and find a savouriness in a quotation from or that be quite absent from any text in or . but if you feed you young setter on raw flesh , how can you wonder at its retain a relish for uncooked partridge in after - life ? and 's recollection of young enthusiasm and ambition be all associate with poetry and ethic that lay aloon from the . on the other hand , I must plead , for I have a affectionate partiality towards the rector 's memory , that he be not vindictive -- and some philanthropist have be so ; that he be not intolerant -- and there be a rumour that some zealous theologian have not be altogether free from that blemish ; that although he would probably have decline to give he body to be burn in any public cause , and be far from bestow all he good to feed the poor , he have that charity which have sometimes be lack to very illustrious virtue -- he be tender to other man 's failings , and unwill to impute evil . he be one of those man , and they be not the commonest , of whom we can know the best only by follow they away from the marketplace , the platform , and the pulpit , enter with they into they own home , hear the voice with which they speak to the young and a about they own hearthstone , and witnesse they thoughtful care for the every day wants of every day companion , who take all they kindness as a matter of course , and not as a subject for panegyric . such man , happily , have live in time when great abuse flourish , and have sometimes even be the living representatives of the abuse . that be a thought which might comfort we a little under the opposite fact -- that it be better sometimes not to follow great reformer of abuse beyond the threshold of they home . but whatever you may think of now , if you have meet he that afternoon ride on he grey cob , with he dog run beside he -- portly , upright , manly , with a good - natured smile on he finely turn lip as he talk to he dashing young companion on the bay mare , you must have felt that , however ill he harmonize with sound theory of the clerical office , he somehow harmonize extremly well with that peaceful landscape . see they in the bright sunlight , interrupt every now and then by roll mass of cloud , ascend the slope from the side , where the tall gable and elm of the rectory predominate over the tiny whitewashed church . they will soon be in the parish of ; the grey church - tower and village roofs lie before they to the left , and farther on , to the right , they can just see the chimney of the . the evidently that gate be never open , for the long grass and the great hemlock grow close against it , and if it be open , it be so rusty that the force necessary to turn it on its hinge would be likely to pull down the square stone - build pillars , to the detriment of the two stone lioness which grin with a doubtful carnivorous affability above a coat of arm surmount each of the pillars . it would be easy enough , by the aid of the nick in the stone pillar , to climb over the brick wall with its smooth stone cop ; but by put we eye close to the rusty bars of the gate , we can see the house well enough , and all but the very corner of the grassy enclosure . it be a very fine old place , of red brick , soften by a pale powdery lichen , which have disperse itself with happy irregularity , so as to bring the red brick into term of friendly companionship with the limestone ornament surround the three gable , the window , and the door - place . but the window be patch with wooden pane , and the door , I think , be like the gate -- it be never open . how it would groan and grate against the stone floor if it be ! for it be a solid , heavy , handsome door , and must once have be in the habit of shutting with a sonorous bang behind a livery lackey , who have just see he master and mistress off the grounds in a carriage and pair . but at present one might fancy the house in the early stage of a chancery suit , and that the fruit from that grand double row of walnut - tree on the right
right hand of the enclosure would fall and rot among the grass , if it be not that we hear the booming bark of dog echo from great building at the back . and now the half - wean calf that have be shelter themselves in a gorse - build hovel against the left - hand wall come out and set up a silly answer to that terrible bark , doubtless suppose that it have reference to buckets of milk . yes , the house must be inhabit , and we will see by whom ; for imagination be a license trespasser : it have no fear of dog , but may climb over wall and peep in at window with impunity . put you face to one of the glass pane in the right - hand window : what do you see ? a large open fireplace , with rusty dog in it , and a bare board floor ; at the far end , fleece of wool stack up ; in the middle of the floor , some empty corn -bag . that be the furniture of the dining - room . and what through the leave - hand window ? several clothes - horse , a pillion , a spinning - wheel , and a old box wide open and stuffe full of coloured rag . at the edge of this box there lie a great wooden doll , which , so far as mutilation be concerned , bear a strong resemblance to the finest sculpture , and especially in the total loss of its nose . near it there be a little chair , and the butt end of a boy 's leather long - lash whip . the history of the house be plain now . it be once the residence of a country squire , whose family , probably dwindl down to mere spinsterhood , get merge in the more territorial name of . it be once the Hall ; it be now the . like the life in some coast town that be once a watering - place , and be now a port , where the genteel streets be silent and grass - grow , and the dock and warehouse busy and resonant , the life at the have change its focus , and no longer radiate from the parlour , but from the kitchen and the farmyard . plenty of life there , though this be the drowsiest time of the year , just before hay - harvest ; and it be the drowsiest time of the day too , for it be close upon three by the sun , and it be half - past three by 's handsome eight - day clock . but there be always a stronger sense of life when the sun be brilliant after rain ; and now he be pour down he beams , and make sparkle among the wet straw , and light up every patch of vivid green moss on the red tile of the cow- shed , and turn even the muddy water that be hurrie along the channel to the drain into a mirror for the yellow - billed duck , who be seize the opportunity of get a drink with as much body in it as possible . there be quite a concert of noise ; the great bull - dog , chain against the stable , be throw into furious exasperation by the unwary approach of a cock too near the mouth of he kennel , and send forth a thundering bark , which be answer by two fox - hound shut up in the opposite cow - house ; the old top - knot hen , scratch with they chick among the straw , set up a sympathetic croaking as the discomfited cock join they ; a sow with she brood , all very muddy as to the leg , and curl as to the tail , throw in some deep staccato note ; we friend the calve be bleat from the home croft ; and , under all , a fine ear discernd the continuous hum of human voice . for the great barn - door be throw wide open , and man be busy there mende the harness , under the superintendence of , the " whittaw , " otherwise saddler , who entertain they with the latest gossip . it be certainly rather a unfortunate day that , the shepherd , have choose for have the whittaw , since the morning turn out so wet ; and have speak she mind pretty strongly as to the dirt which the extra number of man 's shoe bring into the house at dinnertime . indeed , she have not yet recover she equanimity on the subject , though it be now nearly three hour since dinner , and the house - floor be perfectly clean again ; as clean as everything else in that wonderful house - place , where the only chance of collect a few grains of dust would be to climb on the salt - coffer , and put you finger on the high mantel - shelf on which the glitter brass candlestick be enjoy they summer sinecure ; for at this time of year , of course , every one go to be while it be yet light , or at least light enough to discern the outline of object after you have bruise you shins against they . surely nowhere else could a oak clock - case and a oak table have get to such a polish by the hand : genuine " elbow polish , " as call it , for she thank she never have any of you varnished rubbish in she house . often take the opportunity , when she aunt 's back be turn , of look at the pleasing reflection of herself in those polished surface ,
, for the oak table be usually turn up like a screen , and be more for ornament than for use ; and she could see herself sometimes in the great round pewter dish that be range on the shelf above the long deal dinner - table , or in the hob of the grate , which always shine like jasper . everything be look at its brightest at this moment , for the sun shone right on the pewter dish , and from they reflect surface pleasant jet of light be throw on mellow oak and bright brass -- and on a still pleasanter object than these , for some of the ray fell on 's finely mould cheek , and light up she pale red hair to auburn , as she bend over the heavy household linen which she be mende for she aunt . no scene could have be more peaceful , if , who be irone a few thing that still remain from the 's wash , have not be make a frequent clinking with she iron and move to and for whenever she want it to cool ; carry the keen glance of she blue - grey eye from the kitchen to the dairy , where be make up the butter , and from the dairy to the back kitchen , where be take the pie out of the oven . do not suppose , however , that Poyser be elderly or shrewish in she appearance ; she be a good - look woman , not more than eight - and - thirty , of fair complexion and sandy hair , well - shapen , light - foot . the most conspicuous article in she attire be a ample checker linen apron , which almost cover she skirt ; and nothing could be plainer or less noticeable than she cap and gow , for there be no weakness of which she be less tolerant than feminine vanity , and the preference of ornament to utility . the family likeness between she and she niece , with the contrast between she keenness and 's seraphic gentleness of expression , might have serve a painter as a excellent suggestion for a and . they eye be just of the same colour , but a striking test of the difference in they operation be see in the demeanour of trip , the black - and - tan terrier , whenever that much -suspect dog unwarily expose himself to the freezing arctic ray of 's glance . she tongue be not less keen than she eye , and , whenever a damsel come within , seem to take up a unfinished lecture , as a barrel - organ take up a tune , precisely at the point where it have leave off . the fact that it be churning day be another reason why it be inconvenient to have the whittaw , and why , consequently , should scold the housemaid with unusual severity . to all appearance have get through she after - dinner work in a exemplary manner , have " clean herself " with great dispatch , and now come to ask , submissively , if she should sit down to she spinning till milking time . but this blameless conduct , accord to , shroude a secret indulgence of unbecoming wish , which she now drag forth and hold up to 's view with cutting eloquence . " Spinn , indeed ! it be not spin as you would be at , I will be bound , and let you have you own way . I never know you equal for gallowsness . to think of a gell of ' you age want to go and sit with half - a - dozen man ! I have ha ' be asham to let the word pass over my lip if I have be you . and you , as have be here ever since last , and I hire you at Treddle 'on stattit , without a bit of ' character -- as I say , you might be grateful to be hire in that way to a respectable place ; and you know no more of ' what belong to work when you come here than the mawkin I ' the field . as poor a two - fist thing as ever I see , you know you be . who teach you to scrub a floor , I should like to know ? why , you would leave the dirt in heap I ' the corner -- anybody 'uld think you would never be bring up among . and as for spinning , why , you have waste as much as you wage I ' the flax you have spoil learn to spin . and you have a right to feel that , and not to go about as gaping and as thoughtless as if you be behold to nobody . comb the wool for the whittaw , indeed ! that be what you would like to be do , be it ? that be the way with you -- that be the road you would all like to go , headlong to ruin . you be never easy till you have get some sweetheart as be as big a fool as yourself : you think you will be finely off when you be marry , I daresay , and have get a three - leg stool to sit on , and never a blanket to cover you , and a bit of ' oat - cake for you dinner , as three child be a - snatching at . " " I be sure I donto want t ' go wi' the whittaw , " say , whimper , and quite overcome by this picture of she future , " of and 'y we allay use to comb the wool for and at
at 's ; an' so I just ax ye . I do nto want to set eye on the whittaw again ; I wish I may never stir if I do . " " 's , indeed ! it be fine talk of ' what you do at 's . you missis there might like she floor dirt wi's whittaw for what I know . there be no know what people like --such way as I have hear of ! I never have a gell come into my house as seem to know what cleaning be ; I think people live like pig , for my part . and as to that as be dairymaid at 's before she come to I , she would ha ' leave the cheese without turn from week 's end to week 's end , and the dairy thrall , I might ha ' write my name on th'ey , when I come downstairs after my illness , as the doctor say it be inflammation -- it be a mercy I get well of it . and to think of ' you know no better , , and be here a - go I ' nine month , and not for want o ' talk to , neither -- and what be you stann there for , like a jack as be run down , instead o' get you wheel out ? you be a rare un for sit down to you work a little while after it be time to put by . " " , my iron 's twite tell ; pease put it down to warm . " the small chirruping voice that uttere this request come from a little sunny - haired girl between three and four , who , seat on a high chair at the end of the ironing table , be arduously clutch the handle of a miniature iron with she tiny fat fist , and iron rag with a assiduity that require she to put she little red tongue out as far as anatomy would allow . " cold , be it , my darling ? bless you sweet face ! " say , who be remarkable for the facility with which she could relapse from she official objurgatory to one of fondness or of friendly converse . " never mind ! mother 's do she iron now . she be go to put the ironing thing away . " " , I tould ' ike to do into de barn to , to see . " " no , no , no ; 'uld get she foot wet , " say , carry away she iron . " run into the dairy and see cousin Hetty make the butter . " " I tould ' ike a bit of ' pum -take , " rejoin , who seem to be provide with several relay of request ; at the same time , take the opportunity of she momentary leisure to put she finger into a bowl of starch , and drag it down so as to empty the contents with tolerable completeness on to the ironing sheet . " do ever anybody see the like ? " scream . Poyser , run towards the table when she eye have fall on the blue stream . " the child 's allay I ' mischief if you back 's turn a minute . what shall I do to you , you naughty , naughty gell ? " Totty , however , have descend from she chair with great swiftness , and be already in retreat towards the dairy with a sort of waddling run , and a amount of fat on the nape of she neck which make she look like the metamorphosis of a white suckling pig . the starch have be wip up by 's help , and the ironing apparatus put by , . Poyser take up she knitting which always lay ready at hand , and be the work she like best , because she could carry it on automatically as she walk to and fro . but now she come and sit down opposite , whom she look at in a meditative way , as she knit she grey worst stocking . " you look th ' image of ' you , , when you sit a - sewing . I could almost fancy it be thirty year back , and I be a little gell at home , look at as she sit at she work , after she would do the house up ; only it be a little cottage , 's , and not a big rambling house as get dirty i ' one corner as fast as you clean it in another -- but for all that , I could fancy you be you aunt , only she hair be a deal darker than yours , and she be stouter and broader I ' the shoulders . and I allay hung together , though she have such queer way , but you mother and she never could agree . ah , you mother little think as she would have a daughter just cut out after the very pattern og , and leave she a orphan , too , for to take care on , and bring up with a spoon when she be in the graveyard at . I allays say that of ' , as she would bear a pound weight any day to save anybody else carry a ounce . and she be just the same from the first of ' my remembere she ; it make no difference in she , as I could see , when she take to the , only she talk a bit different and wear a different sort of ' cap ; but she would never in she life spend a penny on herself more than keep herself decent . "
" " she be a blessed woman , " say ; " have give she a loving , self - forget nature , and he perfect it by . and she be very fond of you too , . I often hear she talk of you in the same sort of way . when she have that bad illness , and I be only eleven year old , she use to say , ' you will have a friend on earth in you , if I be take from you , for she have a kind heart , ' and I be sure I have find it so . " " I do not know how , child ; anybody 'uld be cunning to do anything for you , I think ; you be like the bird of ' th ' air , and live nobody know how . I have ha ' be glad to behave to you like a mother 's sister , if you would come and live I ' this country where there be some shelter and victual for man and beast , and folk do not live on the naked hill , like poultry a -scratching on a gravel bank . and then you might get married to some decent man , and there would be plenty ready to have you , if you would only leave off that preaching , as be ten time worse than anything you ever do . and even if you would marry , as be a poor wool - gather and 's never like to have a penny beforehand , I know you uncle 'uld help you with a pig , and very like a cow , for he be allays be good - yonatu ' to my kin , for all they be poor , and make th'ey welcome to the house ; and 'uld do for you , I will be bound , as much as ever he would do for , though she be he own niece . and there be linen in the house as I could well spare you , for I have get lot of ' sheeting and table - clothing , and towelling , as be not make up . there be a piece of ' sheeting I could give you as that squint spun -- she be a rare girl to spin , for all she squint , and the child could not abide she ; and , you know , the spinning 's go on constant , and there be new linen wove twice as fast as the old wear out . but where be the use of ' talk , if ye win to be persuade , and settle down like any other woman in she sense , i'stead of ' wear yourself out with walking and preaching , and give away every penny you get , so as you have nothing save against sickness ; and all the thing you have get I ' the world , I verily believe , 'uld go into a bundle no bigger nor a double cheese . and all because you have get notion I ' you head about religion more nor what be I ' the and the prayer - book . " " but not more than what be in the , , " say . " yes , and the too , for that matter , " rejoin , rather sharply ; " else why should not they as know best what be in the -- the parson and people as have get nothing to do but learn it -- do the same as you do ? but , for the matter of ' that , if everybody be to do like you , the world must come to a standstill ; for if everybody try to do without house and home , and with poor eating and drinking , and be allays talk as we must despise the thing of ' the world as you say , I should like to know where the pick of ' the stock , and the corn , and the best new -milk cheese 'uld have to go . everybody 'uld be want bread make of ' tail end and everybody 'uld be run after everybody else to preach to th'ey , istead o ' bring up they family , and lay by against a bad harvest . it stand to sense as that can not be the right religion . " " Nay , dear aunt , you never hear I say that all people be call to forsake they work and they family . it be quite right the land should be plough and sow , and the precious corn store , and the thing of this life care for , and right that people should rejoice in they family , and provide for they , so that this be do in the fear of the , and that they be not unmindful of the soul 's want while they be care for the body . we can all be servant of wherever we lot be cast , but he give we different sort of work , accord as he fit we for it and call we to it . I can no more help spend my life in try to do what I can for the soul of other , than you could help run if you hear little Totty cry at the other end of the house ; the voice would go to you heart , you would think the dear child be in trouble or in danger , and you could not rest without run to help she and comfort she . " " ah , " say , rise and walk towards the door , " I know it 'uld be just the same if I be to talk to you for hour . you would make
make I the same answer , at thg end . I might as well talk to the run brook and tell it to stan ' still . " the causeway outside the kitchen door be dry enough now for . Poyser to stand there quite pleasantly and see what be go on in the yard , the grey worsted stocking make a steady progress in she hand all the while . but she have not be stand there more than five minute before she come in again , and say to , in rather a flurried , awe - stricken tone , " if there be not and a - come into the yard ! I will lay my life they be come to speak about you preaching on the Green , Dinah ; it be you must answer 'em , for I be dumb . I have say enough a'ready about you bring such disgrace upo ' you uncle 's family . I would not ha ' min if you would be 's own niece -- folk must put up wi' they own kin , as they put up wi' they own nos -- it be they own flesh and blood . but to think of a niece of ' mine be cause of ' my husband 's be turn out of he farm , and I bring he no fortin but my savin 's ---- " " Nay , dear , " say gently , " you 've no cause for such fear . I have strong assurance that no evil will happen to you and my uncle and the child from anything I have do . I do not preach without direction . " " direction ! I know very well what you mean by direction , " say , knitt in a rapid and agitate manner . " when there be a bigger maggot than usual in you head you call it ' direction ' ; and then nothing can stir you -- you look like the statty of ' the outside og Treddle 'on church , a - starin ' and a - smilin' whether it be fair weather or foul . I han to common patience with you . " by this time the two gentleman have reach the paling and have get down from they horse : it be plain they mean to come in . advanc to the door to meet they , curtsy low and trembl between anger with Dinah and anxiety to conduct herself with perfect propriety on the occasion . for in those day the keenest of bucolic mind feel a whispering awe at the sight of the gentry , such as of old man feel when they stand on tiptoe to watch the gods pass by in tall human shape . " well , , how be you after this stormy morning ? " say , with he stately cordiality . " we foot be quite dry ; we shall not soil you beautiful floor . " " oh , sir , do not mention it , " say . " will you and the captain please to walk into the parlour ? " " no , indeed , thank you , , " say the captain , look eagerly round the kitchen , as if he eye be seek something it could not find . " I delight in you kitchen . I think it be the most charming room I know . I should like every farmer 's wife to come and look at it for a pattern . " " oh , you be pleased to say so , sir . pray take a seat , " say , relieve a little by this compliment and the captain 's evident good -humour , but still glance anxiously at , who , she see , be look at and advanc towards she . " Poyser be not at home , be he ? " say , seat himself where he could see along the short passage to the open dairy - door . " no , sir , he be not ; he have go to to see , the factor , about the wool . but there be I ' the barn , sir , if he would be of any use . " " no , thank you ; I will just look at the whelp and leave a message about they with you shepherd . I must come another day and see you husband ; I want to have a consultation with he about horse . do you know when he be likely to be at liberty ? " " why , sir , you can hardly miss he , except it be o's Treddle 'on market - day -- that be of a , you know . for if he be anywhere on the farm we can send for he in a minute . if we would get rid of ' the Scantland , we should have no outlying field ; and I should be glad of it , for if ever anything happen , he be sure to be go to the Scantland . thing allays happen so contrairy , if they have a chance ; and it be a unnat'ral thing to have one bit of ' you farm in one county and all the rest in another . " " ah , the Scantland would go much better with 's farm , especially as he want dairyland and you have get plenty . I think yours be the prettiest farm on the estate , though ; and do you know , Poyser , if I be go to marry and settle , I should be temp to turn you out , and do up this fine old house , and turn farmer myself . " " oh , sir , " say , rather alarme , " you would not
not like it at all . as for farming , it be put money into you pocket wi' you right hand and fetch it out wi' you leave . as fur as I can see , it be raise victual for other folk and just get a mouthful for yourself and you child as you go along . not as you would be like a poor man as want to get he bread -- you could afford to lose as much money as you like I ' far -- but it be poor fun lose money , I should think , though I understan ' it be what the great folk I ' play at more than anything . for my husband hear at market as 's eldest son have lose thousand upo ' thousand to the o's Wales , and they say my lady be go to pawn she jewel to pay for he . but you know more about that than I do , sir . but , as for farming , sir , I can to think as you would like it ; and this house -- the draught in it be enough to cut you through , and it be my opinion the floor upstairs be very rotten , and the rat I ' the cellar be beyond anything . " " why , that be a terrible picture , . I think I should be do you a service to turn you out of such a place . but there be no chance of that . I be not likely to settle for the next twenty year , till I be a stout gentleman of forty ; and my grandfather would never consent to part with such good tenant as you . " " well , sir , if he think so well of ' for a tenant I wish you could put in a word for he to allow we some new gate for the five close , for my husband be be ask and ask till he be tired , and to think of ' what he be do for the farm , and be never have a penny allow he , be the time bad or good . and as I have say to my husband often and often , I be sure if the have anything to do with it , it would not be so . not as I wish to speak disrespectful of ' they as have get the power I ' they hand , but it be more than flesh and blood ' ull bear sometimes , to be toiling and striving , and up early and down late , and hardly sleep a wink when you lie down for think as the cheese may swell , or the cow may slip they calf , or the wheat may grow green again I ' the sheaf -- and after all , at th' end of ' the year , it be like as if you would be cook a feast and have get the smell of it for you pain . " , once launch into conversation , always sai along without any check from she preliminary awe of the gentry . the confidence she felt in she own power of exposition be a motive force that overcome all resistance . " I be afraid I should only do harm instead of good , if I be to speak about the gate , , " say the captain , " though I assure you there be no man on the estate I would sooner say a word for than you husband . I know he farm be in better order than any other within ten mile of we ; and as for the kitchen , " he add , smile , " I do not believe there 's one in the kingdom to beat it . by the by , I have never see you dairy : I must see you dairy , . " " indeed , sir , it be not fit for you to go in , for 's in the middle of ' make the butter , for the churning be thrown late , and I be quite asham . " this say blush , and believe that the captain be really interested in she milk - pans , and would adjust he opinion of she to the appearance of she dairy . " oh , I have no doubt it be in capital order . take I in , " say the captain , himself lead the way , while follow . the the dairy be certainly worth look at : it be a scene to sicke for with a sort of calenture in hot and dusty street -- such coolness , such purity , such fresh fragrance of new -pressed cheese , of firm butter , of wooden vessel perpetually bath in pure water ; such soft colouring of red earthenware and creamy surface , brown wood and polish tin , grey limestone and rich orange - red rust on the iron weights and hook and hinge . but one get only a confused notion of these detail when they surround a distractingly pretty girl of seventeen , stand on little patten and rounde she dimple arm to lift a pound of butter out of the scale . blush a deep rose - colour when enter the dairy and speak to she ; but it be not at all a distressed blush , for it be inwreath with smile and dimple , and with sparkle from under long , curl , dark eyelash ; and while she aunt be discourse to he about the limited amount of milk that be to be spare for butter and cheese so long as the calf be not all wean , and a large quantity but inferior quality of milk yield by the shorthorn , which have
have be buy on experiment , together with other matters which must be interesting to a young gentleman who would one day be a landlord , toss and pat she pound of butter with quite a self - possess , coquettish air , slyly conscious that no turn of she head be lose . there be various order of beauty , cause man to make fools of themselves in various style , from the desperate to the sheepish ; but there be one order of beauty which seem make to turn the head not only of man , but of all intelligent mammal , even of woman . it be a beauty like that of kitten , or very small downy duck make gentle rippling noise with they soft bill , or baby just begin to toddle and to engage in conscious mischief -- a beauty with which you can never be angry , but that you feel ready to crush for inability to comprehend the state of mind into which it throw you . 's be that sort of beauty . she aunt , . , who profess to despise all personal attraction and intend to be the severest of mentor , continually gaze at 's charms by the sly , fascinate in spite of herself ; and after administer such a scolding as naturally flow from she anxiety to do well by she husband 's niece -- who have no mother of she own to scold she , poor thing !-- she would often confess to she husband , when they be safe out of hearing , that she firmly believe , " the naughtier the little huzzy behave , the prettier she look . " it be of little use for I to tell you that 's cheek be like a rose - petal , that dimple play about she pouting lips , that she large dark eye hide a soft roguishness under they long lash , and that she curly hair , though all push back under she round cap while she be at work , steal back in dark delicate ring on she forehead , and about she white shell - like ears ; it be of little use for I to say how lovely be the contour of she pink - and - white neckerchief , tuck into she low plum -coloured stuff bodice , or how the linen butter - make apron , with its bib , see a thing to be imitate in silk by duchess , since it fall in such charming line , or how she brown stocking and thick - so buckle sho lose all that clumsiness which they must certainly have have when empty of she foot and ankle -- of little use , unless you have see a woman who affect you as affect she beholder , for otherwise , though you might conjure up the image of a lovely woman , she would not in the least resemble that distract kittenlike maiden . I might mention all the divine charms of a bright spring day , but if you have never in you life utterly forget yourself in strain you eye after the mount lark , or in wander through the still lane when the fresh - open blossom fill they with a sacred silent beauty like that of fretted aisle , where would be the use of my descriptive catalogue ? I could never make you know what I mean by a bright spring day . 's be a spring - tide beauty ; it be the beauty of young frisking thing , round - limb , gamboll , circumvent you by a false air of innocence -- the innocence of a young star - browed calf , for example , that , be inclin for a promenade out of bounds , lead you a severe steeplechase over hedge and ditch , and only come to a stand in the middle of a bog . and they be the prettiest attitude and movement into which a pretty girl be throw in make up butter -- tossing movement that give a charming curve to the arm , and a sideward inclination of the round white neck ; little patting and roll movement with the palm of the hand , and nice adaptation and finishing which can not at all be effect without a great play of the pouting mouth and the dark eye . and then the butter itself seem to communicate a fresh charm -- it be so pure , so sweet - scent ; it be turn off the mould with such a beautiful firm surface , like marble in a pale yellow light ! moreover , be particularly clever at make up the butter ; it be the one performance of hers that she aunt allow to pass without severe criticism ; so she handle it with all the grace that belong to mastery . " I hope you will be ready for a great holiday on the thirtieth of , , " say , when he have sufficiently admire the dairy and give several improvised opinion on Swede turnip and shorthorn . " you know what be to happen then , and I shall expect you to be one of the guest who come earliest and leave latest . will you promise I you hand for two dance , ? if I do not get you promise now , I know I shall hardly have a chance , for all the smart young farmer will take care to secure you . " smile and blush , but before she could answer , . Poyser interpose , scandalize at the mere suggestion that the young squire could be exclude by any meaner partner . " indeed , sir , you be very kind to take that notice of she . and I be sure , whenever you be pleased to dance with she ,
, she will be proud and thankful , if she stand still all the rest of ' th ' evening . " " oh no , no , that would be too cruel to all the other young fellow who can dance . but you will promise I two dance , will not you ? " the captain continue , determi to make look at he and speak to he . drop the prettiest little curtsy , and steal a half - shy , half - coquettish glance at he as she say , " yes , thank you , sir . " " and you must bring all you child , you know , Poyser ; you little Totty , as well as the boy . I want all the youngest child on the estate to be there -- all those who will be fine young man and woman when I be a bald old fellow . " " oh dear , sir , that ' ull be a long time first , " say , quite overcome at the young squire 's speak so lightly of himself , and think how she husband would be interested in hear she recound this remarkable specimen of high - bear humwe . the captain be think to be " very full of he joke , " and be a great favourite throughout the estate on account of he free manners . every tenant be quite sure thing would be different when the rein get into he hand -- there be to be a millennial abundance of new gate , allowances of lime , and return of ten per cent . " but where be to - day ? " he say . " I want to see she . " " where be the little un , ? " say . " she come in here not long ago . " " I do not know . she go into the brewhouse to , I think . " the proud mother , unable to resist the temptation to show she , pass at once into the back kitchen , in search of she , not , however , without misgiving lest something should have happen to render she person and attire unfit for presentation . " and do you carry the butter to market when you have make it ? " say the to , meanwhile . " oh no , sir ; not when it be so heavy . I be not strong enough to carry it . take it on horseback . " " no , I be sure you pretty arm be never mean for such heavy weight . but you go out a walk sometimes these pleasant evening , do not you ? why do not you have a walk in the chase sometimes , now it be so green and pleasant ? I hardly ever see you anywhere except at home and at church . " " aunt do not like I to go a - walk only when I be go somewhere , " say . " but I go through the chase sometimes . " " and do not you ever go to see best , the housekeeper ? I think I see you once in the housekeeper 's room . " " it be not best , it be , the lady 's maid , as I go to see . she be teache I tent - stitch and the lace - mending . I be go to tea with she to - morrow afternoon . " the reason why there have been space for this tete - a - tete can only be know by look into the back kitchen , where have be discover rub a stray blue - bag against she nose , and in the same moment allow some liberal indigo drop to fall on she afternoon pinafore . but now she appear hold she mother 's hand -- the end of she round nose rather shiny from a recent and hurrie application of soap and water . " here she be ! " say the captain , lifte she up and set she on the low stone shelf . " have ! by the by , what be she other name ? she be not christen . " " oh , sir , we call she sadly out of she name . be she christen name . it be a name I ' 's family : he grandmother be name . but we begin with call she Lotty , and now it be get to . to be sure it be more like a name for a dog than a child . " " be a capital name . why , she look like a Totty . have she get a pocket on ? " say the captain , feel in he own waistcoat pocket . immediately with great gravity lift up she frock , and show a tiny pink pocket at present in a state of collapse . " it det notin ' in it , " she say , as she look down at it very earnestly . " no ! what a pity ! such a pretty pocket . well , I think I have get some thing in mine that will make a pretty jingle in it . yes ! I declare I have get five little round silver thing , and hear what a pretty noise they make in 's pink pocket . " here he shook the pocket with the five sixpence in it , and show she tooth and wrinkle she nose in great glee ; but , divine that there be nothing more to be get by staying , she jump off the shelf and run away to jingle she pocket in the hearing of , while she mother call after she , " oh for shame , you naughty gell
gell ! not to thank the captain for what he be give you I be sure , sir , it be very kind of you ; but she be spoil shameful ; she father will not have she say nay in anything , and there be no managing she . it be be the youngest , and th ' only gell . " " oh , she be a funny little fatty ; I would not have she different . but I must be go now , for I suppose the rector be wait for I . " with a " good - bye , " a bright glance , and a bow to leave the dairy . but he be mistaken in imagining himself wait for . the rector have be so much interested in he conversation with that he would not have choose to close it earlier ; and you shall hear now what they have be say to each other . a Vocation Dinah , who have risen when the gentleman come in , but still keep hold of the sheet she be mende , curtsy respectfully when she see look at she and advanc towards she . he have never yet speak to she , or stand face to face with she , and she first thought , as she eye meet he , be , " what a well - favour countenance ! oh that the good seed might fall on that soil , for it would surely flourish . " the agreeable impression must have be mutual , for bow to she with a benignant deference , which would have be equally in place if she have be the most dignified lady of he acquaintance . " you be only a visitor in this neighbourhood , I think ? " be he first word , as he seat himself opposite to she . " no , sir , I come from , in . but my aunt be very kind , want I to have rest from my work there , because I have be ill , and she invite I to come and stay with she for a while . " " ah , I remember very well ; I once have occasion to go there . it be a dreary bleak place . they be build a cotton -mill there ; but that be many year ago now . I suppose the place be a good deal change by the employment that mill must have bring . " " it be change so far as the mill have bring people there , who get a livelihood for themselves by work in it , and make it better for the tradesfolk . I work in it myself , and have reason to be grateful , for thereby I have enough and to spare . but it be still a bleak place , as you say , sir -- very different from this country . " " you have relation live there , probably , so that you be attach to the place as you home ? " " I have a aunt there once ; she bring I up , for I be a orphan . but she be take away seven year ago , and I have no other kindred that I know of , besides my , who be very good to I , and would have I come and live in this country , which to be sure be a good land , wherein they eat bread without scarceness . but I be not free to leave , where I be first plan , and have grow deep into it , like the small grass on the hill - top . " " ah , I daresay you have many religious friend and companion there ; you be a -- a , I think ? " " yes , my aunt at belong to the , and I have cause to be thankful for the privileges I have have thereby from my earliest childhood . " " and have you be long in the habit of preaching ? for I understand you preach at last night . " " I first take to the work four year since , when I be twenty - one . " " you sanction woman 's preach , then ? " " it do not forbid they , sir , when they have a clear call to the work , and when they ministry be own by the conversion of sinner and the strengthening of 's people . , as you may have hear about , be the first woman to preach in the Society , I believe , before she be marry , when she be ; and approve of she undertake the work . she have a great gift , and there be many other now liive who be precious fellow - helper in the work of the ministry . I understand there be be voice raise against it in the Society of late , but I can not but think they counsel will come to nuy . it be not for man to make channel for 's , as they make channel for the watercourse , and say , ' Flow here , but flow not there . ' " " but do not you find some danger among you people -- I do not mean to say that it be so with you , far from it -- but do not you find sometimes that both man and woman fancy themselves channel for 's , and be quite mistaken , so that they set about a work for which they be unfit and bring holy thing into contempt ? " " doubtless it be so sometimes ; for there have be evil - doer among we who have seek to deceive the breth , and some there be who deceive they
they own self . but we be not without discipline and correction to put a check upon these thing . there be a very strict order keep among we , and the breth and sister watch for each other 's soul as they that must give account . they do not go every one he own way and say , ' be I my brother 's keeper ? ' " " but tell I -- if I may ask , and I be really interested in know it -- how you first come to think of preaching ? " " indeed , sir , I do not think of it at all -- I would be use from the time I be sixteen to talk to the little child , and teach they , and sometimes I have have my heart enlarge to speak in class , and be much draw out in prayer with the sick . but I have feel no call to preach , for when I be not greatly wrotch upon , I be too much give to sit still and keep by myself . it seem as if I could sit silent all day long with the thought of overflow my soul -- as the pebble lie bath in the . for thought be so great -- be not they , sir ? they seem to lie upon we like a deep flood ; and it be my besetment to forget where I be and everything about I , and lose myself in thought that I could give no account of , for I could neither make a begin nor end of they in word . that be my way as long as I can remember ; but sometimes it seem as if speech come to I without any will of my own , and word be give to I that come out as the tear come , because we heart be full and we can not help it . and those be always time of great blessing , though I have never think it could be so with I before a congregation of people . but , sir , we be lead on , like the little child , by a way that we know not . I be call to preach quite suddenly , and since then I have never be leave in doubt about the work that be laid upon I . " " but tell I the circumstance -- just how it be , the very day you begin to preach . " " it be one I walk with brother , who be a aged man , one of the local preacher , all the way to - -- that be a village where the people get they liive by work in the lead - mine , and where there be no church nor preacher , but they live like sheep without a shepherd . it be better than twelve mile from , so we set out early in the morning , for it be summertime ; and I have a wonderful sense of the love as we walk over the hill , where there be no tree , you know , sir , as there be here , to make the sky look smaller , but you see the heaven stretch out like a tent , and you feel the everlasting arm around you . but before we get to , brother be seize with a dizziness that make he afraid of falling , for he overwork himself sadly , at he year , in watch and pray , and walk so many mile to speak the , as well as carry on he trade of linen - weave . and when we get to the village , the people be expect he , for he would appoint the time and the place when he be there before , and such of they as care to hear the of Life be assemble on a spot where the cottage be thickest , so as other might be draw to come . but he feel as he could not stand up to preach , and he be force to lie down in the first of the cottage we come to . so I go to tell the people , think we would go into one of the house , and I would read and pray with they . but as I pass along by the cottage and see the aged and trembling woman at the door , and the hard look of the man , who seem to have they eye no more fill with the sight of the morning than if they have be dumb oxen that never look up to the sky , I feel a great movement in my soul , and I tremble as if I be shake by a strong spirit enter into my weak body . and I go to where the little flock of people be gather together , and step on the low wall that be build against the green hillside , and I speak the word that be give to I abundantly . and they all come round I out of all the cottage , and many wept over they sins , and have since be join to the . that be the beginning of my preaching , sir , and I have preach ever since . " have let she work fall during this narrative , which she utter in she usual simple way , but with that sincere articulate , thrill treble by which she always master she audience . she stoop now to gather up she sewing , and then go on with it as before . be deeply interested . he say to himself , " he must be a miserable prig who would act the pedagogue here : one might as well go and lecture the tree for
for grow in they own shape . " " and you never feel any embarrassment from the sense of you youth -- that you be a lovely young woman on whom man 's eye be fix ? " he say aloud . " no , I have no room for such feeling , and I do not believe the people ever take notice about that . I think , sir , when make he presence feel through we , we be like the burn bush : Mose never take any heed what sort of bush it be -- he only see the brightness of the . I have preach to as rough ignorant people as can be in the villag about -- men that look very hard and wild -- but they never say a uncivil word to I , and often thanke I kindly as they make way for I to pass through the midst of they . " " that I can believe -- that I can well believe , " say , emphatically . " and what do you think of you hearer last night , now ? do you find they quiet and attentive ? " " very quiet , sir , but I see no sign of any great work upon they , except in a young girl name , towards whom my heart year greatly , when my eye first fall on she blooming youth , give up to folly and vanity . I have some private talk and prayer with she afterwards , and I trust she heart be touch . but I have notice that in these villag where the people lead a quiet life among the green pasture and the still water , till the ground and ten the cattle , there be a strange deadness to the , as different as can be from the great town , like Leed , where I once go to visit a holy woman who preach there . it be wonderful how rich be the harvest of soul up those high - walle street , where you seem to walk as in a prison - yard , and the ear be deafen with the sound of worldly toil . I think maybe it be because the promise be sweeter when this life be so dark and weary , and the soul get more hungry when the body be ill at ease . " " why , yes , we farm - labourer be not easily rouse . they take life almost as slowly as the sheep and cow . but we have some intelligent workman about here . I daresay you know the ; , by the by , be a . " " yes , I know Seth well , and he brother Adam a little . be a gracious young man --sincere and without offence ; and be like the patriarch , for he great skill and knowledge and the kindness he show to he brother and he parent . " " perhaps you do not know the trouble that have just happen to they ? they father , , be drown in the last night , not far from he own door . I be go now to see . " " ah , they poor aged mother ! " say , drop she hand and look before she with pitying eye , as if she see the object of she sympathy . " she will mourn heavily , for have tell I she be of a anxious , trouble heart . I must go and see if I can give she any help . " as she rise and be begin to fold up she work , , have exhaust all plausible pretext for remain among the milk - pans , come out of the dairy , follow by . now rise also , and , advanc towards , hold out he hand , and say , " good - bye . I hear you be go away soon ; but this will not be the last visit you will pay you aunt -- so we shall meet again , I hope . " he cordiality towards set all 's anxiety at rest , and she face be brighter than usual , as she say , " I have never ask after and the , sir ; I hope they be as well as usual . " " yes , thank you , , except that miss have one of she bad headach to - day . by the by , we all like that nice cream - cheese you send we -- my mother especially . " " I be very glad , indeed , sir . it be but seldom I make one , but I remember be fond of th'ey . please to give my duty to she , and to and . they have never be to look at my poultry this long while , and I have get some beautiful speckle chicken , black and white , as might like to have some of amongst hers . " " well , I will tell she ; she must come and see they . good - bye , " say the rector , mount he horse . " just ride slowly on , , " say , mount also . " I will overtake you in three minute . I be only go to speak to the shepherd about the whelp . good - bye , ; tell you husband I shall come and have a long talk with he soon . " curtsy duly , and watch the two horse until they have disappear from the yard , amidst great excitement on the part of the pig and the poultry , and under the furious indignation of the bull - dog , who perform a Pyrrhic dance , that every moment seem to threat the breaking
breaking of he chain . delighte in this noisy exit ; it be a fresh assurance to she that the farm - yard be well guard , and that no loiterer could enter unobserved ; and it be not until the gate have close behind the captain that she turn into the kitchen again , where stand with she bonnet in she hand , wait to speak to she aunt , before she set out for 's cottage . , however , though she notice the bonnet , defer remark on it until she have disburden herself of she surprise at 's behaviour . " why , Irwine be not angry , then ? what do he say to you , ? do not he scold you for preaching ? " " no , he be not at all angry ; he be very friendly to I . I be quite draw out to speak to he ; I hardly know how , for I have always think of he as a worldly . but he countenance be as pleasant as the morning sunshine . " " pleasant ! and what else do y's expect to find he but pleasant ? " say impatiently , resum she knitting . " I should think he countenance be pleasant indeed ! and he a gentleman bear , and 's get a mother like a picter . you may go the country round and not find such another woman turn sixty - six . it be summat - like to see such a man as that I ' the desk of a ! as I say to , it be like look at a full crop of ' wheat , or a pasture with a fine dairy of ' cow in it ; it make you think the world 's comfortable - like . but as for such creaturs as you Methodiss run after , I ' as soon go to look at a lot of ' bare - rib runt on a common . Fine folk they be to tell you what be right , as look as if they would never taste nothing better than bacon - sword and sour - cake I ' they life . but what do say to you about that fool 's trick of ' preach on the Green ? " " he only say he would hear of it ; he do not seem to feel any displeasure about it . but , dear aunt , do not think any more about that . he tell I something that I be sure will cause you sorrow , as it do I . be drown last night in the , and I be think that the aged mother will be greatly in need of comfort . perhaps I can be of use to she , so I have fetch my bonnet and be go to set out . " " dear heart , dear heart ! but you must have a cup of ' tea first , child , " say , fall at once from the key of with five sharps to the frank and genial . " the kettle 's boiling -- we will have it ready in a minute ; and the young un ' ull be in and want theirs directly . I be quite willing you should go and see th' old woman , for you be one as be allays welcome in trouble , or no Methodist ; but , for the matter of ' that , it be the flesh and blood folk be make on as make the difference . some cheese be make o ' skim milk and some of ' new milk , and it be no matter what you call th'ey , you may tell which be which by the look and the smell . but as to , he be better out of ' the way nor in -- ' I for say so -- for he be do little this ten year but make trouble for they as belong to he ; and I think it 'uld be well for you to take a little bottle of ' rum for th ' old woman , for I daresay she be get never a drop o' nothing to comfort she inside . sit down , child , and be easy , for you sha not stir out till you have have a cup of ' tea , and so I tell you . " during the latter part of this speech , . Poyser have be reach down the tea - thing from the shelf , and be on she way towards the pantry for the loaf ( follow close by , who have make she appearance on the rattling of the tea-cup ) , when come out of the dairy relieive she tired arm by lift they up , and clasp she hand at the back of she head . " , " she say , rather languidly , " just run out and get I a bunch of dock - leave : the butter 's ready to pack up now . " " d' you hear what be happen , ? " say she aunt . " no ; how should I hear anything ? " be the answer , in a pettish tone . " not as you would care much , I daresay , if you do hear ; for you be too feather - head to mind if everybody be dead , so as you could stay upstairs a - dress yourself for two hour by the clock . but anybody besides yourself 'uld mind about such thing happen to they as think a deal more of you than you deserve . but and all he kin might be drownd for what you would care -- you would be perk at the glass the next minute . " " --
-- drown ? " say , let she arm fall and look rather bewildered , but suspect that she aunt be as usual exaggerating with a didactic purpose . " no , my dear , no , " say kindly , for . Poyser have pass on to the pantry without deign more precise information . " . 's father , the old man , be drown . he be drown last night in the . have just tell I about it . " " oh , how dreadful ! " say , look serious , but not deeply affect ; and as now enter with the dock - leave , she take they silently and return to the dairy without ask further question . 's she adjust the broad leave that set off the pale fragrant butter as the primrose be set off by its nest of green I be afraid be think a great deal more of the look have cast at she than of and he trouble . Bright , admir glance from a handsome young gentleman with white hand , a gold chain , occasional regimental , and wealth and grandeur immeasurable -- those be the warm ray that set poor 's heart vibrat and play its little foolish tune over and over again . we do not hear that 's statue give forth its melody at all under the rushing of the mightiest wind , or in response to any other influence divine or human than certain short - liv sunbeam of morning ; and we must learn to accommodate ourselves to the discovery that some of those cunningly fashioned instrument call human soul have only a very limited range of music , and will not vibrate in the least under a touch that fill other with tremulous rapture or quiver agony . be quite use to the thought that people like to look at she . she be not blind to the fact that young of come to on a afternoon on purpose that he might see she ; and that he would have make much more decided advance if she uncle Poyser , think but lightly of a young man whose father 's land be so foul as old 's , have not forbide she aunt to encourage he by any civility . she be aware , too , that , the gardener at the chase , be over head and ears in love with she , and have lately make unmistakable avowal in luscious strawberry and hyperbolical pea . she know still better , that -- tall , upright , clever , brave Adam -- who carry such authority with all the people round about , and whom she uncle be always delighted to see of a evening , say that " kknow a fine sight more of ' the natur of ' thing than those as think themselves he better " -- she know that this Adam , who be often rather stern to other people and not much give to run after the lass , could be make to turn pale or red any day by a word or a look from she . 's sphere of comparison be not large , but she could not help perceive that be " something like " a man ; always know what to say about thing , could tell she uncle how to prop the hovel , and have mende the churn in no time ; knew , with only look at it , the value of the chestnut - tree that be blow down , and why the damp come in the wall , and what they must do to stop the rat ; and write a beautiful hand that you could read off , and could do figure in he head -- a degree of accomplishment totally unknown among the richest farmer of that countryside . not at all like that slouch , who , when she once walk with he all the way from to , have only broken silence to remark that the grey goose have begin to lay . and as for , the gardener , he be a sensible man enough , to be sure , but he be knock - knee , and have a queer sort of sing - song in he talk ; moreover , on the most charitable supposition , he must be far on the way to forty . be quite certain she uncle want she to encourage , and would be pleased for she to marry he . for those be time when there be no rigid demarcation of rank between the farmer and the respectable artisan , and on the home hearth , as well as in the public house , they might be see take they jug of ale together ; the farmer have a latent sense of capital , and of weight in parish affair , which sustain he under he conspicuous inferiority in conversation . be not a frequenter of public house , but he like a friendly chat over he own home - brew ; and though it be pleasant to lay down the law to a stupid neighbour who have no notion how to make the best of he farm , it be also a agreeable variety to learn something from a clever fellow like . accordingly , for the last three year -- ever since he have superintend the building of the new barn -- have always be make welcome at the , especially of a winter evening , when the whole family , in patriarchal fashion , master and mistress , child and servants , be assemble in that glorious kitchen , at well - graduate distances from the blazing fire . and for the last two year , at least , have be in the habit of hear she uncle say , " may be work for wage now , but he
he will be a master- man some day , as sure as I sit in this chair . be in the right of n't to want he to go partner and marry he daughter , if it be true what they say ; the woman as marry he ' ull have a good take , beot Lady day or , " a remark which always follow up with she cordial assent . " ah , " she would say , " it be all very fine have a ready - make rich man , but mayhappen he will be a ready - make fool ; and it be no use fill you pocket full of ' money if you have get a hole in the corner . it will do you no good to sit in a spring - cart of ' you own , if you have get a soft to drive you : he will soon turn you over into the ditch . I allays say I have never marry a man as have get no brain ; for where be the use of a woman have brain of she own if she be tackle to a geck as everybody be a - laugh at ? she might as well dress herself fine to sit back'ard on a donkey . " these expressions , though figurative , sufficientely indicate the bent of 's mind with regard to ; and though she and she husband might have view the subject differently if have be a daughter of they own , it be clear that they would have welcome the match with for a penniless niece . for what could have be but a servant elsewhere , if she uncle have not take she in and bring she up as a domestic help to she aunt , whose health since the birth of have not be equal to more positive labour than the superintendence of servants and child ? but have never give any steady encouragement . even in the moment when she be most thoroughly conscious of he superiority to she other admirer , she have never bring herself to think of accept he . she like to feel that this strong , skilful , keen - eyed man be in she power , and would have be indignant if he have show the least sign of slipping from under the yoke of she coquettish tyranny and attach himself to the gentle , who would have be grateful enough for the most trifling notice from he . " , indeed ! such a sallow - faced girl : if she put on a bit of pink ribbon , she look as yellow as a crow - flower and she hair be as straight as a hank of cotton . " and always when stay away for several week from the , and otherwise make some show of resistance to he passion as a foolish one , take care to entice he back into the net by little air of meekness and timidity , as if she be in trouble at he neglect . but as to marry , that be a very different affair ! there be nothing in the world to tempt she to do that . she cheek never grow a shade deeper when he name be mention ; she feel no thrill when she see he pass along the causeway by the window , or advanc towards she unexpectedly in the footpath across the meadow ; she feel nothing , when he eye rest on she , but the cold triumph of know that he love she and would not care to look at . he could no more stir in she the emotion that make the sweet intoxication of young love than the mere picture of a sun can stir the spring sap in the subtle fibre of the plant . she see he as he be -- a poor man with old parent to keep , who would not be able , for a long while to come , to give she even such luxuries as she share in she uncle 's house . and 's dream be all of luxury : to sit in a carpet parlour , and always wear white stocking ; to have some large beautiful ear - ring , such as were all the fashion ; to have lace round the top of she gown , and something to make she handkerchief smell nice , like 's when she draw it out at church ; and not to be oblige to get up early or be scold by anybody . she think , if have be rich and could have give she these thing , she love he well enough to marry he . but for the last few week a new influence have come over Hetty -- vague , atmospheric , shape itself into no self - confess hope or prospect , but produce a pleasant narcotic effect , make she tread the ground and go about she work in a sort of dream , unconscious of weight or effort , and show she all thing through a soft , liquid veil , as if she be live not in this solid world of brick and stone , but in a beatified world , such as the sun light up for we in the water . Hetty have become aware that would take a good deal of trouble for the chance of see she ; that he always place himself at church so as to have the fullest view of she both sitting and standing ; that he be constantly finding reason for call at the , and always would contrive to say something for the sake of make she speak to he and look at he . the poor child no more conceive at present the idea that the young squire could ever be she lover than a
a baker 's pretty daughter in the crowd , whom a young emperor distinguishes by a imperial but admir smile , conceive that she shall be make empress . but the baker 's daughter go home and dream of the handsome young emperor , and perhaps weigh the flour amiss while she be think what a heavenly lot it must be to have he for a husband . and so , poor have get a face and a presence haunt she wake and sleep dream ; bright , soft glance have penetrat she , and suffuse she life with a strange , happy languor . the eyes that shed those glance be really not half so fine as 's , which sometimes look at she with a sad , beseech tenderness , but they have find a ready medium in 's little silly imagination , whereas 's could get no entrance through that atmosphere . for three week , at least , she inward life have consist of little else than live through in memory the look and word have direct towards she -- of little else than recall the sensation with which she hear he voice outside the house , and see he enter , and become conscious that he eye be fix on she , and then become conscious that a tall figure , look down on she with eye that seem to touch she , be come nearer in clothes of beautiful texture with a odour like that of a flower - garden borne on the evening breeze . Foolish thought ! but all this happen , you must remember , nearly sixty year ago , and be quite uneducated -- a simple farmer 's girl , to whom a gentleman with a white hand be dazzl as a Olympian god . until to - day , she have never look farther into the future than to the next time would come to the farm , or the next when she should see he at church ; but now she think , perhaps he would try to meet she when she go to the to - morrow -- and if he should speak to she , and walk a little way , when nobody be by ! that have never happen yet ; and now she imagination , instead of retrace the past , be busy fashione what would happen to - morrow -- whereabout in the chase she should see he come towards she , how she should put she new rose -coloured ribbon on , which he have never see , and what he would say to she to make she return he glance -- a glance which she would be live through in she memory , over and over again , all the rest of the day . in this state of mind , how could Hetty give any feeling to 's trouble , or think much about poor old Thias be drown ? young soul , in such pleasant delirium as hers be as unsympathetic as butterfly sipp nectar ; they be isolate from all appeal by a barrier of dream -- by invisible look and impalpable arm . while 's hand be busy pack up the butter , and she head fill with these picture of the morrow , , ride by 's side towards the valley of the , have also certain indistinct anticipation , run as a undercurrent in he mind while he be listen to 's account of -- indistinct , yet strong enough to make he feel rather conscious when suddenly say , " what fascinate you so in 's dairy , ? have you become a amateur of damp quarry and skimm dish ? " yoArthu know the rector too well to suppose that a clever invention would be of any use , so he say , with he accustom frankness , " no , I go to look at the pretty butter- maker . she be a perfect Hebe ; and if I be a artist , I would paint she . it be amazing what pretty girl one see among the farmer ' daughter , when the man be such clown . that common , round , red face one see sometimes in the man -- all cheek and no feature , like 's -- come out in the woman of the famuly as the most charme phiz imaginable . " " well , I have no objection to you contemplating Hetty in a artistic light , but I must not have you feed she vanity and fill she little noddle with the notion that she be a great beauty , attractive to fine gentleman , or you will spoil she for a poor man 's wife -- honest 's , for example , whom I have see bestow soft glance on she . the little puss seem already to have air enough to make a husband as miserable as it be a law of nature for a quiet man to be when he marry a beauty . Apropo of marrying , I hope we friend Adam will get settled , now the poor old man 's gone . he will only have he mother to keep in future , and I have a notion that there be a kindness between he and that nice modest girl , , from something that fall from old one day when I be talk to he . but when I mention the subject to he look uneasy and turn the conversation . I suppose the love - make do not run smooth , or perhaps hang back till he be in a better position . he have independence of spirit enough for two man -- rather a excess of pride , if anything . " " that would be a capital match for . he would slip into old 's shoe and make a fine thing of that build
build business , I will answer for he . I should like to see he well settle in this parish ; he would be ready then to act as my grand - vizier when I want one . we could plan no end of repair and improvement together . I have never see the girl , though , I think -- at least I have never look at she . " " look at she next at church -- she sit with she father on the left of the reading - desk . you need not look quite so much at then . when I have make up my mind that I can not afford to buy a tempting dog , I take no notice of he , because if he take a strong fancy to I and look lovingly at I , the struggle between arithmetic and inclination might become unpleasantly severe . I pique myself on my wisdom there , , and as a old fellow to whom wisdom have become cheap , I bestow it upon you . " " thank you . it may stand I in good stead some day though I do not know that I have any present use for it . bless I ! how the brook have overflow . suppose we have a canter , now we be at the bottom of the hill . " that be the great advantage of dialogue on horseback ; it can be merge any minute into a trot or a canter , and one might have escape from himself in the saddle . the two friend be free from the necessity of further conversation till they pull up in the lane behind 's cottage . at five o'clock come downstairs with a large key in she hand : it be the key of the chamber where she husband lay dead . throughout the day , except in she occasional outburst of wailing grief , she have be in incessant movement , perform the initial duty to she dead with the awe and exactitude that belong to religious rite . she have brotch out she little store of bleach linen , which she have for long year keep in reserve for this supreme use . it seem but yesterday -- that time so many midsummer ago , when she have tell Thias where this linen lay , that he might be sure and reach it out for she when she die , for she be the elder of the two . then there have be the work of cleansing to the strictest purity every object in the sacred chamber , and of remove from it every trace of common daily occupation . the small window , which have hithertoo freely let in the frosty moonlight or the warm summer sunrise on the work man 's slumber , must now be darken with a fair white sheet , for this be the sleep which be as sacr under the bare rafter as in ceiled house . have even mende a long - neglected and unnoticeable rent in the checker bit of bed -curtain ; for the moment be few and precious now in which she would be able to do the smallest office of respect or love for the still corpse , to which in all she thought she attribute some consciousness . we dead be never dead to we until we have forget they : they can be injure by we , they can be wound ; they know all we penitence , all we ach sense that they place be empty , all the kiss we bestow on the smallest relic of they presence . and the aged peasant woman most of all believe that she dead be conscious . decent burial be what have be think of for herself through year of thrift , with a indistinct expectation that she should know when she be be carry to the churchyard , follow by she husband and she son ; and now she feel as if the greatest work of she life be to be do in see that be bury decently before she -- under the white thorn , where once , in a dream , she have think she lay in the coffin , yet all the while see the sunshine above and smelt the white blossom that be so thick upon the thorn the she go to be church after be bear . but now she have do everything that could be do to - day in the chamber of death -- have do it all herself , with some aid from she son in lifting , for she would let no one be fetch to help she from the village , not be fond of female neighbour generally ; and she favourite Dolly , the old housekeeper at 's , who have come to condeal with she in the morning as soon as she hear of 's death , be too dim - sight to be of much use . she have lock the door , and now hold the key in she hand , as she throw herself wearily into a chair that stand out of it be place in the middle of the house floor , where in ordinary time she would never have consent to sit . the kitchen have have none of she attention that day ; it be soiled with the tread of muddy shoe and untidy with clothes and other object out of place . but what at another time would have be intolerable to 's habits of order and cleanliness seem to she now just what should be : it be right that thing should look strange and disorder and wretch , now the old man have come to he end in that sad way ; the kitchen ought not to look as if nothing have happen . , overcome with the agitation and
and exertion of the day after he night of hard work , have fall asleep on a bench in the workshop ; and be in the back kitchen make a fire of stick that he might get the kettle to boil , and persuade he mother to have a cup of tea , a indulgence which she rarely allow herself . there be no one in the kitchen when enter and throw herself into the chair . she look round with blank eye at the dirt and confusion on which the bright afternoon 's sun shone dismally ; it be all of a piece with the sad confusion of she mind -- that confusion which belong to the first hour of a sudden sorrow , when the poor human soul be like one who have be deposit sleep among the ruin of a vast city , and wake up in dreary amazement , not know whether it be the growing or the die day -- not know why and whence come this illimitable scene of desolation , or why he too find himself desolate in the midst of it . at another time 's first thought would have be , " where be ? " but the sudden death of she husband have restore he in these hour to that first place in she affections which he have hold six - and - twenty year ago . she have forget he fault as we forget the sorrow of we departed childhood , and think of nothing but the young husband 's kindness and the old man 's patience . she eye continue to wander blankly until come in and begin to remove some of the scattered thing , and clear the small round deal table that he might set out he mother 's tea upon it . " what be goin ' to do ? " she say , rather peevishly . " I want thee to have a cup of tea , mother , " answer , tenderly . " it will do thee good ; and I will put two or three of these thing away , and make the house look more comfortable . " " comfortable ! how canst talk of ' ma'in ' thing comfortable ? let a - be , let a - be . there be no comfort for I no more , " she go on , the tear come when she begin to speak , " now thy poor feyther 's gone , as I and wash for and mende , a ' get 's victual for he for thirty ' ear , a ' he allays so pleased wig iverything I do for he , a ' use to be so handy a ' do the job for I when I war ill a ' cumber wi' th ' babby , a ' make I the posset a ' bring it upstairs as proud as could be , a ' carry the lad as war as heavy as two child for five mile a ' ne 'er grumble , all the way to , ' cause I want to go a ' see my sister , as war dead an's go the very next as e'er come . a ' he to be drownd in the brook as we pass o 'er the day we war marry a ' come home together , an' he would make they lot of ' shelf for I to put my plate a ' thing on , a ' show them I as proud as could be , ' cause he know' I should be pleased . a ' he war to die a ' I not to know , but to be a - sleepin ' I ' my bed , as if I care to nuy about it . Eh ! a ' I to live to see that ! a ' we as war young folk once , a ' think we should do rarely when we war marry . let a - be , lad , let a - be ! I wonna ha ' no tay . I carena if I ne 'er ate nor drink no more . when one end of ' th ' bridge tumble down , where 's th ' use of ' th ' other stannin ' ? I may be well die , a ' foller my old man . there be no knowin ' but he will want I . " here break from word into moan , sway herself backward and forward on she chair . , always timid in he behaviour towards he mother , from the sense that he have no influence over she , feel it be useless to attempt to persuade or soothe she till this passion be past ; so he contente himself with ten the back kitchen fire and fold up he father 's clothes , which have be hang out to dry since morning -- afraid to move about in the room where he mother be , lest he should irritate she further . but after have be rock herself and moan for some minute , she suddenly pause and say aloud to herself , " I will go a ' see arter Adam , for I can to think where he be get ; an' I want he to go upstairs wi' I afore it be dark , for the minute to look at the corpse be like the meltin ' snow . " overhear this , and come into the kitchen again , as he mother rise from she chair , he say , " 's asleep in the workshop , mother . Thee ' dst better not wake he . he be o'erwrotch with work and trouble . " " wake he ? who be a - goin ' to wake he ? I shan to wake he wi's lookin ' at
at he . I han to see the lad this two hour -- I would welly forgot as he would e'er grow up from a babby when 's feyther carry he . " be seat on a rough bench , he head support by he arm , which rest from the shoulder to the elbow on the long planing - table in the middle of the workshop . it seem as if he have sit down for a few minute ' rest and have fall asleep without slipp from he first attitude of sad , fatigue thought . he face , unwashed since yesterday , look pallid and clammy ; he hair be toss shaggily about he forehead , and he close eye have the sunken look which follow upon watch and sorrow . he brow be knit , and he whole face have a expression of weariness and pain . be evidently uneasy , for he sit on he haunch , rest he nose on he master 's stretch - out leg , and divide the time between lick the hand that hang listlessly down and glance with a listen air towards the door . the poor dog be hungry and restless , but would not leave he master , and be wait impatiently for some change in the scene . it be owe to this feeling on Gyp's part that , when come into the workshop and advanc towards as noiselessly as she could , she intention not to awake he be immediately defeat ; for Gyp's excitement be too great to find vent in anything short of a sharp bark , and in a moment open he eye and see he mother stand before he . it be not very unlike he dream , for he sleep have be little more than live through again , in a fevere delirious way , all that have happene since daybreak , and he mother with she fretful grief be present to he through it all . the chief difference between the reality and the vision be that in he dream be continually come before he in bodily presence -- strangely mingl herself as a actor in scene with which she have nothing to do . she be even by the ; she make he mother angry by come into the house ; and he meet she with she smart clothes quite wet through , as he walk in the rain to , to tell the coroner . but wherever Hetty come , he mother be sure to follow soon ; and when he open he eye , it be not at all startling to see she stand near he . " Eh , my lad , my lad ! " Lisbeth burst out immediately , she wail impulse return , for grief in its freshness feel the need of associate its loss and its lament with every change of scene and incident , " thee 'st get nobody now but thy old mother to torment thee and be a burden to thee . thy poor feyther ' ull ne 'er anger thee no more ; a ' thy mother may 's well go arter he -- the sooner the better -- for I be no good to nobody now . one old coat ' ull do to patch another , but it be good for nuy else . Thee ' dst like to ha ' a wife to mmend thy clothes an's get thy victual , better nor thy old mother . An' I shall be notch but cumber , a -sittin ' I ' th ' chimney - corner . ( Adam wince and move uneasily ; he dread , of all thing , to hear he mother speak of . ) but if thy feyther have lived , he would ne 'er ha ' want I to go to make room for another , for he could no more ha ' do wi'out I nor one side of ' the scissar can do wi'out th ' other . Eh , we should ha ' be both fling away together , a ' then I should na ha ' see this day , a ' one buryin ' 'uld ha ' do for we both . " here pause , but sit in pained silence -- he could not speak otherwise than tenderly to he mother to - day , but he could not help be irritate by this plaint . it be not possible for poor to know how it affect any more than it be possible for a wounded dog to know how he moan affect the nerve of he master . like all complain woman , she complain in the expectation of be soothe , and when say nothing , she be only prompt to complain more bitterly . " I know thee couldst do better wi'out I , for thee couldst go where thee likedst a ' marry they as thee likedst . but I do nto want to say thee nay , let thee bring home who thee wut ; I would ne 'er open my lip to find faut , for when folk be old a ' of ' no use , they may think theirsen well off to get the bit a ' the sup , though they 'n to swallow ill word with i't . a ' if thee 'st set thy heart on a lass as will bring thee nuy and waste all , when thee mightst ha ' they as 'uld make a man on thee , I will say nuy , now thy feyther 's dead a ' drownd , for I be no better nor a old haft when the blade 's gone . " , unable to bear this any longer , rise silently from the bench and walk out of the workshop into the kitchen . but follow he . " Thee wutna go upstairs
upstairs a ' see thy feyther then ? I and do everythin ' now , a ' he would like thee to go a ' look at he , for he war allays so pleased when thee wast mild to he . " turn round at once and say , " yes , mother ; let we go upstairs . come , Seth , let we go together . " they go upstairs , and for five minute all be silence . then the key be turn again , and there be a sound of footstep on the stair . but do not come down again ; he be too weary and worn - out to encounter more of he mother 's querulous grief , and he go to rest on he bed . no sooner enter the kitchen and sit down than she throw she apron over she head , and begin to cry and moan and rock herself as before . thought , " she will be quieter by and by , now we have be upstairs " ; and he go into the back kitchen again , to tend he little fire , hope that he should presently induce she to have some tea . have be rock herself in this way for more than five minute , give a low moan with every forward movement of she body , when she suddenly feel a hand place gently on hers , and a sweet treble voice say to she , " dear sister , the have send I to see if I can be a comfort to you . " pause , in a listening attitude , without remove she apron from she face . the voice be strange to she . could it be she sister 's spirit come back to she from the dead after all those year ? she tremble and da not look . Dinah , believe that this pause of be in itself a relief for the sorrowing woman , say no more just yet , but quietly take off she bonnet , and then , motion silence to , who , on hear she voice , have come in with a beat heart , laid one hand on the back of 's chair and lean over she , that she might be aware of a friendly presence . slowly draw down she apron , and timidly she open she dim dark eye . she see nothing at first but a face -- a pure , pale face , with loving grey eye , and it be quite unknown to she . she wonder increase ; perhaps it be a angel . but in the same instant have lay she hand on 's again , and the old woman look down at it . it be a much smaller hand than she own , but it be not white and delicate , for have never wear a glove in she life , and she hand bear the trace of labour from she childhood upward . look earnestly at the hand for a moment , and then , fix she eye again on 's face , say , with something of restore courage , but in a tone of surprise , " why , ye're a workin ' woman ! " " yes , I be , and I work in the cotton -mill when I be at home . " " ah ! " say slowly , still wonder ; " ye come in so light , like the shadow on the wall , a ' speak I ' my ear , as I think ye might be a sperrit . ye have get a'most the face og one as be a -sittin ' on the grave I ' 's new . " " I come from the now . you know --she be my aunt , and she have hear of you great affliction , and be very sorry ; and I be come to see if I can be any help to you in you trouble ; for I know you son and , and I know you have no daughter ; and when the clergyman tell I how the hand of be heavy upon you , my heart go out towards you , and I feel a command to come and be to you in the place of a daughter in this grief , if you will let I . " " ah ! I know who y's be now ; y's be a , like ; he be tould I on you , " say fretfully , she overpower sense of pain return , now she wonder be gone . " ye will make it out as trouble be a good thing , like he allays do . but where be the use of ' talkin ' to I a - that 'n ? ye can to make the smart less wi' talkin ' . ye will ne 'er make I believe as it be better for I not to ha ' my old man die in 's bed , if he must die , a ' ha ' the parson to pray by he , a ' I to sit by he , a ' tell he ne 'er to mind th ' ill word I have gi'en he sometimes when I war anger , a ' to gi ' he a bit a ' a sup , as long as a bit a ' a sup he would swallow . but eh ! to die I ' the cold water , a ' we close to he , a ' ne 'er to know ; a ' I a -sleepin ' , as if I ne belong to he no more nor if he have be a journeyman tramp from nobody know where ! " here begin to cry and rock herself again ; and say ,
, " yes , dear friend , you affliction be great . it would be hardness of heart to say that you trouble be not heavy to bear . do not send I to you to make light of you sorrow , but to mourn with you , if you will let I . if you have a table spread for a feast , and be make merry with you friend , you would think it be kind to let I come and sit down and rejoice with you , because you would think I should like to share those good thing ; but I should like better to share in you trouble and you labour , and it would seem harder to I if you deny I then . you will not send I away ? you be not angry with I for come ? " " Nay , nay ; anger ! who say I war anger ? it war good on you to come . a ' Seth , why do nna ye get she some tay ? ye war in a hurry to get some for I , as have no need , but ye donto think of ' gettin' 't for they as want it . sit ye down ; sit ye down . I thank you kindly for comin ' , for it be little wage ye get by walkin ' through the wet field to see a old woman like I .... Nay , I and get no daughter of ' my own -- ne 'er have one -- ang I warna sorry , for they be poor queechy thing , gell be ; I allay want to ha ' lad , as could fend for theirsen . a ' the lad 's ull be marryin '-- I shall ha ' daughter eno ' , a ' too many . but now , do ye make the tay as ye like it , for I and get no taste I ' my mouth this day -- it be all one what I swaller -- it be all get the taste o' sorrow with i't . " take care not to betray that she have have she tea , and accept 's invitation very readily , for the sake of persuade the old woman herself to take the food and drink she so much need after a day of hard work and fast . be so happy now be in the house that he could not help think she presence be worth purchase with a life in which grief incessantly follow upon grief ; but the next moment he reproach himself -- it be almost as if he be rejoice in he father 's sad death . nevertheless the joy of be with would triumph -- it be like the influence of climate , which no resistance can overcome . and the feeling even suffuse itself over he face so as to attract he mother 's notice , while she be drink she tea . " Thee may 'st well talk of ' trouble bein' a good thing , , for thee thriv 'st o not . Thee look 'st as if thee know ' dst no more of ' care a ' cumber nor when thee wast a babby a - lyin ' awake I ' th ' cradle . for thee ' dst allay lie still wi' thy eye open , a ' Adam ne 'er 'uld lie still a minute when he wake . Thee wast allays like a bag of ' meal as can ne 'er be bruise -- though , for the matter of ' that , thy poor feyther war just such another . but ye have get the same look too " ( here turn to ) . " I reckon it be wi's bein' a Methody . not as I be a -findin ' faut wi' ye of r't , for ye have no call to be frettin ' , a ' somehow ye loeak sorry too . Eh ! well , if the be fond of ' trouble , they be like to thrive : it be a pity they canto h a't all , a ' take it away from they as don na like it . I could ha ' gi'en 'em plenty ; for when I would get my old man I war worret from morn till night ; and now he be go , I would be glad for the worst of 'er again . " " yes , " say , careful not to oppose any feeling of 's , for she reliance , in she smallest word and deed , on a divine guidance , always issue in that finest woman 's tact which proceed from acute and ready sympathy ; " yes , I remember too , when my dear aunt die , I longe for the sound of she bad cough in the night , instead of the silence that come when she be gone . but now , dear friend , drink this other cup of tea and eat a little more . " " what ! " say , take the cup and speak in a less querulous tone , " have ye get no feyther and mother , then , as ye war so sorry about you aunt ? " " no , I never know a father or mother ; my aunt bring I up from a baby . she have no child , for she be never married and she bring I up as tenderly as if I have be she own child . " " Eh , she have fine work wi' ye , I will warrant , bringin ' ye up from a babby , a ' she a lone woman -- it be ill bringin ' up a cade lamb . but I daresay ye warna franzy , for ye
ye look as if ye' ne 'er be anger I ' you life . but what do ye do when you aunt di , a ' why do na ye come to live in this country , bein ' as 's you aunt too ? " Dinah , see that 's attention be attract , tell she the story of she early life -- how she have be bring up to work hard , and what sort of place be , and how many people have a hard life there -- all the detail that she think likely to interest . the old woman listen , and forget to be fretful , unconsciously subject to the soothing influence of 's face and voice . after a while she be persuade to let the kitchen be make tidy ; for be bend on this , believe that the sense of order and quietude around she would help in dispose to join in the prayer she longe to pour forth at she side . , meanwhile , go out to chop wood , for he surmise that would like to be leave alone with he mother . sit watch she as she move about in she still quick way , and say at last , " ye have get a notion of ' cleanin ' up . I would to mind ha 'in ye for a daughter , for ye would to spend the lad 's wage I ' fine clothes a ' waste . ye be not like the lass of ' this countryside . I reckon folk be different at from what they be here . " " they have a different sort of life , many of th'ey , " say ; " they work at different thing -- some in the mill , and many in the mine , in the villag round about . but the heart of man be the same everywhere , and there be the child of this world and the child of light there as well as elsewhere . but we have many more there than in this country . " " well , I do to know as the woman war like ye , for there 's 's wife , as they say 's a big Methody , isna pleasant to look at , at all . I would have lief look at a tooad . An' I be thinkin's I would to mind if ye would stay a ' sleep here , for I should like to see ye I ' th ' house I ' th ' mornin ' . but mayhappen they will be lookin for ye at 's . " " no , " say , " they do not expect I , and I should like to stay , if you will let I . " " well , there be room ; I and get my bed laid I ' th ' little room of 'er the back kitchen , a ' ye can lie beside I . I would be glad to ha ' ye wi' I to speak to I ' th ' night , for ye have get a nice way of ' talkin ' . it put I I ' mind of ' the swallow as be under the thack last ' ear when they fust begin to s low a ' soft - like I ' th ' mornin ' . , but my old man war fond of ' they bird ! a ' so war , but they 'n ne 'er come again this ' ear . happen they be dead too . " " there , " say , " now the kitchen look tidy , and now , dear mother -- for I be you daughter to - night , you know -- I should like you to wash you face and have a clean cap on . do you remember what do , when take away he child from he ? while the child be yet alive he fast and pray to to spare it , and he would neither eat nor drink , but lay on the ground all night , beseech for the child . but when he know it be dead , he rise up from the ground and wash and anoint himself , and change he clothes , and ate and drank ; and when they ask he how it be that he seem to have leave off grieve now the child be dead , he say , ' While the child be yet alive , I fast and weep ; for I say , who can tell whether will be gracious to I , that the child may live ? but now he be dead , wherefore should I fast ? can I bring he back again ? I shall go to he , but he shall not return to I . ' " " Eh , that be a true word , " say . " yea , my old man win to come back to I , but I shall go to he -- the sooner the better . well , ye may do as ye like wi' I : there be a clean cap I ' that drawer , an' I will go I ' the back kitchen a ' wash my face . a ' Seth , thee may 'st reach down 's new wi' th ' picter in , a ' she shall read we a chapter . Eh , I like they word -- 'I shall go to he , but he win to come back to I . ' " and be both inwardly offer thanks for the greater quietness of spirit that have come over . this be what have be try to bring about , through all she still sympathy and absence from exhortation . from she girlhood upwards she have have experience
experience among the sick and the mourning , among mind harden and shrivell through poverty and ignorance , and have gain the subtlest perception of the mode in which they could best be touch and soften into willingness to receive word of spiritual consolation or warning . as express it , " she be never leave to herself ; but it be always give she when to keep silence and when to speak . " and do we not all agree to call rapid thought and noble impulse by the name of inspiration ? after we subtlest analysis of the mental process , we must still say , as do , that we highest thought and we best deed be all give to we . and so there be earnest prayer -- there be faith , love , and hope pour forth that evening in the little kitchen . and poor , aged , fretful , without grasp any distinct idea , without go through any course of religious emotion , feel a vague sense of goodness and love , and of something right lie underneath and beyond all this sorrowing life . she could not understand the sorrow ; but , for these moment , under the subduing influence of 's spirit , she feel that she must be patient and still . in the Cottage it be but half - past four the next morning when , tired of lie awake listen to the bird and watch the grow light through the little window in the garret roof , rose and begin to dress herself very quietly , lest she should disturb . but already some one else be astir in the house , and have go downstairs , proceed by . the dog 's pattering step be a sure sign that it be who go down ; but be not aware of this , and she think it be more likely to be , for he have tell she how have stay up work the night before . , however , have only just awaken at the sound of the opening door . the exciting influence of the previous day , heighten at last by 's unexpected presence , have not be counteract by any bodily weariness , for he have not do he ordinary amount of hard work ; and so when he go to be ; it be not till he have ti himself with hour of tossing wakefulness that drowsiness come , and lead on a heavier morning sleep than be usual with he . but have be refresh by he long rest , and with he habitual impatience of mere passivity , he be eager to begin the new day and subdue sadness by he strong will and strong arm . the white mist lay in the valley ; it be go to be a bright warm day , and he would start to work again when he have have he breakfast . " there be nothing but what be bearable as long as a man can work , " he say to himself ; " the natur of ' thing do not change , though it seem as if one be own life be nothing but change . the square of ' four be sixteen , and you must lengthen you lever in proportion to you weight , be as true when a man 's miserable as when he be happy ; and the best of ' work is , it give you a grip hold of ' thing outside you own lot . " as he dash the cold water over he head and face , he feel completely himself again , and with he black eye as keen as ever and he thick black hair all glisten with the fresh moisture , he go into the workshop to look out the wood for he father 's coffin , intend that he and should carry it with they to 's and have the coffin make by one of the workman there , so that he mother might not see and hear the sad task go forward at home . he have just go into the workshop when he quick ear detect a light rapid foot on the stair -- certainly not he mother 's . he have be in bed and asleep when have come in , in the evening , and now he wonder whose step this could be . a foolish thought come , and move he strangely . as if it could be ! she be the last person likely to be in the house . and yet he feel reluctant to go and look and have the clear proof that it be some one else . he stood lean on a plank he have take hold of , listen to sound which he imagination interpret for he so pleasantly that the keen strong face become suffused with a timid tenderness . the light footstep move about the kitchen , follow by the sound of the sweeping brush , hardly make so much noise as the lightest breeze that chase the autumn leave along the dusty path ; and 's imagination see a dimpled face , with dark bright eye and roguish smile look backward at this brush , and a round figure just lean a little to clasp the handle . a very foolish thought -- it could not be ; but the only way of dismissing such nonsense from he head be to go and see Whough it be , for he fancy only get nearer and nearer to belief while he stand there listen . he loose the plank and go to the kitchen door . " how do you do , ? " say , in she calm treble , pause from she sweeping and fix she mild grave eye upon he . " I trust you feel rest and strengthen again to bear the
the burden and heat of the day . " it be like dreaming of the sunshine and awak in the moonlight . have see several time , but always at the , where he be not very vividly conscious of any woman 's presence except 's , and he have only in the last day or two begun to suspect that be in love with she , so that he attention have not hithertoo be draw towards she for he brother 's sake . but now she slim figure , she plain black gown , and she pale serene face impress he with all the force that belong to a reality contrast with a preoccupy fancy . for the first moment or two he make no answer , but look at she with the concentrated , examine glance which a man give to a object in which he have suddenly begin to be interested . Dinah , for the first time in she life , feel a painful self - consciousness ; there be something in the dark penetrate glance of this strong man so different from the mildness and timidity of he brother Seth . a faint blush come , which deepen as she wonder at it . this blush recall from he forgetfulness . " I be quite take by surprise ; it be very good of you to come and see my mother in she trouble , " he say , in a gentle grateful tone , for he quick mind tell he at once how she come to be there . " I hope my mother be thankful to have you , " he add , wonder rather anxiously what have be 's reception . " yes , " say , resum she work , " she see greatly comfort after a while , and she be have a good deal of rest in the night , by time . she be fast asleep when I leave she . " " who be it take the news to the ? " say , he thought revert to some one there ; he wonder whether she have feel anything about it . " it be , the clergyman , tell I , and my aunt be grieve for you mother when she hear it , and want I to come ; and so be my uncle , I be sure , now he be hear it , but he be go out to Rosseter all yesterday . they will look for you there as soon as you have get time to go , for there 's nobody round that hearth but what be glad to see you . " Dinah , with she sympathetic divination , know quite well that be longing to hear if have say anything about they trouble ; she be too rigorously truthful for benevolent invention , but she have contrive to say something in which be tacitly include . love have a way of cheat itself consciously , like a child who play at solitary hide - and - seek ; it be pleased with assurance that it all the while disbelieve . like what have say so much that he mind be directly full of the next visit he should pay to the , when Hetty would perhaps behave more kindly to he than she have ever do before . " but you will not be there yourself any longer ? " he say to . " no , I go back to on , and I shall have to set out to early , to be in time for the Oakbourne carrier . so I must go back to the farm to - night , that I may have the last day with my aunt and she child . but I can stay here all to - day , if you mother would like I ; and she heart seem inclin towards I last night . " " ah , then , she be sure to want you to - day . if mother take to people at the beginning , she be sure to get fond of th'ey ; but she be a strange way of not like young woman . though , to be sure , " go on , smile , " she not like other young woman be no reason why she should not like you . " have be assist at this conversation in motionless silence , seat on he haunch , and alternately look up in he master 's face to watch its expression and observe 's movement about the kitchen . the kind smile with which utter the last word be apparently decisive with of the light in which the stranger be to be regard , and as she turn round after put aside she sweeping - brush , he trot towards she and put up he muzzle against she hand in a friendly way . " you see Gyp bids you welcome , " say , " and he be very slow to welcome stranger . " " poor dog ! " say , pat the rough grey coat , " I have a strange feeling about the dumb thing as if they want to speak , and it be a trouble to 'em because they could not . I can not help be sorry for the dog always , though perhaps there be no need . but they may well have more in they than they know how to make we understand , for we can not say half what we feel , with all we word . " come down now , and be pleased to find talk with ; he want to know how much better she be than all other woman . but after a few word of greeting , draw he into the workshop to consult about the coffin , and go on with she cleaning . by
by six o'clock they be all at breakfast with in a kitchen as clean as she could have make it herself . the window and door be open , and the morning air brotch with it a mingl scent of southernwood , thyme , and sweet - briar from the patch of garden by the side of the cottage . do not sit down at first , but move about , serve the other with the warm porridge and the toast oat - cake , which she have get ready in the usual way , for she have ask to tell she just what he mother give they for breakfast . have be unusually silent since she come downstairs , apparently require some time to adjust she idea to a state of thing in which she come down like a lady to find all the work do , and sit still to be wait on . she new sensation seem to exclude the remembrance of she grief . at last , after taste the porridge , she break silence : " ye might ha ' make the parridge worse , " she say to ; " I can eat it wi'out its turnin ' my stomach . it might ha ' be a trifle thicker a ' no harm , an' I allays pute a sprig of ' mint in mysen ; but how 's ye t ' know that ? the lad arena like to get folk as will make they parridge as I and make it for 'em ; it be well if they get onybody as will make parridge at all . but ye might do , wi' a bit of ' showin ' ; for ye be a stirrin ' body in a mornin ' , a ' ye have a light heel , a ' ye have clean thg house well enough for a ma'shift . " " Makeshift , mother ? " say . " why , I think the house look beautiful . I do not know how it could look better . " " Thee dostna know ? Nay ; how be thee to know ? ' man ne 'er know whether the floor 's clean or cat - lick . but thee 'lt know when thee get 's thy parridge burnt , as it be like enough to be when I 'n gi'en of 'er makin ' it . Thee 'lt think thy mother war good for summat then . " " Dinah , " say , " do come and sit down now and have you breakfast . we be all serve now . " " aye , come a ' sit ye down -- do , " say , " a ' eat a morsel ; ye would need , arter bein ' upo ' you leg this hour a ' half a'ready . come , then , " she add , in a tone of complain affection , as sit down by she side , " I will be loath for ye t ' go , but ye can to stay much longer , I doubt . I could put up wig ye I ' th ' house better nor wi' most folk . " " I will stay till to - night if you be willing , " say . " I would stay longer , only I be go back to on , and I must be with my aunt to - morrow . " " Eh , I would ne 'er go back to that country . my old man come from that side , but he leave it when he war a young un , a ' I ' the right o not too ; for he say as there war no wood there , a ' it 'uld ha ' be a bad country for a carpenter . " " ah , " say , " I remember father tell I when I be a little lad that he make up he mind if ever he move it should be south'ard . but I be not so sure about it . say -- and he know the South -- as the northern man be a finer breed than the southern , harder - headed and stronger - body , and a deal taller . and then he say in some o' those county it be as flat as the back of ' you hand , and you can see nothing of a distance without climb up the highest tree . I could not abide that . I like to go to work by a road that will take I up a bit of a hill , and see the field for mile round I , and a bridge , or a town , or a bit of a steeple here and there . it make you feel the world 's a big place , and there be other man work in it with they head and hand besides yourself . " " I like th ' hill best , " say , " when the cloud be over you head and you see the sun shining ever so far off , over the way , as I have often do of ' late , on the stormy day . it seem to I as if that be heaven where there be always joy and sunshine , though this life 's dark and cloudy . " " oh , I love the side , " say ; " I should not like to set my face towards the country where they be rich in corn and cattle , and the ground so level and easy to tread ; and to turn my back on the hill where the poor people have to live such a hard life and the man spend they day in the mine away from the sunlight . it be very bless
bless on a bleak cold day , when the sky be hang dark over the hill , to feel the love of in one 's soul , and carry it to the lonely , bare , stone house , where there be nothing else to give comfort . " " Eh ! " say , " that be very well for ye to talk , as look welly like the snowdrop - flower as ha ' live for day a ' day when I 'n gether 'em , wi' nothin ' but a drop of ' water a ' a peep of ' daylight ; but th ' hungry foulk have better leave th ' hungry country . it make less mouth for the scant cake . but , " she go on , look at , " don na thee talk of ' goin ' south'ard or north 'ard , a ' leavin ' thy feyther and mother I ' the churchyard , a ' goin ' to a country as they know nothin ' on . I will ne 'er rest I ' my grave if I do not to see thee I ' the churchyard of a . " " fear , mother , " say . " if I have to make up my mind not to go , I should ha ' be go before now . " he have finish he breakfast now , and rise as he be speak . " what be goin ' to do ? " ask . " set about thy feyther 's coffin ? " " no , mother , " say ; " we be go to take the wood to the village and have it make there . " " Nay , my lad , nay , " burst out in a eager , wail tone ; " thee wotna let nobody make thy feyther 's coffin but thysen ? who would make it so well ? a ' he have know have what good work war , a 's get a son as be the head of ' the village a ' all Treddles 'on too , for cleverness . " " very well , mother , if that be thy wish , I will make the coffin at home ; but I think thee wouldst to like to hear the work go on . " " a ' why shouldna I like ot ? it be the right thing to be do . a ' what have like get to do with i't ? it be choice of ' misliking be all I and get I ' this world . one morsel 's as good as another when you mouth 's out of ' taste . Thee mun set about it now this mornin ' fust thing . I wonna ha' nobody to touch the coffin but thee . " 's eye meet 's , which look from to he rather wistfully . " no , mother , " he say , " I will not consent but shall have a hand in it too , if it be to be do at home . I will go to the village this forenoon , because ' ull want to see I , and shall stay at home and begin the coffin . I can come back at noon , and then he can go . " " Nay , nay , " persist , begin to cry , " I and set my heart o not as thee shalt ma ' thy feyther 's coffin . the e't so stiff a ' masterful , the e't ne 'er do as thy mother want thee . Thee wast often angered wig thy feyther when he war alive ; thee must be the better to he now he be gone . he would ha ' think nothin ' of n't for to 's coffin . " " say no more , , say no more , " say , gently , though he voice tell that he speak with some effort ; " mother 's in the right . I will go to work , and do thee stay at home . " he pass into the workshop immediately , follow by ; while , automatically obey she old habit , begin to put away the breakfast thing , as if she do not mean to take she place any longer . say nothing , but presently use the opportunity of quietly join the brothers in the workshop . they have already get on they apron and paper cap , and be stand with he left hand on 's shoulder , while he point with the hammer in he right to some board which they be look at . they back be turn towards the door by which enter , and she come in so gently that they be not aware of she presence till they hear she voice say , " ! " start , and they both turn round . look as if she do not see , and fix she eye on 's face , say with calm kindness , " I will not say farewell . I shall see you again when you come from work . so as I be at the farm before dark , it will be quite soon enough . " " thank you , Dinah ; I should like to walk home with you once more . it will perhaps be the last time . " there be a little tremor in 's voice . Dinah put out she hand and say , " you will have sweet peace in you mind to - day , , for you tenderness and long - suffer towards you aged mother . " she turn round and leave the workshop as quickly and quietly as she have enter it . have be observe she closely all the while , but she
she have not look at he . as soon as she be go , he say , " I do not wonder at thee for love she , . she be get a face like a lily . " 's rush to he eye and lip : he have never yet confess he secret to , but now he feel a delicious sense of disburdenment , as he answer , " aye , Addy , I do love she -- too much , I doubt . but she do to love I , lad , only as one child o' love another . she will never love any man as a husband -- that be my belief . " " Nay , lad , there be no telling ; thee must to lose heart . she be make out of ' stuff with a finer grain than most of ' the woman ; I can see that clear enough . but if she be better than they be in other thing , I can to think she will fall short of th'ey in love . " no more be say . Seth set out to the village , and begin he work on the coffin . " help the lad , and I too , " he think , as he lift the board . " we be like enough to find life a tough job -- hard work inside and out . it be a strange thing to think of a man as can lift a chair with he tooth and walk fifty mile on end , trembl and turn hot and cold at only a look from one woman out of all the rest I ' the world . it be a mystery we can give no account of ; but no more we can of the sprouting of ' the seed , for that matter . " in the same morning , as be move about in he dressing - room see he well - look british person reflect in the old - fashioned mirror , and star at , from a dingy olive - green piece of tapestry , by 's daughter and she maiden , who ought to have be mind the infant Mose , he be hold a discussion with himself , which , by the time he valet be tie the black silk sl over he shoulder , have issue in a distinct practical resolution . " I mean to go to and fish for a week or so , " he say aloud . " I shall take you with I , Pym , and set off this morning ; so be ready by half - past eleven . " the low whistle , which have assist he in arrive at this resolution , here break out into he loudest ringing tenor , and the corridor , as he hurrie along it , echo to he favourite song from the 's , " when the heart of a man be oppress with care . " not a heroic strain ; nevertheless feel himself very heroic as he strode towards the stable to give he order about the horse . he own approbation be necessary to he , and it be not a approbation to be enjoy quite gratuitously ; it must be win by a fair amount of merit . he have never yet forfeit that approbation , and he have considerable reliance on he own virtue . no young man could confess he fault more candidly ; candou be one of he favourite virtue ; and how can a man 's candour be see in all its lustre unless he have a few failings to talk off ? but he have a agreeable confidence that he fault be all of a generous kind -- impetuous , warm - blooded , leonine ; never crawl , crafty , reptilian . it be not possible for to do anything mean , dastardly , or cruel . " no ! I be a devil of a fellow for get myself into a hobble , but I always take care the load shall fall on my own shoulders . " Unhappily , there be no inherent poetical justice in hobble , and they will sometimes obstinately refuse to inflict they worst consequence on the prime offender , in spite of he loudly express wish . it be entirely owe to this deficiency in the scheme of thing that yoArthu have ever bring any one into trouble besides himself . he be nothing if not good - natured ; and all he picture of the future , when he should come into the estate , be make up of a prosperous , content tenantry , adore they landlord , who would be the model of a gentleman -- mansion in first - rate order , all elegance and high taste -- jolly housekeepe , finest stud in -- purse open to all public object -- in short , everything as different as possible from what be now associate with the name of . and one of the first good action he would perform in that future should be to increase 's income for the vicarage of , so that he might keep a carriage for he mother and sister . he hearty affection for the rector date from the age of frock and trousers . it be a affection partly filial , partly fraternal -- fraternal enough to make he like 's company better than that of most younger man , and filial enough to make he shrink strongly from incurr 's disapprobation . you perceive that be " a good fellow " -- all he college friend think he such . he could not bear to see any one uncomfortable ; he would have be sorry even in he angriest mood for any harm to happen to he grandfather ; and he aunt herself have the
the benefit of that soft - heartedness which he bear towards the whole sex . whether he would have self - mastery enough to be always as harmless and purely beneficent as he good - nature lead he to desire , be a question that no one have yet decide against he ; he be but twenty - one , you remember , and we do not inquire too closely into character in the case of a handsome generous young fellow , who will have property enough to support numerous peccadilloe -- who , if he should unfortunately break a man 's leg in he rash drive , will be able to pension he handsomely ; or if he should happen to spoil a woman 's existence for she , will make it up to she with expensive bon - bon , pack up and direct by he own hand . it would be ridiculous to be pry and analytic in such case , as if one be inquire into the character of a confidential clerk . we use round , general , gentlemanly epithet about a young man of birth and fortune ; and lady , with that fine intuition which be the distinguishing attribute of they sex , see at once that he be " nice . " the chance be that he will go through life without scandalize any one ; a seaworthy vessel that no one would refuse to insure . ships , certainly , be liable to casualty , which sometimes make terribly evident some flaw in they construction that would never have be discoverable in smooth water ; and many a " good fellow , " through a disastrous combination of circumstance , have undergone a like betrayal . but we have no fair ground for entertaining unfavourable augury concern , who this morning prove himself capable of a prudent resolution founde on conscience . one thing be clear : have take care that he shall never go far astray with perfect comfort and satisfaction to himself ; he will never get beyond that border - land of sin , where he will be perpetually harass by assault from the other side of the boundary . he will never be a courtier of Vice , and wear she order in he button - hole . it be about ten o'clock , and the sun be shin brilliantly ; everything be look lovelier for the yesterday 's rain . it be a pleasant thing on such a morning to walk along the well - roll gravel on one 's way to the stable , meditat a excursion . but the scent of the stable , which , in a natural state of thing , ought to be among the soothing influence of a man 's life , always bring with it some irritation to . there be no have he own way in the stable ; everything be manage in the stingiest fashion . he grandfather persist in retaining as head groom a old dolt whom no sort of lever could move out of he old habit , and who be allow to hire a succession of raw Loamshire lad as he subordinate , one of whom have lately test a new pair of shear by clipp a oblong patch on 's bay mare . this state of thing be naturally embitter ; one can put up with annoyance in the house , but to have the stable make a scene of vexation and disgust be a point beyond what human flesh and blood can be expect to endure long together without danger of misanthropy . 's wooden , deep - wrinkled face be the first object that meet 's eye as he enter the stable - yard , and it quite poisone for he the bark of the two bloodhound that keep watch there . he could never speak quite patiently to the old blockhead . " you must have saddle for I and bring to the door at half - past eleven , and I shall want saddle for at the same time . do you hear ? " " yes , I hear , I hear , , " say old very deliberately , follow the young master into the stable . consider a young master as the natural enemy of a old servant , and young people in general as a poor contrivance for carry on the world . yoArthu go in for the sake of patting , decline as far as possible to see anything in the stable , lest he should lose he temper before breakfast . the pretty creature be in one of the inner stable , and turn she mild head as she master come beside she . , a tiny spaniel , she inseparable companion in the stable , be comfortably curl up on she back . " well , , my pretty girl , " say , pat she neck , " we will have a glorious canter this morning . " " Nay , you honour , I don to see as that can be , " say . " not be ? why not ? " " why , she have get lamed . " " Lam , confound you ! what do you mean ? " " why , th's lad take she too close to 's hoss , a ' one on th'ey fling out at she , a ' she be get she shank bruise of ' the near foreleg . " the judicious historian abstain from narrat precisely what ensue . you understand that there be a great deal of strong language , mingl with soothing " who - ho 's " while the leg be examine ; that stand by with quite as much emotion as if he have be a cunningly carve crab -tree walking - stick , and that presently repass the iron gate of the pleasure
pleasure - ground without singe as he go . he consider himself thoroughly disappointed and annoyed . there be not another mount in the stable for himself and he servant besides and . it be vexatious ; just when he want to get out of the way for a week or two . it seem culpable in to allow such a combination of circumstance . to be shut up at the chase with a broken arm when every other fellow in he regiment be enjoy himself at -- shut up with he grandfather , who have the same sort of affection for he as for he parchment deed ! and to be disgust at every turn with the management of the house and the estate ! in such circumstance a man necessarily get in a ill humour , and work off the irritation by some excess or other . " would have drink a bottle of port every day , " he mutter to himself , " but I be not well season enough for that . well , since I can not go to , I will have a gallop on to Norburne this morning , and lunch with . " behind this explicit resolution there lay a implicit one . if he lunche with and linger chatting , he should not reach the chase again till nearly five , when would be safe out of he sight in the housekeeper 's room ; and when she set out to go home , it would be he lazy time after dinner , so he should keep out of she way altogether . there really would have be no harm in be kind to the little thing , and it be worth dancing with a dozen ballroom belle only to look at for half a hour . but perhaps he have better not take any more notice of she ; it might put notion into she head , as Irwine have hint ; though , for he part , think girl be not by any means so soft and easily bruise ; indeed , he have generally find they twice as cool and cunn as he be himself . as for any real harm in 's case , it be out of the question : accept he own bond for himself with perfect confidence . so the twelve o'clock sun see he gallop towards ; and by good fortune lay in he road and give he some fine leap for . nothing like " take " a few bushes and ditch for exorcise a demon ; and it be really astonish that the , with they immense advantage in this way , have leave so bad a reputation in history . after this , you will perhaps be surprised to hear that although be at home , the hand of the dial in the courtyard have scarcely clear the last stroke of three when return through the entrance - gate , get down from the panting , and go into the house to take a hasty luncheon . but I believe there have be man since he day who have ride a long way to avoid a rencontre , and then gallop hastily back lest they should miss it . it be the favourite stratagem of we passion to sham a retreat , and to turn sharp round upon we at the moment we have make up we minds that the day be we own . " the cap'n have be ridin ' the 's own pace , " say Dalton the coachman , whose person stand out in high relief as he smoke he pipe against the stable wall , when bring up . " An' I wish he would get the devil to do 's groome for , " grow . " aye ; he would haheve a deal haimabler groom nor what he have now , " observe -- and the joke appear to he so good that , be leave alone upon the scene , he continue at interval to take he pipe from he mouth in order to wink at a imaginary audience and shake luxuriously with a silent , ventral laughter , mentally rehearse the dialogue from the beginning , that he might recite it with effect in the servants 's hall . when yoArthu go up to he dressing - room again after luncheon , it be inevitable that the debate he have have with himself there earlier in the day should flash across he mind ; but it be impossible for he now to dwell on the remembrance -- impossible to recall the feeling and reflection which have be decisive with he then , any more than to recall the peculiar scent of the air that have freshen he when he first open he window . the desire to see have rush back like a ill - stem current ; he be amaze himself at the force with which this trivial fancy seem to grasp he : he be even rather tremulous as he brush he hair -- pooh ! it be ride in that break - neck way . it be because he have make a serious affair of a idle matter , by think of it as if it be of any consequence . he would amuse himself by see to - day , and get rid of the whole thing from he mind . it be all 's fault . " if Irwine have say nothing , I should not have thought half so much of as of 's lameness . " however , it be just the sort of day for lolling in the Hermitage , and he would go and finish 's there before dinner . the Hermitage stand in Fir- tree -- the way be sure to come in walk from the . so nothing could be simpler and more natural : meeting be a mere circumstance
circumstance of he walk , not its object . be shadow flit rather faster among the sturdy oak of the chase than might have be expect from the shadow of a tired man on a warm afternoon , and it be still scarcely four o'clock when he stand before the tall narrow gate lead into the delicious labyrinthine wood which skirt one side of the chase , and which be call Fir- tree Grove , not because the fir be many , but because they be few . it be a wood of beech and lime , with here and there a light silver - stem birch -- just the sort of wood most haunt by the nymph : you see they white sunlit limb gleam athwart the bough , or pee from behind the smooth - sweeping outline of a tall lime ; you hear they soft liquid laughter -- but if you look with a too curious sacrilegious eye , they vanish behind the silvery beech , they make you believe that they voice be only a run brooklet , perhaps they metamorphose themselves into a tawny squirrel that scamper away and mock you from the topmost bough . it be not a grove with measure grass or roll gravel for you to tread upon , but with narrow , hollow - shaped , earthy path , ed with faint dash of delicate moss -- path which look as if they be make by the free will of the tree and underwood , move reverently aside to look at the tall queen of the white - foot nymph . it be along the broadest of these path that pass , under a avenue of lime and beech . it be a still afternoon -- the golden light be linger languidly among the upper bough , only glance down here and there on the purple pathway and its edge of faintly sprinkle moss : a afternoon in which destiny disguise she cold awful face behind a hazy radiant veil , enclose we in warm downy wing , and poison we with violet - scent breath . yoArthu stroll along carelessly , with a book under he arm , but not look on the ground as meditative man be apt to do ; he eye would fix themselves on the distant bend in the road round which a little figure must surely appear before long . ah ! there she come . first a bright patch of colour , like a tropic bird among the bough ; then a tripping figure , with a round hat on , and a small basket under she arm ; then a deep - blush , almost frightened , but bright - smiling girl , make she curtsy with a fluttered yet happy glance , as come up to she . if yoArthu have have time to think at all , he would have think it strange that he should feel flutter too , be conscious of blush too -- in fact , look and feel as foolish as if he have be take by surprise instead of meet just what he expect . poor thing ! it be a pity they be not in that golden age of childhood when they would have stood face to face , eye each other with timid liking , then give each other a little butterfly kiss , and toddle off to play together . yoArthu would have go home to he silk - curtain cot , and to she home - spun pillow , and both would have sleep without dream , and to - morrow would have be a life hardly conscious of a yesterday . yoArthu turn round and walk by 's side without give a reason . they be alone together for the first time . what a overpower presence that first privacy be ! he actually da not look at this little butter - maker for the first minute or two . as for , she foot rest on a cloud , and she be borne along by warm zephyr ; she have forget she rise -coloured ribbon ; she be no more conscious of she limb than if she childish soul have pass into a water - lily , rest on a liquid bed and warm by the midsummer sun - beam . it may seem a contradiction , but gather a certain carelessness and confidence from he timidity : it be a entirely different state of mind from what he have expect in such a meeting with ; and full as he be of vague feeling , there be room , in those moment of silence , for the thought that he previous debate and scruple be needless . " you be quite right to choose this way of come to the chase , " he say at last , look down at ; " it be so much prettier as well as shorter than come by either of the lodg . " " yes , sir , " answer , with a tremulous , almost whisper voice . she do not know one bit how to speak to a gentleman like , and she very vanity make she more coy of speech . " do you come every week to see ? " " yes , sir , every , only when she be get to go out with . " " and she be teache you something , be she ? " " yes , sir , the lace - mende as she learn abroad , and the stocking - mende -- it look just like the stocking , you can not tell it be be mende ; and she teach I cut - out too . " " what ! be you go to be a lady 's maid ? " " I should like to be one very much indeed . " Hetty speak more audibly now
now , but still rather tremulously ; she think , perhaps she seem as stupid to as do to she . " I suppose always expect you at this time ? " " she expect I at four o'clock . I be rather late to - day , because my aunt could not spare I ; but the regular time be four , because that give we time before 's bell ring . " " ah , then , I must not keep you now , else I should like to show you the Hermitage . do you ever see it ? " " no , sir . " " this be the walk where we turn up to it . but we must not go now . I will show it you some other time , if you would like to see it . " " yes , please , sir . " " do you always come back this way in the evening , or be you afraid to come so lonely a road ? " " oh no , sir , it be never late ; I always set out by eight o'clock , and it be so light now in the evening . my aunt would be angry with I if I do not get home before nine . " " perhaps , the gardener , come to take care of you ? " a deep blush overspread 's face and neck . " I be sure he do not ; I be sure he never do ; I would not let he ; I do not like he , " she say hastily , and the tear of vexation have come so fast that before she have do speak a bright drop roll down she hot cheek . then she feel asham to death that she be cry , and for one long instant she happiness be all gone . but in the next she feel a arm steal round she , and a gentle voice say , " why , Hetty , what make you cry ? I do not mean to vex you . I would not vex you for the world , you little blossom . come , do not cry ; look at I , else I shall think you will not forgive I . " yoArthu have lay he hand on the soft arm that be nearest to he , and be stoop towards with a look of coaxing entreaty . lift she long dewy lash , and meet the eye that be bend towards she with a sweet , timid , beseeching look . what a space of time those three moments be while they eye meet and he arm touch she ! love be such a simple thing when we have only one - and - twenty summers and a sweet girl of seventeen tremble under we glance , as if she be a bud first open she heart with wonder rapture to the morning . such young unfurrowed soul roll to meet each other like two velvet peach that touch softly and be at rest ; they mingle as easily as two brooklet that ask for nothing but to entwine themselves and ripple with ever- interlacing curve in the leafiest hiding - place . while gaze into 's dark beseeching eye , it make no difference to he what sort of she speak ; and even if hoops and powder have be in fashion , he would very likely not have be sensible just then that want those sign of high breeding . but they start asunder with beat heart : something have fall on the ground with a rattling noise ; it be 's basket ; all she little workwoman 's matter be scatter on the path , some of they show a capability of rolling to great length . there be much to be do in pick up , and not a word be speak ; but when yoArthu hang the basket over she arm again , the poor child feel a strange difference in he look and manner . he just press she hand , and say , with a look and tone that be almost chill to she , " I have be hinder you ; I must not keep you any longer now . you will be expect at the house . good - bye . " without wait for she to speak , he turn away from she and hurrie back towards the road that lead to the Hermitage , leave to pursue she way in a strange dream that seem to have begin in bewilder delight and be now pass into contrariety and sadness . would he meet she again as she come home ? why have he speak almost as if he be displease with she ? and then run away so suddenly ? she cry , hardly know why . too be very uneasy , but he feeling be lit up for he by a more distinct consciousness . he hurry to the Hermitage , which stand in the heart of the wood , unlock the door with a hasty wrench , slam it after he , pitch into the most distant corner , and thrust he right hand into he pocket , first walk four or five time up and down the scanty length of the little room , and then seat himself on the ottoman in a uncomfortable stiff way , as we often do when we wish not to abandon ourselves to feel . he be get in love with -- that be quite plain . he be ready to pitch everything else -- no matter where -- for the sake of surrender himself to this delicious feeling which have just disclose itself . it be no use blink the fact now -- they would get too fond of each other , if he go on
on take notice of she -- and what would come of it ? he should have to go away in a few week , and the poor little thing would be miserable . he must not see she alone again ; he must keep out of she way . what a fool he be for come back from 's ! he get up and throw open the window , to let in the soft breath of the afternoon , and the healthy scent of the fir that make a belt round the Hermitage . the soft air do not help he resolution , as he lean out and look into the leafy distance . but he consider he resolution sufficiently fix : there be no need to debate with himself any longer . he have make up he mind not to meet Hetty again ; and now he might give himself up to think how immensly agreeable it would be if circumstance be different -- how pleasant it would have be to meet she this evening as she come back , and put he arm round she again and look into she sweet face . he wonder if the dear little thing be think of he too -- twenty to one she be . how beautiful she eye be with the tear on they lash ! he would like to satisfy he soul for a day with look at they , and he must see she again -- he must see she , simply to remove any false impression from she mind about he manner to she just now . he would behave in a quiet , kind way to she -- just to prevent she from go home with she head full of wrong fancie . yes , that would be the best thing to do after all . it be a long while -- more than a hour before yoArthu have bring he meditations to this point ; but once arrive there , he could stay no longer at the Hermitage . the time must be fill up with movement until he should see again . and it be already late enough to go and dress for dinner , for he grandfather 's dinner - hour be six . evening in the it happen that have have a slight quarrel with . best , the housekeeper , on this morning -- a fact which have two consequence highly convenient to . it cause Pomfret to have tea send up to she own room , and it inspire that exemplary lady 's maid with so lively a recollection of former passage in . 's conduct , and of dialogue in which . best have decidedly the inferiority as a interlocutor with , that require no more presence of mind than be demand for use she needle , and throw in a occasional " yes " or " no . " she would have want to put on she hat earlier than usual ; only she have tell that she usually set out about eight o'clock , and if he should go to the again expect to see she , and she should be gone ! would he come ? she little butterfly soul flutter incessantly between memory and dubious expectation . at last the minute - hand of the old - fashioned brazen - faced timepiece be on the last quarter to eight , and there be every reason for its be time to get ready for departure . even 's preoccupied mind do not prevent she from noticing what look like a new flush of beauty in the little thing as she tie on she hat before the look - glass . " that child get prettier and prettier every day , I do believe , " be she inward comment . " the more be the pity . she will get neither a place nor a husband any the sooner for it . Sober well - to - do man do not like such pretty wives . when I be a girl , I be more admired than if I have be so very pretty . however , she be reason to be grateful to I for teache she something to get she bread with , better than farm - house work . they always tell I I be good - nature -- and that be the truth , and to my hurt too , else there be they in this house that would not be here now to lord it over I in the housekeeper 's room . " walk hastily across the short space of pleasure - ground which she have to traverse , dread to meet , to whom she could hardly have speak civilly . how relieve she be when she have get safely under the oak and among the fern of the chase ! even then she be as ready to be start as the deer that leape away at she approach . she think nothing of the evening light that lay gently in the grassy alley between the fern , and make the beauty of they living green more visible than it have be in the overpowering flood of noon : she think of nothing that be present . she only see something that be possible : come to meet she again along the Fir- tree . that be the foreground of 's picture ; behind it lay a bright hazy something -- day that be not to be as the other day of she life have be . it be as if she have be woo by a river - god , who might any time take she to he wondrous hall below a watery heaven . there be no know what would come , since this strange entrancing delight have come . if a chest full of lace and satin and jewel have be send she from some unknown source
source , how could she but have think that she whole lot be go to change , and that to - morrow some still more bewildering joy would befall she ? Hetty have never read a novel ; if she have ever see one , I think the word would have be too hard for she ; how then could she find a shape for she expectation ? they be as formless as the sweet languid odour of the garden at the chase , which have float past she as she walk by the gate . she be at another gate now -- that lead into . she enter the wood , where it be already twilight , and at every step she take , the fear at she heart become colder . if he should not come ! oh , how dreary it be -- the thought of go out at the other end of the wood , into the unsheltered road , without have see he . she reach the first turn towards the Hermitage , walk slowly -- he be not there . she hate the leveret that run across the path ; she hate everything that be not what she long for . she walk on , happy whenever she be come to a bend in the road , for perhaps he be behind it . no . she be begin to cry : she heart have swell so , the tear stand in she eye ; she give one great sob , while the corner of she mouth quiver , and the tear roll down . she do not know that there be another turn to the Hermitage , that she be close against it , and that be only a few yard from she , full of one think , and a thought of which she only be the object . he be go to see again : that be the longing which have be grow through the last three hour to a feverish thirst . not , of course , to speak in the caresse way into which he have unguardedly fallen before dinner , but to set thing right with she by a kindness which would have the air of friendly civility , and prevent she from run away with wrong notion about they mutual relation . if have know he be there , she would not have cry ; and it would have be better , for then yoArthu would perhaps have behave as wisely as he have intend . as it be , she start when he appear at the end of the side - alley , and look up at he with two great drop roll down she cheek . what else could he do but speak to she in a soft , soothing tone , as if she be a bright - eye spaniel with a thorn in she foot ? " have something frightene you , ? have you see anything in the wood ? do not be frightened -- I will take care of you now . " be blush so , she do not know whether she be happy or miserable . to be cry again -- what do gentleman think of girl who cry in that way ? she feel unable even to say " no , " but could only look away from he and wipe the tear from she cheek . not before a great drop have fall on she rise -coloured string -- she know that quite well . " come , be cheerful again . smile at I , and tell I what be the matter . come , tell I . " turn she head towards he , whisper , " I think you would not come , " and slowly get courage to lift she eye to he . that look be too much : he must have have eye of egyptian granite not to look too lovingly in return . " you little frightened bird ! little tearful rose ! silly pet ! you will not cry again , now I be with you , will you ? " ah , he do not know in the least what he be say . this be not what he mean to say . he arm be steal round the waist again ; it be tighten it be clasp ; he be bend he face nearer and nearer to the round cheek ; he lip be meet those pout child - lip , and for a long moment time have vanish . he may be a shepherd in for atch he know , he may be the first youth kiss the first maiden , he may be himself , sipp the lip of -- it be all one . there be no speaking for minute after . they walk along with beating heart till they come within sight of the gate at the end of the wood . then they look at each other , not quite as they have look before , for in they eye there be the memory of a kiss . but already something bitter have begin to mingle itself with the fountain of sweet : already be uncomfortable . he take he arm from 's waist , and say , " here we be , almost at the end of the . I wonder how late it be , " he add , pull out he watch . " twenty minute past eight -- but my watch be too fast . however , I would better not go any further now . trot along quickly with you little foot , and get home safely . good - bye . " he take she hand , and look at she half - sadly , half with a constrained smile . 's eye seem to beseech he not to go away yet ; but he pat she
she cheek and say " good - bye " again . she be oblige to turn away from he and go on . as for , he rush back through the wood , as if he want to put a wide space between himself and . he would not go to the Hermitage again ; he remember how he have debate with himself there before dinner , and it have all come to nothing -- worse than nothing . he walk right on into the chase , glad to get out of the , which surely be haunt by he evil genius . those beech and smooth lime -- there be something enervat in the very sight of they ; but the strong knot old oak have no bending languor in they -- the sight of they would give a man some energy . yoArthu lose himself among the narrow opening in the fern , win about without seek any issue , till the twilight deepen almost to night under the great bough , and the hare look black as it dart across he path . he be feel much more strongly than he have do in the morning : it be as if he horse have wheel round from a leap and da to dispute he mastery . he be dissatisfied with himself , irritate , mortify . he no sooner fix he mind on the probable consequence of give way to the emotion which have steal over he to - day -- of continue to notice , of allow himself any opportunity for such slight caress as he have be betraye into already -- than he refuse to believe such a future possible for himself . to flirt with be a very different affair from flirt with a pretty girl of he own station : that be understand to be a amusement on both side , or , if it become serious , there be no obstacle to marriage . but this little thing would be speak ill of directly , if she happen to be see walk with he ; and then those excellent people , the Poyser , to whom a good name be as precious as if they have the best blood in the land in they vein -- he should hate himself if he make a scandal of that sort , on the estate that be to be he own some day , and among tenant by whom he like , above all , to be respect . he could no more believe that he should so fall in he own esteem than that he should break both he leg and go on crutch all the rest of he life . he could not imagine himself in that position ; it be too odious , too unlike he . and even if no one know anything about it , they might get too fond of each other , and then there could be nothing but the misery of parting , after all . no gentleman , out of a ballad , could marry a farmer 's niece . there must be a end to the whole thing at once . it be too foolish . and yet he have be so determined this morning , before he go to 's ; and while he be there something have take hold of he and make he gallop back . it seem he could not quite depend on he own resolution , as he have think he could ; he almost wish he arm would get painful again , and then he should think of nothing but the comfort it would be to get rid of the pain . there be no know what impulse might seize he to - morrow , in this confounded place , where there be nothing to occupy he imperiously through the livelong day . what could he do to secure himself from any more of this folly ? there be but one resource . he would go and tell -- tell he everything . the mere act of tell it would make it seem trivial ; the temptation would vanish , as the charm of fond word vanish when one repeat they to the indifferent . in every way it would help he to tell . he would ride to the first thing after breakfast to - morrow . yoArthu have no sooner come to this determination than he begin to think which of the path would lead he home , and make as short a walk thither as he could . he feel sure he should sleep now : he have have enough to tire he , and there be no more need for he to think . the return Home While that part in the wood be happen , there be a parting in the cottage too , and have stand with at the door , strain she aged eye to get the last glimpse of and , as they mount the opposite slope . " Eh , I be loath to see the last on she , " she say to , as they turn into the house again . " I have ha ' be willin ' t ' ha ' she about I till I die and go to lie by my old man . she would make it easier dyin ' -- she spake so gentle a ' move about so still . I could be fast sure that pictur ' be draw for she I ' thy new -- th ' angel a - sittin ' on the big stone by the grave . Eh , I would to mind ha 'in a daughter like that ; but nobody ne 'er marry they as be good for atch . " " well , mother , I hope thee will have she for a daughter ; for 's get a liking for she , and
and I hope she will get a liking for in time . " " where be th's use of ' talkin ' a - that 'n ? she caresna for . she be goin ' away twenty mile aff . how be she to get a likin ' for he , I would like to know ? no more nor the cake 's ull come wi'out the leaven . thy figurin ' boonks might ha ' tould thee better nor that , I should think , else thee mightst as well read the commin print , as allay do . " " Nay , mother , " say , laugh , " the figure tell we a fine deal , and we could not go far without th'ey , but they do not tell we about folk 's feeling . it be a nicer job to calculate they . but be as good - hear a lad as ever handle a tool , and plenty o' sense , and good - look too ; and he be get the same way o ' think as . he deserve to win she , though there be no denying she be a rare bit of ' workmanship . you do not see such woman turn off the wheel every day . " " Eh , the e't allay stick up for thy brother . Thee 'st be just the same , e'er sin ' ye war little un together . Thee wbe allay for halving iverything wi' he . but what be get to do with marryin ' , as be on 'y three - a '- twenty ? he would more need to learn a ' lay by sixpence . a ' as for he desarve she -- she be two 'ear older nor Seth : she be pretty near as old as thee . but that be the way ; folk mun allays choose by contrairy , as if they must be sort like the pork -- a bit of ' good meat wi' a bit of ' offal . " to the feminine mind in some of its mood , all thing that might be receive a temporary charm from comparison with what be ; and since do not want to marry himself , feel rather peevish on that score -- as peevish as she would have be if he have want to marry she , and so shut himself out from and the partnership as effectually as by marry . it be more than half - past eight when and he mother be talk in this way , so that when , about ten minute later , reach the turning of the lane that lead to the farmyard gate , she see and approach it from the opposite direction , and wait for they to come up to she . they , too , like , have linger a little in they walk , for be try to speak word of comfort and strength to in these part moment . but when they see , they pause and shake hand ; turn homeward , and come on alone . " would have come and speak to you , my dear , " she say , as she reach , " but he be very full of trouble to - night . " answer with a dimple smile , as if she do not quite know what have be say ; and it make a strange contrast to see that sparkl self - engross loveliness look at by 's calm pitying face , with its open glance which tell that she heart live in no cherish secret of its own , but in feeling which it long to share with all the world . like as well as she have ever like any woman ; how be it possible to feel otherwise towards one who always put in a kind word for she when she aunt be find fault , and who be always ready to take off she hand -- little tiresome Totty , that be make such a pet of by every one , and that could see no interest in at all ? have never say anything disapprove or reproachful to during she whole visit to the ; she have talk to she a great deal in a serious way , but do not mind that much , for she never listen : whatever Dinah might say , she almost always strok 's cheek after it , and want to do some mending for she . be a riddle to she ; look at she much in the same way as one might imagine a little perching bird that could only flutter from bough to bough , to look at the swoop of the swallow or the mounting of the lark ; but she do not care to solve such riddle , any more than she care to know what be mean by the picture in the 's , or in the old folio that and always plague she about on a . take she hand now and draw it under she own arm . " you look very happy to - night , dear child , " she say . " I shall think of you often when I be at , and see you face before I as it be now . it be a strange thing -- sometimes when I be quite alone , sit in my room with my eye close , or walking over the hill , the people I have see and know , if it be only be for a few day , be bring before I , and I hear they voice and see they look and move almost plainer than I ever do when they be really with I so as I could touch they . and then my heart be draw out towards they , and I
I feel they lot as if it be my own , and I take comfort in spread it before the and rest in he love , on they behalf as well as my own . and so I feel sure you will come before I . " she pause a moment , but say nothing . " it have be a very precious time to I , " go on , " last night and to - day -- see two such good son as and . they be so tender and thoughtful for they aged mother . and she have be tell I what have do , for these many year , to help he father and he brother ; it be wonderful what a spirit of wisdom and knowledge he have , and how he be ready to use it all in behalf of they that be feeble . and I be sure he have a loving spirit too . I have notice it often among my own people round , that the strong , skilful man be often the gentlest to the woman and child ; and it be pretty to see them carry the little baby as if they be no heavier than little bird . and the baby always seem to like the strong arm best . I feel sure it would be so with . do not you think so , ? " " yes , " say abstractedly , for she mind have be all the while in the wood , and she would have find it difficult to say what she be assent to . see she be not inclin to talk , but there would not have be time to say much more , for they be now at the yard - gate . the still twilight , with its die western red and its few faint struggling star , rest on the farm - yard , where there be not a sound to be hear but the stamping of the cart - horse in the stable . it be about twenty minute after sunset . the fowl be all go to roost , and the bull - dog lay stretch on the straw outside he kennel , with the black - and - tan terrier by he side , when the falling - to of the gate disturb they and set they bark , like good official , before they have any distinct knowledge of the reason . the barking have it be effect in the house , for , as and approach , the doorway be fill by a portly figure , with a ruddy black - eyed face which bear in it the possibility of look extremely acute , and occasionally contemptuous , on market - day , but have now a predominant after -supper expression of hearty good - nature . it be well know that great scholar who have show the most pitiless acerbity in they criticism of other man 's scholarship have yet be of a relenting and indulgent temper in private life ; and I have hear of a learn man meekly rock the twin in the cradle with he left hand , while with he right he inflict the most lacerating sarcasm on a opponent who have betraye a brutal ignorance of . Weakness and error must be forgiven -- ala ! they be not alien to we -- but the man who take the wrong side on the momentous subject of the Hebrew point must be treat as the enemy of he race . there be the same sort of antithetic mixture in : he be of so excellent a disposition that he have be kinder and more respectful than ever to he old father since he have make a deed of gift of all he property , and no man judge he neighbour more charitably on all personal matter ; but for a farmer , like , for example , whose fallow be not well clean , who do not know the rudiment of hedging and ditching , and show but a small share of judgment in the purchase of winter stock , be as hard and implacable as the north - east wind . could not make a remark , even on the weather , but detect in it a taint of that unsoundness and general ignorance which be palpable in all he farming operation . he hate to see the fellow lift the pewter pint to he mouth in the bar of the on market - day , and the mere sight of he on the other side of the road bring a severe and critical expression into he black eye , as different as possible from the fatherly glance he bend on he two niece as they approach the door . have smok he evening pipe , and now hold he hand in he pocket , as the only resource of a man who continue to sit up after the day 's business be done . " why , lass , ye be rather late to - night , " he say , when they reach the little gate lead into the causeway . " the mother have begin to fidget about you , a ' she be get the little un ill . a ' how do you leave the old woman , ? be she much down about the old man ? he have be but a poor bargain to she this five year . " " she be be greatly distress for the loss of he , " say , " but she be see more comforted to - day . she son have be at home all day , work at he father 's coffin , and she love to have he at home . she be be talk about he to I almost all the day . she have a loving heart , though
though she be sorely give to fret and be fearful . I wish she have a surer trust to comfort she in she old age . " " 's sure enough , " say , misunderstan 's wish . " there be no fear but he will yield well I ' the threshing . he be not one of ' they as be all straw and no grain . I will be bond for he any day , as he will be a good son to the last . do he say he would be come to see we soon ? but come in , come in , " he add , make way for they ; " I have not need keep y ' out any longer . " the tall building round the yard shut out a good deal of the sky , but the large window let in abundant light to show every corner of the house - place . , seat in the rocking - chair , which have be bring out of the " right - hand parlour , " be try to soothe to sleep . but be not dispose to sleep ; and when she cousin enter , she raise herself up and show a pair of flushed cheek , which look fatter than ever now they be define by the edge of she linen night -cap . in the large wicker - bottom arm -chair in the left - hand chimney - nook sit old , a hale but shrunke and bleach image of he portly black - haire son -- he head hang forward a little , and he elbow push backwards so as to allow the whole of he forearm to rest on the arm of the chair . he blue handkerchief be spread over he knee , as be usual indoors , when it be not hang over he head ; and he sit watch what go forward with the quiet outward glance of healthy old age , which , disengage from any interest in a inward drama , spy out pin upon the floor , follow one 's minutest motion with a unexpectant purposeless tenacity , watch the flickering of the flame or the sun -gleam on the wall , count the quarry on the floor , watch even the hand of the clock , and please itself with detect a rhythm in the tick . " what a time of ' night this be to come home , ! " say . " look at the clock , do ; why , it be go on for half - past nine , and I have send the gell to be this half - hour , and late enough too ; when they have get to get up at half after four , and the mower 's bottle to fill , and the baking ; and here be this bless child wi' the fever for what I know , and as wakeful as if it be dinner - time , and nobody to help I to give she the physic but you uncle , and fine work there be been , and half of it spild on she night - gown -- it be well if she be swallow more nor ' ull make she worse i'stead of ' better . but folk as have no mind to be of ' use have allay the luck to be out of ' the road when there be anything to be do . " " I do set out before eight , aunt , " say , in a pettish tone , with a slight toss of she head . " but this clock 's so much before the clock at the chase , there be no tell what time it will be when I get here . " " what ! you would be want the clock set by gentlefolk 's time , would you ? a ' sit up burnin ' candle , a ' lie a - bed wi' the sun a - bakin ' you like a cowcumber I ' the frame ? the clock have not be put forrard for the first time to - day , I reckon . " the fact be , Hetty have really forget the difference of the clock when she tell that she set out at eight , and this , with she lingering pace , have make she nearly half a hour later than usual . but here she aunt 's attention be divert from this tender subject by , who , perceive at length that the arrival of she cousin be not likely to bring anything satisfactory to she in particular , begin to cry , " , munny , " in a explosive manner . " well , then , my pet , 's get she , mother will not leave she ; be a good dilling , and go to sleep now , " say , lean back and rock the chair , while she try to make nestle against she . but only cry louder , and say , " do not yock ! " so the mother , with that wondrous patience which love give to the quickest temperament , sit up again , and press she cheek against the linen night - cap and kiss it , and forget to scold any longer . " come , , " say , in a conciliatory tone , " go and get you supper I ' the pantry , as the thing be all put away ; a ' then you can come and take the little un while you aunt undress herself , for she will not lie down in bed without she mother . An' I reckon you could eat a bit , Dinah , for they do not keep much of a house down there . " " no , thank you
you , uncle , " say ; " I eat a good meal before I come away , for . would make a kettle - cake for I . " " I do not want any supper , " say , take off she hat . " I can hold now , if want I . " " why , what nonsense that be to talk ! " say . " do you think you can live wi'out eatin ' , a ' nourish you inside wi' stickin ' red ribbon on you head ? go a ' get you supper this minute , child ; there be a nice bit of ' could pudd I ' the safe -- just what you be fond of . " comply silently by go towards the pantry , and go on speak to . " sit down , my dear , a ' look as if you know what it be to make yourself a bit comfortable I ' the world . I warrant the old woman be glad to see you , since you stay so long . " " she seem to like have I there at last ; but she son say she do not like young woman about she commonly ; and I think just at first she be almost angry with I for go . " " Eh , it be a poor look - out when th ' would folk do to like the young un , " say old , bend he head down lower , and seem to trace the pattern of the quarry with he eye . " aye , it be ill livin ' in a hen - roost for they as do not like fleas , " say . " we have all have we turn at bein' young , I reckon , beot good luck or ill . " " but she must learn to ' commodate herself to young woman , " say , " for it be not to be count on as and ' ull keep bachelor for the next ten year to please they mother . that 'uld be unreasonable . it be not right for old nor young nayther to make a bargain all of ' they own side . what be good for one 's good all round I ' the long run . I be no friend to yoing fellow a - marry afore they know the difference atween a crab a ' a apple ; but they may wait of 'er long . " " to be sure , " say ; " if you go past you dinner - time , there will be little relish of ' you meat . you turn it of 'er a ' of 'er wi' you fork , a ' do not eat it after all . you find faut wi' you meat , a ' the faut 's all I ' you own stomach . " Hetty now come back from the pantry and say , " I can take now , aunt , if you like . " " come , , " say , as he wife seem to hesitate , see that be at last nestling quietly , " thee ' dst better let carry she upstairs , while thee tak 'st thy thing off . Theeot tire . it be time thee wast in bed . the e't bring on the pain in thy side again . " " well , she may hold she if the child 's ull go to she , " say . go close to the rocking - chair , and stand without she usual smile , and without any attempt to entice , simply wait for she aunt to give the child into she hand . " will go to , my dilling , while mother get ready to go to bed ? then shall go into mother 's bed , and sleep there all night . " before she mother have do speak , have give she answer in a unmistakable manner , by knitt she brow , set she tiny tooth against she underlip , and lean forward to slap on the arm with she utmost force . then , without speak , she nestle to she mother again . " hey , hey , " say , while stand without move , " not go to ? that be like a babby . be a little woman , a ' not a babby . " " it be no use try to persuade she , " say . " she allays take against when she be not well . happen she will go to . " Dinah , have take off she bonnet and shawl , have hitherto keep quietly seat in the background , not like to thrust herself between Hetty and what be consider 's proper work . but now she come forward , and , put out she arm , say , " , come and let carry she upstairs along with mother : poor , poor mother ! she be so tired -- she want to go to bed . " turn she face towards , and look at she a instant , then lift herself up , put out she little arm , and let lift she from she mother 's lap . turn away without any sign of ill humour , and , take she hat from the table , stood wait with a air of indifference , to see if she should be tell to do anything else . " you may make the door fast now , ; be be come in this long while , " say , rise with a appearance of relief from she low chair . " get I the match down , Hetty , for I must have the rushlight burn I ' my room . , . "
" the heavy wooden bolt begin to roll in the house door , and old prepare to move , by gather up he blue handkerchief , and reach he bright knob walnut - tree stick from the corner . then lead the way out of the kitchen , follow by the gandfather , and with in she arm -- all go to be by twilight , like the bird . , on she way , pee into the room where she two boy lay ; just to see they ruddy round cheek on the pillow , and to hear for a moment they light regular breathing . " come , Hetty , get to bed , " say , in a soothing tone , as he himself turn to go upstairs . " you do to mean to be late , I will be bound , but you aunt be be worrit to - day . good - night , my wench , good - night . " the two Bed-Chamber and both sleep in the second story , in room adjoin each other , meagrely furnished room , with no blind to shut out the light , which be now begin to gather new strength from the rising of the moon -- more than enough strength to enable to move about and undress with perfect comfort . she could see quite well the peg in the old paint linen - press on which she hang she hat and gow ; she could see the head of every pin on she red cloth pin-cushion ; she could see a reflection of herself in the old - fashioned look - glass , quite as distinct as be needful , consider that she have only to brush she hair and put on she night - cap . a queer old look - glass ! get into a ill temper with it almost every time she dress . it have be consider a handsome glass in its day , and have probably be buy into the Poyser family a quarter of a century before , at a sale of genteel household furniture . even now a auctioneer could say something for it : it have a great deal of tarnished gilding about it ; it have a firm mahogany base , well supply with drawer , which open with a decided jerk and send the contents leap out from the farthest corner , without give you the trouble of reach they ; above all , it have a brass candle - socket on each side , which would give it a aristocratic air to the very last . but object to it because it have numerous dim blotch sprinkle over the mirror , which no rubbing would remove , and because , instead of swing backward and forward , it be fix in a upright position , so that she could only get one good view of she head and neck , and that be to be have only by sit down on a low chair before she dressing - table . and the dressing - table be no dressing - table at all , but a small old chest of drawer , the most awkward thing in the world to sit down before , for the big brass handle quite hurt she knee , and she could not get near the glass at all comfortably . but devout worshipper never allow inconvenience to prevent they from perform they religious rite , and this evening be more bent on she peculiar form of worship than usual . have take off she gown and white kerchief , she draw a key from the large pocket that hang outside she petticoat , and , unlock one of the lower drawer in the chest , reach from it two short bit of wax candle -- secretly buy at -- and stick they in the two brass socket . then she draw forth a bundle of match and light the candle ; and last of all , a small red -framed shilling look - glass , without blotch . it be into this small glass that she choose to look first after seat herself . she look into it , smile and turn she head on one side , for a minute , then lay it down and take out she brush and comb from a upper drawer . she be go to let down she hair , and make herself look like that picture of a lady in 's dressing - room . it be soon do , and the dark hyacinthine curve fall on she neck . it be not heavy , massive , merely rippl hair , but soft and silken , run at every opportunity into delicate ring . but she push it all backward to look like the picture , and form a dark curtain , throw into relief she round white neck . then she put down she brush and comb and look at herself , fold she arm before she , still like the picture . even the old mottled glass could not help send back a lovely image , no the less lovely because 's stay be not of white satin -- such as I feel sure heroines must generally wear -- but of a dark greenish cotton texture . oh yes ! she be very pretty . think so . Prettier than anybody about -- prettier than any of the lady she have ever see visit at the chase -- indeed it seem fine lady be rather old and ugly -- and prettier than , the miller 's daughter , who be call the beauty of . and look at herself to - night with quite a different sensation from what she have ever feel before ; there be a invisible spectator whose eye rest on she like morning on the flowers . he soft voice be say over
over and over again those pretty thing she have hear in the wood ; he arm be round she , and the delicate rise -scent of he hair be with she still . the vainest woman be never thoroughly conscious of she own beauty till she be love by the man who set she own passion vibrat in return . but seem to have make up she mind that something be want , for she get up and reach a old black lace scarf out of the linen - press , and a pair of large ear - ring out of the sacred drawer from which she have take she candle . it be a old old scarf , full of rent , but it would make a become border round she shoulders , and set off the whiteness of she upper arm . and she would take out the little ear-ring she have in she ear -- oh , how she aunt have scold she for have she ear bore !-- and put in those large one . they be but colou glass and gilding , but if you do not know what they be make of , they look just as well as what the lady wore . and so she sit down again , with the large ear - ring in she ear , and the black lace scarf adjust round she shoulders . she look down at she arm : no arm could be prette down to a little way below the elbow -- they be white and plump , and dimple to match she cheek ; but towards the wrist , she think with vexation that they be coarsen by butter - making and other work that lady never do . could not like she to go on do work : he would like to see she in nice clothes , and thin shoe , and white stocking , perhaps with silk clock to they ; for he must love she very much -- no one else have ever put he arm round she and kiss she in that way . he would want to marry she and make a lady of she ; she could hardly dare to shape the thought -- yet how else could it be ? marry she quite secretly , as , the doctor 's assistant , marry the doctor 's niece , and nobody ever find it out for a long while after , and then it be of no use to be angry . the doctor have tell she aunt all about it in 's hearing . she do not know how it would be , but it be quite plain the old could never be tell anything about it , for be ready to faint with awe and fright if she come across he at the chase . he might have be earth - bear , for what she know . it have never enter she mind that he have be young like other man ; he have always be the old at whom everybody be frightened . oh , it be impossible to think how it would be ! but would know ; he be a great gentleman , and could have he way in everything , and could buy everything he like . and nothing could be as it have be again : perhaps some day she should be a grand lady , and ride in she coach , and dress for dinner in a brocaded silk , with feather in she hair , and she dress sweep the ground , like and , when she see they go into the dining - room one evening as she pee through the little round window in the lobby ; only she should not be old and ugly like , or all the same thickness like , but very pretty , with she hair do in a great many different way , and sometimes in a pink dress , and sometimes in a white one -- she do not know which she like best ; and and everybody would perhaps see she go out in she carriage -- or rather , they would hear of it : it be impossible to imagine these thing happen at in sight of she aunt . at the thought of all this splendour , get up from she chair , and in do so catch the little red-framed glass with the edge of she scarf , so that it fall with a bang on the floor ; but she be too eagerly occupy with she vision to care about pick it up ; and after a momentary start , begin to pace with a pigeon - like stateliness backward and forwards along she room , in she coloured stay and colou skirt , and the old black lace scarf round she shoulders , and the great glass ear - ring in she ear . how pretty the little puss look in that odd dress ! it would be the easiest folly in the world to fall in love with she : there be such a sweet babylike roundness about she face and figure ; the delicate dark ring of hair lie so charmingly about she ear and neck ; she great dark eye with they long eye - lash touch one so strangely , as if a imprison frisky sprite look out of they . ah , what a prize the man get who win a sweet bride like ! how the man envy he who come to the wedding breakfast , and see she hang on he arm in she white lace and orange blossom . the dear , young , round , soft , flexible thing ! she heart must be just as soft , she temper just as free from angle , she character just as pliant . if anything ever go wrong , it must be the husband
husband 's fault there : he can make she what he like -- that be plain . and the lover himself think so too : the little darling be so fond of he , she little vanity be so bewitch , he would not consent to she be a bit wiser ; those kittenlike glance and movement be just what one want to make one 's hearth a paradise . every man under such circumstance be conscious of be a great physiognomist . , he know , have a language of she own , which she use with strict veracity , and he consider himself a adept in the language . have write out he bride 's character for he in those exquisite line of cheek and lip and ching , in those eyelid delicate as petal , in those long lash curl like the staman of a flower , in the dark liquid dept of those wonderful eye . how she will dote on she child ! she be almost a child herself , and the little pink round thing will hang about she like floret round the central flower ; and the husband will look on , smile benignly , able , whenever he choose , to withdraw into the sanctuary of he wisdom , towards which he sweet wife will look reverently , and never lift the curtain . it be a marriage such as they make in the golden age , when the man be all wise and majestic and the woman all lovely and loving . it be very much in this way that we friend think about ; only he put he thought into different word . if ever she behave with cold vanity towards he , he say to himself it be only because she do not love I well enough ; and he be sure that she love , whenever she give it , would be the most precious thing a man could possess on earth . before you despise as deficient in penetration , pray ask yourself if you be ever predispose to believe evil of any pretty woman -- if you ever could , without hard head - breaking demonstration , believe evil of the one supremely pretty woman who have bewitch you . no : people who love downy peach be apt not to think of the stone , and sometimes jar they tooth terribly against it . , too , have the same sort of notion about , so far as he have think of she nature of all . he feel sure she be a dear , affectionate , good little thing . the man who awake the wondere tremulous passion of a young girl always think she affectionate ; and if he chance to look forward to future year , probably imagine himself be virtuously tender to she , because the poor thing be so clingingly fond of he . make these dear woman so -- and it be a convenient arrangement in case of sickness . after all , I believe the wisest of we must be beguil in this way sometimes , and must think both better and worse of people than they deserve . have she language , and she be not unveracious ; but we do not know all the intricacy of she syntax just yet , and in a hasty reading we may happen to extract the very opposite of she real meaning . Long dark eyelash , now -- what can be more exquisite ? I find it impossible not to expect some depth of soul behind a deep grey eye with a long dark eyelash , in spite of a experience which have show I that they may go along with deceit , peculation , and stupidity . but if , in the reaction of disgust , I have betake myself to a fishy eye , there have be a surprising similarity of result . one begin to suspect at length that there be no direct correlation between eyelash and moral ; or else , that the eyelash express the disposition of the fair one 's grandmother , which be on the whole less important to we . no eyelash could be more beautiful than 's ; and now , while she walk with she pigeon - like stateliness along the room and look down on she shoulders bordere by the old black lace , the dark fringe show to perfection on she pink cheek . they be but dim ill - define picture that she narrow bit of a imagination can make of the future ; but of every picture she be the central figure in fine clothes ; be very close to she , put he arm round she , perhaps kiss she , and everybody else be admir and envie she -- especially , whose new print dress look very contemptible by the side of 's resplendent toilette . do any sweet or sad memory mingle with this dream of the future -- any loving thought of she second parent -- of the child she have help to tend -- of any youthful companion , any pet animal , any relic of she own childhood even ? not one . there be some plant that have hardly any root : you may tear they from they native nook of rock or wall , and just lay they over you ornamental flower - pot , and they blossom none the worse . Hetty could have cast all she past life behind she and never care to be remind of it again . I think she have no feeling at all towards the old house , and do not like the 's Ladder and the long row of hollyhock in the garden better than other flowers -- perhaps not so well . it be wonderful how little she seem to care about wait on she uncle , who have
have be a good father to she -- she hardly ever remember to reach he he pipe at the right time without be tell , unless a visitor happen to be there , who would have a better opportunity of see she as she walk across the hearth . Hetty do not understand how anybody could be very fond of middle - aged people . and as for those tiresome child , and and , they have be the very nuisance of she life -- as bad as buz insect that will come tease you on a hot day when you want to be quiet . , the eldest , be a baby when she first come to the farm , for the child bear before he have die , and so Hetty have have they all three , one after the other , toddl by she side in the meadow , or play about she on wet day in the half - empty room of the large old house . the boy be out of hand now , but be still a day - long plague , worse than either of the other have be , because there be more fuss make about she . and there be no end to the make and mende of clothes . would have be glad to hear that she should never see a child again ; they be worse than the nasty little lamb that the shepherd be always bring in to be take special care of in lambing time ; for the lambs be get rid of sooner or later . as for the young chicken and turkey , would have hate the very word " hatching , " if she aunt have not bribe she to attend to the young poultry by promise she the proceed of one out of every brood . the round downy chick pee out from under they mother 's wing never touch Hetty with any pleasure ; that be not the sort of prettiness she care about , but she do care about the prettiness of the new thing she would buy for herself at with the money they fetch . and yet she look so dimpled , so charming , as she stoop down to put the soaked bread under the hen - coop , that you must have be a very acute personage indeed to suspect she of that hardness . , the housemaid , with a turn - up nose and a protuberant jaw , be really a tender - hear girl , and , as Poyser say , a jewel to look after the poultry ; but she stolid face show nothing of this maternal delight , any more than a brown earthenware pitcher will show the light of the lamp within it . it be generally a feminine eye that first detect the moral deficiencies hide under the " dear deceit " of beauty , so it be not surprising that , with she keenness and abundant opportunity for observation , should have form a tolerably fair estimate of what might be expect from in the way of feeling , and in moment of indignation she have sometimes speak with great openness on the subject to she husband . " she be no better than a peacock , as 'uld strut about on the wall and spread it be tail when the sun shone if all the folk I ' the parish be die : there be nothing seem to give she a turn I ' th ' inside , not even when we think have tumble into the pit . to think of ' that dear cherub ! and we find she wi' she little shoe stick I ' the mud a ' crying fit to break she heart by the far horse - pit . but never minde it , I could see , though she be be at the nussin ' of ' the child ever since it be a babby . it be my belief she heart 's as hard as a pebble . " " Nay , nay , " say , " thee must not judge too hard . they young gell be like the unripe grain ; they will make good meal by and by , but they be squashy as yet . the e't see will be all right when she be get a good husband and child of she own . " " I do not want to be hard upo ' the gell . she be get cliver finger of she own , and can be useful enough when she like and I should miss she wi' the butter , for she be get a cool hand . a ' let be what may , I would strive to do my part by a niece o' yours -- a ' that I have do , for I have teach she everything as belong to a house , an' I have tell she she duty often enough , though , know , I 've no breath to spare , a ' that catching 's pain come on dreadful by time . Wi' they three gell in the house I would need have twice the strength to keep them up to they work . it be like have roast meat at three fire ; as soon as you have bast one , another 's burnin '. " stand sufficiently in awe of she aunt to be anxious to conceal from she so much of she vanity as could be hide without too great a sacrifice . she could not resist spend she money in bit of finery which disapprove ; but she would have be ready to die with shame , vexation , and fright if she aunt have this moment open the door , and see she with she bits of candle light , and strutt about deck in she scarf and
and ear - ring . to prevent such a surprise , she always bolt she door , and she have not forget to do so to - night . it be well : for there now come a light tap , and , with a leaping heart , rush to blow out the candle and throw they into the drawer . she da not stay to take out she ear - ring , but she throw off she scarf , and let it fall on the floor , before the light tap come again . we shall know how it be that the light tap come , if we leave for a short time and return to , at the moment when she have deliver to she mother 's arm , and be come upstairs to she bedroom , adjoin 's . delighte in she bedroom window . be on the second story of that tall house , it give she a wide view over the field . the thickness of the wall form a broad step about a yard below the window , where she could place she chair . and now the first thing she do on enter she room be to seat herself in this chair and look out on the peaceful field beyond which the large moon be rise , just above the hedgerow elm . she like the pasture best where the milch cow be lie , and next to that the meadow where the grass be half - mown , and lay in silvered sweeping line . she heart be very full , for there be to be only one more night on which she would look out on those field for a long time to come ; but she think little of leave the mere scene , for , to she , bleak have just as many charms . she think of all the dear people whom she have learn to care for among these peaceful field , and who would now have a place in she loving remembrance for ever . she think of the struggle and the weariness that might lie before they in the rest of they life 's journey , when she would be away from they , and know nothing of what be befall they ; and the pressure of this thought soon become too strong for she to enjoy the unresponding stillness of the moonlit field . she close she eye , that she might feel more intensely the presence of a and deeper and more tender than be breathe from the earth and sky . that be often 's mode of pray in solitude . simply to close she eye and to feel herself enclose by the ; then gradually she fear , she year anxiety for other , melt away like ice - crystal in a warm ocean . she have sit in this way perfectly still , with she hand cross on she lap and the pale light rest on she calm face , for at least ten minute when she be start by a loud sound , apparently of something fall in 's room . but like all sound that fall on we ear in a state of abstraction , it have no distinct character , but be simply loud and startling , so that she feel uncertain whether she have interpret it rightly . she rise and listen , but all be quiet afterwards , and she reflect that might merely have knock something down in get into bed . she begin slowly to undress ; but now , owe to the suggestion of this sound , she thought become concentrate on -- that sweet young thing , with life and all its trial before she -- the solemn daily duty of the wife and mother -- and she mind so unprepared for they all , bend merely on little foolish , selfish pleasure , like a child hug its toy in the beginning of a long toilsome journey in which it will have to bear hunger and cold and unsheltered darkness . feel a double care for , because she share 's anxious interest in he brother 's lot , and she have not come to the conclusion that do not love well enough to marry he . she see too clearly the absence of any warm , self - devoting love in 's nature to regard the coldness of she behaviour towards as any indication that he be not the man she would like to have for a husband . and this blank in 's nature , instead of exciting 's dislike , only touche she with a deeper pity : the lovely face and form affect she as beauty always affect a pure and tender mind , free from selfish jealousy . it be a excellent divine gift , that give a deeper patho to the need , the sin , the sorrow with which it be mingl , as the canker in a lily - white bud be more grievous to behold than in a common pot -herb . by the time have undress and put on she night - gown , this feeling about have gather a painful intensity ; she imagination have create a thorny thicket of sin and sorrow , in which she see the poor thing struggling tear and bleed , look with tear for rescue and find none . it be in this way that 's imagination and sympathy act and react habitually , each heighten the other . she feel a deep longing to go now and pour into 's ear all the word of tender warning and appeal that rush into she mind . but perhaps be already asleep . Dinah put she ear to the partition and hear still some slight noise , which convince she that be not yet in bed . still she hesitate ; she be not quite
quite certain of a divine direction ; the voice that tell she to go to see no stronger that the other voice which say that be weary , and that go to she now in a unseasonable moment would only tend to close she heart more obstinately . be not satisfy without a more unmistakable guidance than those inward voice . there be light enough for she , if she open she , to discern the text sufficiently to know what it would say to she . she know the physiognomy of every page , and could tell on what book she open , sometimes on what chapter , without see title or number . it be a small thick , wear quite round at the edge . lay it sideways on the window ledge , where the light be strongest , and then open it with she forefinger . the first word she look at be those at the top of the left - hand page : " and they all wept sore , and fall on 's neck and kiss he . " that be enough for ; she have open on that memorable parting at , when have feel bound to open he heart in a last exhortation and warning . she hesitat no longer , but , open she own door gently , go and tap on 's . we know she have to tap twice , because have to put out she candle and throw off she black lace scarf ; but after the second tap the door be open immediately . say , " will you let I come in , ? " and , without speak , for she be confuse and vex , open the door wider and let she in . what a strange contrast the two figure make , visible enough in that mingled twilight and moonlight ! Hetty , she cheek flush and she eye glisten from she imaginary drama , she beautiful neck and arm bare , she hair hang in a curly tangle down she back , and the bauble in she ear . , cove with she long white dress , she pale face full of subdue emotion , almost like a lovely corpse into which the soul have return charge with sublimer secret and a sublimer love . they be nearly of the same height ; evidently a little the taller as she put she arm round 's waist and kiss she forehead . " I know you be not in bed , my dear , " she say , in she sweet clear voice , which be irritat to , mingl with she own peevish vexation like music with jangling chain , " for I hear you move ; and I long to speak to you again to - night , for it be the last but one that I shall be here , and we do not know what may happen to - morrow to keep we apart . shall I sit down with you while you do up you hair ? " " oh yes , " say , hastily turn round and reach the second chair in the room , glad that look as if she do not notice she ear - ring . sit down , and begin to brush together she hair before twist it up , do it with that air of excessive indifference which belong to confuse self - consciousness . but the expression of 's eye gradually relieve she ; they seem unobservant of all detail . " dear Hetty , " she say , " it have be borne in upon my mind to - night that you may some day be in trouble -- trouble be appoint for we all here below , and there come a time when we need more comfort and help than the thing of this life can give . I want to tell you that if ever you be in trouble , and need a friend that will always feel for you and love you , you have get that friend in at , and if you come to she , or send for she , she will never forget this night and the word she be speak to you now . will you remember it , ? " " yes , " say , rather frightened . " but why should you think I shall be in trouble ? do you know of anything ? " Hetty have seat herself as she tie on she cap , and now lean forwards and take she hand as she answer , " because , dear , trouble come to we all in this life : we set we heart on thing which it be not 's will for we to have , and then we go sorrow ; the people we love be take from we , and we can joy in nothing because they be not with we ; sickness come , and we faint under the burden of we feeble body ; we go astray and do wrong , and bring ourselves into trouble with we fellow- man . there be no man or woman bear into this world to whom some of these trial do not fall , and so I feel that some of they must happen to you ; and I desire for you , that while you be young you should seek for strength from you , that you may have a support which will not fail you in the evil day . " pause and release 's hand that she might not hinder she . sit quite still ; she feel no response within herself to 's anxious affection ; but 's word utter with solemn pathetic distinctness , affect she with a chill fear . she flush have die away almost to paleness ; she have the timidity of a luxurious pleasure -
- seek nature , which shrink from the hint of pain . see the effect , and she tender anxious pleading become the more earnest , till , full of a vague fear that something evil be some time to befall she , begin to cry . it be we habit to say that while the lower nature can never understand the higher , the higher nature command a complete view of the lower . but I think the higher nature have to learn this comprehension , as we learn the art of vision , by a good deal of hard experience , often with bruise and gash incur in take thing up by the wrong end , and fancie we space wider than it be . have never see affect in this way before , and , with she usual benignant hopefulness , she trust it be the stirring of a divine impulse . she kiss the sobbing thing , and begin to cry with she for grateful joy . but be simply in that excitable state of mind in which there be no calculating what turn the feeling may take from one moment to another , and for the first time she become irritate under 's caress . she push she away impatiently , and say , with a childish sobb voice , " do not talk to I so , . why do you come to frighten I ? I have never do anything to you . why can not you let I be ? " poor feel a pang . she be too wise to persist , and only say mildly , " yes , my dear , you be tired ; I will not hinder you any longer . make haste and get into bed . good -night . " she go out of the room almost as quietly and quickly as if she have be a ghost ; but once by the side of she own bed , she throw herself on she knee and pour out in deep silence all the passionate pity that fill she heart . as for , she be soon in the wood again -- she wake dream be merge in a sleeping life scarcely more fragmentary and confused . yoArthu Donnithorne , you remember , be under a engagement with himself to go and see this morning , and he be awake and dress so early that he determine to go before breakfast , instead of after . the rector , he know , breakfast alone at half - past nine , the lady of the family have a different breakfast - hour ; yoArthu will have a early ride over the hill and breakfast with he . one can say everything best over a meal . the progress of civilization have make a breakfast or a dinner a easy and cheerful substitute for more troublesome and disagreeable ceremony . we take a less gloomy view of we error now we father confessor listen to we over he egg and coffee . we be more distinctly conscious that rude penance be out of the question for gentleman in a enlighten age , and that mortal sin be not incompatible with a appetite for muffin . a assault on we pockets , which in more barbarous time would have be make in the brusque form of a pistol - shot , be quite a well - breed and smile procedure now it have become a request for a loan throw in as a easy parenthesis between the second and third glassis of claret . still , there be this advantage in the old rigid form , that they commit you to the fulfilment of a resolution by some outward deed : when you have put you mouth to one end of a hole in a stone wall and be aware that there be a expectant ear at the other end , you be more likely to say what you come out with the intention of say than if you be seat with you leg in a easy attitude under the mahogany with a companion who will have no reason to be surprised if you have nothing particular to say . however , , as he wind among the pleasant lane on horseback in the morning sunshine , have a sincere determination to open he heart to the rector , and the swirl sound of the scythe as he pass by the meadow be all the pleasanter to he because of this honest purpose . he be glad to see the promise of settled weather now , for get in the hay , about which the farmer have be fearful ; and there be something so healthful in the sharing of a joy that be general and not merely personal , that this think about the hay - harvest react on he state of mind and make he resolution seem a easier matter . a man about town might perhaps consider that these influence be not to be feel out of a child 's story - book ; but when you be among the field and hedgerow , it be impossible to maintain a consistent superiority to simple natural pleasure . yoArthu have pass the village of and be approach the side of the hill , when , at a turning in the road , he see a figure about a hundred yard before he which it be impossible to mistake for any one else than , even if there have be no grey , tailless shepherd - dog at he heel . he be strid along at he usual rapid pace , and push on he horse to overtake he , for he retain too much of he boyish feeling for to miss a opportunity of chat with he . I will not say that he love for that good fellow do not owe some of its force to the
the love of patronage : we friend like to do everything that be handsome , and to have he handsome deed recognize . look round as he hear the quickening clatter of the horse 's heel , and wait for the horseman , lifte he paper cap from he head with a bright smile of recognition . next to he own brother , would have do more for than for any other young man in the world . there be hardly anything he would not rather have lose than the two - foot ruler which he always carry in he pocket ; it be 's present , buy with he pocket -money when he be a fair - hair lad of eleven , and when he have profit so well by 's lesson in carpentering and turn as to embarrass every female in the house with gift of superfluous thread - reel and round box . have quite a pride in the little squire in those early day , and the feeling have only become slightly modified as the fair - haired lad have grow into the whiskered young man . , I confess , be very susceptible to the influence of rank , and quite ready to give a extra amount of respect to every one who have more advantage than himself , not be a philosopher or a proletaire with democratic idea , but simply a stout - limb clever carpenter with a large fund of reverence in he nature , which inclin he to admit all establish claim unless he see very clear grounds for question they . he have no theory about set the world to right , but he see there be a great deal of damage do by building with ill - seaso timber -- by ignorant man in fine clothes make plan for outhouse and workshop and the like without know the bearing of thing -- by slovenly joiner ' work , and by hasty contract that could never be fulfil without ruin somebody ; and he resolve , for he part , to set he face against such doings . on these point he would have maintain he opinion against the largest land proprietor in or either ; but he feel that beyond these it would be better for he to defer to people who be more know than himself . he see as plainly as possible how ill the wood on the estate be manage , and the shameful state of the farm - building ; and if old have ask he the effect of this mismanagement , he would have speak he opinion without flinching , but the impulse to a respectful demeanour towards a " gentleman " would have be strong within he all the while . the word " gentleman " have a spell for , and , as he often say , he " could not abide a fellow who think he make himself fine by be coxy to 's betters . " I must remind you again that have the blood of the peasant in he vein , and that since he be in he prime half a century ago , you must expect some of he characteristic to be obsolete . towards the young squire this instinctive reverence of 's be assist by boyish memory and personal regard so you may imagine that he think far more of 's good quality , and attach far more value to very slight action of he , than if they have be the quality and action of a common workman like himself . he feel sure it would be a fine day for everybody about when the young squire come into the estate -- such a generous open - hearted disposition as he have , and a " uncommon " notion about improvement and repair , consider he be only just come of age . thus there be both respect and affection in the smile with which he raise he paper cap as ride up . " well , , how be you ? " say , hold out he hand . he never shook hand with any of the farmer , and feel the honour keenly . " I could swear to you back a long way off . it be just the same back , only broader , as when you use to carry I on it . do you remember ? " " aye , sir , I remember . it 'uld be a poor look - out if folk do not remember what they do and say when they be lad . we should think no more about old friend than we do about new un , then . " " you be go to , I suppose ? " say , put he horse on at a slow pace while walk by he side . " be you go to the rectory ? " " no , sir , I be go to see about 's barn . they be afraid of the roof push the wall out , and I be go to see what can be do with it before we send the stuff and the workman . " " why , trust almost everything to you now , , do not he ? I should think he will make you he partner soon . he will , if he be wise . " " Nay , sir , I do not see as he would be much the better off for that . a foreman , if he be get a conscience and delights in he work , will do he business as well as if he be a partner . I would not give a penny for a man as 'uld drive a nail in slack because he do not get extra pay for it . " " I know that , ; I know you work for he as
as well as if you be work for yourself . but you would have more power than you have now , and could turn the business to better account perhaps . the old man must give up he business sometime , and he have no son ; I suppose he will want a son - in - law who can take to it . but he have rather grasp finger of he own , I fancy . I daresay he want a man who can put some money into the business . if I be not as poor as a rat , I would gladly invest some money in that way , for the sake of have you settle on the estate . I be sure I should profit by it in the end . and perhaps I shall be better off in a year or two . I shall have a larger allowance now I be of age ; and when I have pay off a debt or two , I shall be able to look about I . " " you be very good to say so , sir , and I be not unthankful . but " -- continue , in a decide tone -- " I should not like to make any offer to , or t ' have any make for I . I see no clear road to a partnership . if he should ever want to dispose of the business , that 'uld be a different matter . I should be glad of some money at a fair interest then , for I feel sure I could pay it off in time . " " very well , , " say , remember what have say about a probable hitch in the love - make between and , " we will say no more about it at present . when be you father to be bury ? " " on , sir ; 's come earlier on purpose . I shall be glad when it be over , for I think my mother ' ull perhaps get easier then . it cut one sadly to see the grief of old people ; they 've no way of ' work it off , and the new spring bring no new shoot out on the withered tree . " " ah , you have have a good deal of trouble and vexation in you life , . I do not think you have ever be hare - brained and light - hear , like other youngster . you have always have some care on you mind . " " why , yes , sir ; but that be nothing to make a fuss about . if we be man and have man 's feeling , I reckon we must have man 's trouble . we can not be like the bird , as fly from they nest as soon as they have get they wing , and never know they kin when they see th'ey , and get a fresh lot every year . I have have enough to be thankful for : I have allays have health and strength and brain to give I a delight in my work ; and i count it a great thing as I have have 's night - school to go to . he be help I to knowledge I could never ha ' get by myself . " " what a rare fellow you be , ! " say , after a pause , in which he have look musingly at the big fellow walking by he side . " I could hit out better than most man at , and yet I believe you would knock I into next week if I be to have a battle with you . " " forbid I should ever do that , sir , " say , look round at and smile . " I use to fight for fun , but I have never do that since I be the cause of ' poor be lay up for a fortnight . I will never fight any man again , only when he behave like a scoundrel . if you get hold of a chap that be get no shame nor conscience to stop he , you must try what you can do by bunge he eye up . " yoArthu do not laugh , for he be preoccupy with some thought that make he say presently , " I should think now , , you never have any struggle within yourself . I fancy you would master a wish that you have make up you mind it be not quite right to indulge , as easily as you would knock down a drunken fellow who be quarrelsome with you . I mean , you be never shilly - shally , first make up you mind that you will not do a thing , and then do it after all ? " " well , " say , slowly , after a moment 's hesitation , " no . I do not remember ever be see - see in that way , when I would make my mind up , as you say , that a thing be wrong . it take the taste out of ' my mouth for thing , when I know I should have a heavy conscience after th'ey . I have see pretty clear , ever since I could cast up a sum , as you can never do what be wrong without breed sin and trouble more than you can ever see . it be like a bit of ' bad workmanship -- you never see th' end of ' the mischief it will do . and it be a poor look - out to come into the world to make you fellow - creature worse off instead o ' better . but there
there be a difference between the thing folk call wrong . I be not for make a sin of every little fool 's trick , or bit o' nonsense anybody may be let into , like some of ' they dissenter . and a man may have two mind whether it be not worthwhile to get a bruise or two for the sake of a bit of ' fun . but it be not my way to be see - see about anything : I think my fault lie th ' other way . when I have say a thing , if it be only to myself , it be hard for I to go back . " " yes , that be just what I expect of you , " say . " you have get a iron will , as well as a iron arm . but however strong a man 's resolution may be , it cost he something to carry it out , now and then . we may determine not to gather any cherry and keep we hand sturdily in we pocket , but we can not prevent we mouths from watering . " " that be true , sir , but there be nothing like settle with ourselves as there be a deal we must do without I ' this life . it be no use look on life as if it be Treddle 'on , where folk only go to see show and get fairing . if we do , we shall find it different . but where be the use of ' I talk to you , sir ? you know better than I do . " " I be not so sure of that , . you have have four or five year of experience more than I have have , and I think you life have be a better school to you than college have be to I . " " why , sir , you seem to think of ' college something like what do . he say college mostly make people like bladder -- just good for nothing but t ' hold the tuff as be pour into th'ey . but he be get a tongue like a sharp blade , have -- it never touch anything but it cut . here be the turning , sir . I must bid you good - morning , as you be go to the rectory . " " good - bye , , good - bye . " yoArthu give he horse to the groom at the rectory gate , and walk along the gravel towards the door which open on the garden . he know that the rector always breakfast in he study , and the study lay on the left hand of this door , opposite the dining - room . it be a small low room , belong to the old part of the house -- dark with the sombre cover of the book that line the wall ; yet it look very cheery this morning as yoArthu reach the open window . for the morning sun fall aslant on the great glass globe with gold fish in it , which stand on a scagliola pillar in front of the ready - spread bachelor breakfast - table , and by the side of this breakfast - table be a group which would have make any room enticing . in the crimson damask easy - chair sat , with that radiant freshness which he always have when he come from he morning toilet ; he finely for plump white hand be play along 's brown curly back ; and close to 's tail , which be wag with calm matronly pleasure , the two brown pup be roll over each other in a ecstatic duet of worrying noise . on a cushion a little remove sat Pug , with the air of a maiden lady , who look on these familiarity as animal weakness , which she make as little show as possible of observing . on the table , at 's elbow , lay the first volume of the , which know well by sight ; and the silver coffee - pot , which be bring in , send forth a fragrant steam which complete the delight of a bachelor breakfast . " Hallo , , that be a good fellow ! you be just in time , " say , as pause and step in over the low window - sill . " Carroll , we shall want more coffee and egg , and have not you get some cold fowl for we to eat with that ham ? why , this be like old day , Arthur ; you have not be to breakfast with I these five year . " " it be a tempting morning for a ride before breakfast , " say ; " and I use to like breakfast with you so when I be read with you . my grandfather be always a few degrees colder at breakfast than at any other hour in the day . I think he morning bath do not agree with he . " yoArthu be anxious not to imply that he come with any special purpose . he have no sooner find himself in 's presence than the confidence which he have think quite easy before , suddenly appear the most difficult thing in the world to he , and at the very moment of shaking hand he see he purpose in quite a new light . how could he make Irwine understand he position unless he tell he those little scene in the wood ; and how could he tell they without look like a fool ? and then he weakness in come back from 's , and do the very opposite of what he intend ! Irwine would think he a shilly -
- shally fellow ever after . however , it must come out in a unpremeditated way ; the conversation might lead up to it . " I like breakfast - time better than any other moment in the day , " say . " no dust have settle on one 's mind then , and it present a clear mirror to the ray of thing . I always have a favourite book by I at breakfast , and I enjoy the bits I pick up then so much , that regularly every morning it seem to I as if I should certainly become studious again . but presently bring up a poor fellow who have kill a hare , and when I have get through my ' justicing , ' as call it , I be inclin for a ride round the glebe , and on my way back I meet with the master of the workhouse , who have get a long story of a mutinous pauper to tell I ; and so the day go on , and I be always the same lazy fellow before evening set in . besides , one want the stimulus of sympathy , and I have never have that since poor leave . if you have stuck to you book well , you rascal , I should have have a pleasanter prospect before I . but scholarship do not run in you family blood . " " no indeed . it be well if I can remember a little inapplicable latin to adorn my maiden speech in parliament six or seven year hence . ' Cra ingen iterabimus aequor , ' and a few shred of that sort , will perhaps stick to I , and I shall arrange my opinion so as to introduce they . but I do not think a knowledge of the classic be a pressing want to a country gentleman ; as far as I can see , he would much better have a knowledge of manure . I have be read you friend Arthur young 's book lately , and there be nothing I should like better than to carry out some of he idea in put the farmers on a better management of they land ; and , as he say , make what be a wild country , all of the same dark hue , bright and variegate with corn and cattle . my grandfather will never let I have any power while he life , but there be nothing I should like better than to undertake the side of the estate -- it be in a dismal condition -- and set improvement on foot , and gallop about from one place to another and overlook they . I should like to know all the labourer , and see they touch they hat to I with a look of goodwill . " " , ! a man who have no feeling for the classic could not make a better apology for come into the world than by increase the quantity of food to maintain scholar -- and rector who appreciate scholar . and whenever you enter on you career of model landlord may I be there to see . you will want a portly rector to complete the picture , and take he tithe of all the respect and honour you get by you hard work . only do not set you heart too strongly on the goodwill you be to get in consequence . I be not sure that man be the fondest of those who try to be useful to they . you know have get the curse of the whole neighbourhood upon he about that enclosure . you must make it quite clear to you mind which you be most bent upon , old boy -- popularity or usefulness -- else you may happen to miss both . " " oh ! be harsh in he manners ; he do not make himself personally agreeable to he tenant . I do not believe there be anything you can not prevail on people to do with kindness . for my part , I could not live in a neighbourhood where I be not respect and belove . and it be very pleasant to go among the tenant here -- they seem all so well inclin to I I suppose it seem only the other day to they since I be a little lad , ride on a pony about as big as a sheep . and if fair allowances be make to they , and they building attend to , one could persuade they to farm on a better plan , stupid as they be . " " the mind you fall in love in the right place , and do not get a wife who will drain you purse and make you niggardly in spite of yourself . my mother and I have a little discussion about you sometimes : she say , 'I will never risk a single prophecy on until I see the woman he fall in love with . ' she think you lady - love will rule you as the moon rule the tide . but I feel bound to stand up for you , as my pupil you know , and I maintain that you be not of that watery quality . so mind you do not disgrace my judgment . " yoArthu wince under this speech , for keen old Mrs . 's opinion about he have the disagreeable effect of a sinister oman . this , to be sure , be only another reason for persever in he intention , and get a additional security against himself . nevertheless , at this point in the conversation , he be conscious of increase disinclination to tell he story about . he be of a impressible nature , and live a great deal in other people 's
's opinion and feeling concern himself ; and the mere fact that he be in the presence of a intimate friend , who have not the slightest notion that he have have any such serious internal struggle as he come to confide , rather shook he own belief in the seriousness of the struggle . it be not , after all , a thing to make a fuss about ; and what could Irwine do for he that he could not do for himself ? he would go to in spite of 's lameness -- go on , and let follow as well as he could on the old hack . that be he think as he sugar he coffee ; but the next minute , as he be lift the cup to he lip , he remember how thoroughly he have make up he mind last night to tell . no ! he would not be vacillat again -- he would do what he have mean to do , this time . so it would be well not to let the personal tone of the conversation altogether drop . if they go to quite indifferent topics , he difficulty would be heighten . it have require no noticeable pause for this rush and rebound of feeling , before he answer , " but I think it be hardly a argument against a man 's general strength of character that he should be apt to be master by love . a fine constitution do not insure one against smallpox or any other of those inevitable disease . a man may be very firm in other matter and yet be under a sort of witchery from a woman . " " yes ; but there be this difference between love and smallpox , or bewitchment either -- that if you detect the disease at a early stage and try change of air , there be every chance of complete escape without any further development of symptom . and there be certain alternative dos which a man may administer to himself by keep unpleasant consequence before he mind : this give you a sort of smoke glass through which you may look at the resplendent fair one and discern she true outline ; though I be afraid , by the by , the smoked glass be apt to be miss just at the moment it be most want . I daresay , now , even a man fortify with a knowledge of the classic might be lure into a imprudent marriage , in spite of the warning give he by the chorus in the Prometheus . " the smile that flit across 's face be a faint one , and instead of follow 's playful lead , he say , quite seriously -- " yes , that be the worst of it . it be a desperately vexatious thing , that after all one 's reflection and quiet determination , we should be rule by mood that one can not calculate on beforehand . I do not think a man ought to be blame so much if he be betraye into do thing in that way , in spite of he resolution . " " ah , but the mood lie in he nature , my boy , just as much as he reflection do , and more . a man can never do anything at variance with he own nature . he carry within he the germ of he most exceptional action ; and if we wise people make eminent fools of ourselves on any particular occasion , we must endure the legitimate conclusion that we carry a few grains of folly to we ounce of wisdom . " " well , but one may be betraye into do thing by a combination of circumstance , which one might never have do otherwise . " " why , yes , a man can not very well steal a bank - note unless the bank - note lie within convenient reach ; but he will not make we think he a honest man because he begin to howl at the bank - note for falling in he way . " " but surely you do not think a man who struggle against a temptation into which he fall at last as bad as the man who never struggle at all ? " " no , certainly ; I pity he in proportion to he struggle , for they foreshadow the inward suffering which be the worst form of . consequence be unpitying . we deed carry they terrible consequence , quite apart from any fluctuation that go before -- consequence that be hardly ever confin to ourselves . and it be best to fix we mind on that certainty , instead of consider what may be the element of excuse for we . but I never know you so inclin for moral discussion , ? be it some danger of you own that you be consider in this philosophical , general way ? " in ask this question , push he plate away , throw himself back in he chair , and look straight at . he really suspect that want to tell he something , and think of smoothing the way for he by this direct question . but he be mistaken . bring suddenly and involuntarily to the brink of confession , shrank back and feel less dispose towards it than ever . the conversation have take a more serious tone than he have intend -- it would quite mislead -- he would imagine there be a deep passion for , while there be no such thing . he be conscious of colouring , and be annoyed at he boyishness . " oh no , no danger , " he say as indifferently as he could . " I do not know that I be more liable to irresolution than other
other people ; only there be little incidents now and then that set one speculating on what might happen in the future . " be there a motive at work under this strange reluctance of 's which have a sort of backstair influence , not admit to himself ? we mental business be carry on much in the same way as the business of the State : a great deal of hard work be do by agent who be not acknowledge . in a piece of machinery , too , I believe there be often a small unnoticeable wheel which have a great deal to do with the motion of the large obvious one . possibly there be some such unrecognized agent secretly busy in 's mind at this moment -- possibly it be the fear lest he might hereafter find the fact of have make a confession to the rector a serious annoyance , in case he should not be able quite to carry out he good resolution ? I dare not assert that it be not so . the human soul be a very complex thing . the idea of have just cross 's mind as he look inquiringly at , but he disclaim indifferent answer confirm the thought which have quickly follow -- that there could be nothing serious in that direction . there be no probability that ever see she except at church , and at she own home under the eye of ; and the hint he have give about she the other day have no more serious meaning than to prevent he from notice she so as to rouse the little chit 's vanity , and in this way perturb the rustic drama of she life . yoArthu would soon join he regiment , and be far away : no , there could be no danger in that quarter , even if 's character have not be a strong security against it . he honest , patronize pride in the good - will and respect of everybody about he be a safeguard even against foolish romance , still more against a lower kind of folly . if there have be anything special on 's mind in the previous conversation , it be clear he be not inclin to enter into detail , and be too delicate to imply even a friendly curiosity . he perceive a change of subject would be welcome , and say , " by the way , , at you colonel 's birthday fete there be some transparency that make a great effect in honour of , and , and the , and , above all , the ' generous youth , ' the hero of the day . do not you think you should get up something of the same sort to astonish we weak mind ? " the opportunity be gone . while be hesitat , the rope to which he might have clung have drift away -- he must trust now to he own swimming . in ten minute from that time , be call for on business , and , bid he good - bye , mount he horse again with a sense of dissatisfaction , which he try to quell by determining to set off for without a hour 's delay . two in the a " this rector of be little better than a pagan ! " I hear one of my reader exclaim . " how much more edifying it would have be if you have make he give yoArthu some truly spiritual advice ! you might have put into he mouth the most beautiful thing -- quite as good as read a sermon . " certainly I could , if I hold it the highest vocation of the novelist to represent thing as they never have be and never will be . then , of course , I might refashion life and character entirely after my own liking ; I might select the most unexceptionable type of clergyman and put my own admirable opinion into he mouth on all occasion . but it happen , on the contrary , that my strongest effort be to avoid any such arbitrary picture , and to give a faithful account of man and thing as they have mirror themselves in my mind . the mirror be doubtless defective , the outline will sometimes be disturb , the reflection faint or confuse ; but I feel as much bound to tell you as precisely as I can what that reflection be , as if I be in the witness - box , narrat my experience on oath . sixty year ago -- it be a long time , so no wonder thing have change -- all clergyman be not zealous ; indeed , there be reason to believe that the number of zealous clergyman be small , and it be probable that if one among the small minority have own the livings of and in the year 1799 , you would have like he no better than you like . ten to one , you would have think he a tasteless , indiscreet , methodistical man . it be so very rarely that fact hit that nice medium require by we own enlighten opinion and refin taste ! perhaps you will say , " do improve the fact 's a little , then ; make they more accordant with those correct view which it be we privilege to possess . the world be not just what we like ; do touch it up with a tasteful pencil , and make believe it be not quite such a mix entangle affair . let all people who hold unexceptionable opinion act unexceptionably . let you most faulty character always be on the wrong side , and you virtuous one on the right . then we shall see at a glance whom we be to condemn and whom we be
be to approve . then we shall be able to admire , without the slightest disturbance of we prepossession : we shall hate and despise with that true ruminant relish which belong to undoubt confidence . " but , my good friend , what will you do then with you fellow -parishioner who oppose you husband in the vestry ? with you newly appoint vicar , whose style of preaching you find painfully below that of he regret predecessor ? with the honest servant who worry you soul with she one failing ? with you neighbour , , who be really kind to you in you last illness , but have say several ill - nature thing about you since you convalescence ? Nay , with you excellent husband himself , who have other irritating habits besides that of not wip he shoe ? these fellow - mortal , every one , must be accept as they be : you can neither straighten they nos , nor brighten they wit , nor rectify they disposition ; and it be these people -- amongst whom you life be pass -- that it be needful you should tolerate , pity , and love : it be these more or less ugly , stupid , inconsistent people whose movement of goodness you should be able to admire -- for whom you should cherish all possible hope , all possible patience . and I would not , even if I have the choice , be the clever novelist who could create a world so much better than this , in which we get up in the morning to do we daily work , that you would be likely to turn a harder , colder eye on the dusty street and the common green fields -- on the real breathing man and woman , who can be chill by you indifference or injure by you prejudice ; who can be cheer and help onward by you fellow - feel , you forbearance , you outspoken , brave justice . so I be content to tell my simple story , without try to make thing seem better than they be ; dread nothing , indeed , but falsity , which , in spite of one 's best effort , there be reason to dread . Falsehood be so easy , truth so difficult . the pencil be conscious of a delightful facility in draw a griffin -- the longer the claw , and the larger the wing , the better ; but that marvellous facility which we mistook for genius be apt to forsake we when we want to draw a real unexaggerated lion . examine you word well , and you will find that even when you have no motive to be false , it be a very hard thing to say the exact truth , even about you own immediate feeling -- much harder than to say something fine about they which be not the exact truth . it be for this rare , precious quality of truthfulness that I delight in many painting , which lofy - minded people despise . I find a source of delicious sympathy in these faithful picture of a monotonous homely existence , which have be the fate of so many more among my fellow - mortal than a life of pomp or of absolute indigence , of tragic suffer or of world - stirr action . I turn , without shrinking , from cloud - borne angel , from prophet , sibyl , and heroic warrior , to a old woman bend over she flower - pot , or eat she solitary dinner , while the noonday light , soften perhaps by a screen of leave , fall on she mob-cap , and just touch the rim of she spinning - wheel , and she stone jug , and all those cheap common thing which be the precious necessary of life to she -- or I turn to that village wedding , keep between four brown wall , where a awkward bridegroom open the dance with a high - shouldered , broad - faced bride , while elderly and middle - aged friend look on , with very irregular nos and lip , and probably with quart - pots in they hand , but with a expression of unmistakable contentment and goodwill . " Foh ! " say my idealistic friend , " what vulgar detail ! what good be there in take all these pain to give a exact likeness of old woman and clown ? what a low phase of life ! what clumsy , ugly people ! " but bless we , thing may be lovable that be not altogether handsome , I hope ? I be not at all sure that the majority of the human race have not be ugly , and even among those " lord of they kind , " the british , squat figure , ill - shapen nostril , and dingy complexion be not start exception . yet there be a great deal of family live amongst we . I have a friend or two whose class of feature be such that the curl on the summit of they brows would be decidedly try ; yet to my certain knowledge tender heart have beat for they , and they miniature -- flatter , but still not lovely -- be kiss in secret by motherly lip . I have see many a excellent matron , who could have never in she best day have be handsome , and yet she have a packet of yellow love - letter in a private drawer , and sweet child shower kiss on she sallow cheek . and I believe there have be plenty of young heroe , of middle stature and feeble beard , who have feel quite sure they could never love anything more insignificant than a , and yet have find
find themselves in middle life happily settle with a wife who waddle . yes ! thank ; human feeling be like the mighty rivers that bless the earth : it do not wait for beauty -- it flow with resistless force and bring beauty with it . all honour and reverence to the divine beauty of form ! let we cultivate it to the utmost in man , woman , and child -- in we garden and in we house . but let we love that other beauty too , which lie in no secret of proportion , but in the secret of deep human sympathy . paint we a angel , if you can , with a float violet robe , and a face pal by the celestial light ; paint we yet oftener a , turn she mild face upward and open she arm to welcome the divine glory ; but do not impose on we any aesthetic rule which shall banish from the region of those old woman scraping carrot with they work - worn hand , those heavy clown take holiday in a dingy pot - house , those round back and stupid weather - beat face that have bend over the spade and do the rough work of the world -- those home with they tin pan , they brown pitcher , they rough curs , and they cluster of onion . in this world there be so many of these common coarse people , who have no picturesque sentimental wretchedness ! it be so needful we should remember they existence , else we may happen to leave they quite out of we religion and philosophy and frame lofty theory which only fit a world of extreme . therefore , let always remind we of they ; therefore let we always have man ready to give the loving pain of a life to the faithful representing of commonplace thing -- man who see beauty in these commonplace thing , and delight in show how kindly the light of heaven falls on they . there be few prophet in the world ; few sublimely beautiful woman ; few heroe . I can not afford to give all my love and reverence to such rarity : I want a great deal of those feeling for my every - day fellow - man , especially for the few in the foreground of the great multitude , whose face I know , whose hand I touch for whom I have to make way with kindly courtesy . neither be picturesque lazzaroni or romantic criminal half so frequent as you common labourer , who get he own bread and eat it vulgarly but creditably with he own pocket - knife . it be more needful that I should have a fibre of sympathy connect I with that vulgar citizen who weigh out my sugar in a vilely assort cravat and waistcoat , than with the handsomest rascal in red scarf and green feather -- more needful that my heart should swell with love admiration at some trait of gentle goodness in the faulty people who sit at the same hearth with I , or in the clergyman of my own parish , who be perhaps rather too corpulent and in other respects be not a or a Tillotson , than at the deed of heroe whom I shall never know except by hearsay , or at the sublimest abstract of all clerical graces that be ever conceive by a able novelist . and so I come back to , with whom I desire you to be in perfect charity , far as he may be from satisfye you demand on the clerical character . perhaps you think he be not -- as he ought to have been -- a liive demonstration of the benefit attach to a national church ? but I be not sure of that ; at least I know that the people in and would have be very sorry to part with they clergyman , and that most face brighten at he approach ; and until it can be prove that hatre be a better thing for the soul than love , I must believe that 's influence in he parish be a more wholesome one than that of the zealous , who come there twenty year afterwards , when have be gather to he father . it be true , insist strongly on the doctrine of the Reformation , visit he flock a great deal in they own home , and be severe in rebuk the aberration of the flesh -- put a stop , indeed , to the round of the church singer , as promote drunkenness and too light a handling of sacred thing . but I gather from , to whom I talk of these matters in he old age , that few clergyman could be less successful in win the heart of they parishioner than . they learn a great many notion about doctrine from he , so that almost every church - goer under fifty begin to distinguish as well between the genuine gospel and what do not come precisely up to that standard , as if he have be bear and breed a Dissenter ; and for some time after he arrival there seem to be quite a religious movement in that quiet rural district . " but , " say , " I have see pretty clear , ever since I be a young un , as religion 's something else besides notion . it be not notions set people do the right thing -- it be feeling . it be the same with the notions in religion as it be with math'matic -- a man may be able to work problem straight off in 's head as he sit by the fire and smoke he pipe , but if he have to make a machine or a building ,
, he must have a will and a resolution and love something else better than he own ease . somehow , the congregation begin to fall off , and people begin to speak light of ' . I believe he mean right at bottom ; but , you see , he be sourish - tempered , and be for beat down price with the people as work for he ; and he preaching would not go down well with that sauce . and he want to be like my lord judge I ' the parish , punish folk for do wrong ; and he scold th'ey from the pulpit as if he have be a Ranter , and yet he could not abide the Dissenter , and be a deal more set against th'ey than be . and then he do not keep within he income , for he seem to think at first go - off that six hundr a - year be to make he as big a man as . that be a sore mischief I have often see with the poor curate jump into a bit of a living all of a sudden . be a deal think on at a distance , I believe , and he write book , but as for math'matic and the natur of ' thing , he be as ignorant as a woman . he be very know about doctrine , and use to call them the bulwark of the Reformation ; but I have always mistrust that sort of ' learn as leave folk foolish and unreasonable about business . now be as different as could be : as quick !-- he understand what you mean in a minute , and he know all about building , and could see when you would make a good job . and he behave as much like a gentleman to the farmer , and th ' old woman , and the labourer , as he do to the gentry . you never see he interfering and scolding , and try to play th ' emperor . ah , he be a fine man as ever you set eye on ; and so kind to 's mother and sister . that poor sickly -- he seem to think more of she than of anybody else in the world . there be not a soul in the parish have a word to say against he ; and he servants stay with he till they be so old and potter , he have to hire other folk to do they work . " " well , " I say , " that be a excellent way of preach in the weekday ; but I daresay , if you old friend be to come to life again , and get into the pulpit next , you would be rather asham that he do not preach better after all you praise of he . " " Nay , nay , " say , broaden he chest and throw himself back in he chair , as if he be ready to meet all inference , " nobody have ever hear I say be much of a preacher . he do not go into deep speritial experience ; and I know there 's a deal in a man 's inward life as you can not measure by the square , and say , ' do this and that will follow , ' and , ' do that and this will follow . ' there be thing go on in the soul , and time when feeling come into you like a rushe mighty wind , as the Scripture say , and part you life in two a'most , so you look back on yourself as if you be somebody else . those be thing as you can not bottle up in a 'due this ' and 'due that ' ; and I will go so far with the strongest ever you will find . that show I there be deep speritial thing in religion . you can not make much out wi's talk about it , but you feel it . do not go into those thing -- he preache short moral sermon , and that be all . but then he act pretty much up to what he say ; he do not set up for be so different from other folk one day , and then be as like 'em as two pea the next . and he make folk love he and respect he , and that be better nor stirr up they gall wig be overbusy . use to say -- you know she would have she word about everything -- she say , be like a good meal o' victual , you be the better for he without think on it , and be like a dose of ' physic , he grip you and worret you , and after all he leave you much the same . " " but do not preach a great deal more about that spiritual part of religion that you talk of , ? could not you get more out of he sermon than out of 's ? " " Eh , I . he preach a deal about doctrine . but I have see pretty clear , ever since I be a young un , as religion 's something else besides doctrine and notion . I look at it as if the doctrine be like find name for you feeling , so as you can talk of th'ey when you have never know th'ey , just as a man may talk of ' tool when he know they name , though he be never so much as see th'ey , still less handle th'ey . I have hear a deal o' doctrine I ' my time , for I use to go after the dissenting preacher along wig
wig Seth , when I be a lad of ' seventeen , and get puzzl myself a deal about and the Calvinist . the , you know , be strong ; and , who could never abide anything harsh and be always for hope the best , hold fast by the from the very first ; but I think I could pick a hole or two in they notion , and I get dispute wi' one of ' the class leader down at , and harass he so , first of ' this side and then o ' that , till at last he say , ' young man , it be the make use of ' you pride and conceit as a weapon to war against the simplicity of ' the truth . ' I could not help laugh then , but as I be go home , I think the man be not far wrong . I begin to see as all this weighing and sift what this text means and that text mean , and whether folk be save all by 's , or whether there go a ounce of ' they own will t oot , be no part of ' real religion at all . you may talk o' these thing for hour on end , and you will only be all the more coxy and conceit of r't . so I take to go nowhere but to church , and hear nobody but , for he say nothing but what be good and what you would be the wiser for remember . and I find it better for my soul to be humble before the mystery o' 's dealings , and not be make a clatter about what I could never understand . and they be poor foolish question after all ; for what have we get either inside or outside of we but what come from ? if we have get a resolution to do right , he give it we , I reckon , first or last ; but I see aplain enough we shall never do it without a resolution , and that be enough for I . " , you perceive , be a warm admirer , perhaps a partial judge , of , as , happily , some of we still be of the people we have know familiarly . Doubtless it will be despise as a weakness by that lofy order of mind who pant after the ideal , and be oppress by a general sense that they emotion be of too exquisite a character to find fit object among they every day fellowman . I have often be favour with the confidence of these select nature , and find they to concur in the experience that great man be overestimated and small man be insupportable ; that if you would love a woman without ever look back on you love as a folly , she must die while you be court she ; and if you would maintain the slightest belief in human heroism , you must never make a pilgrimage to see the hero . I confess I have often meanly shrunk from confessing to these accomplished and acute gentleman what my own experience have be . I be afraid I have often smile with hypocritical assent , and gratify they with a epigram on the fleeting nature of we illusion , which any one moderately acquaint with french literature can command at a moment 's notice . human converse , I think some wise man have remark , be not rigidly sincere . but I herewith discharge my conscience , and declare that I have have quite enthusiastic movement of admiration towards old gentleman who speak the worst , who be occasionally fretful in they temper , and who have never move in a higher sphere of influence than that of parish overseer ; and that the way in which I have come to the conclusion that human nature be lovable -- the way I have lear not something of its deep patho , its sublime mystery -- have be by live a great deal among people more or less commonplace and vulgar , of whom you would perhaps hear nothing very surprising if you be to inquire about they in the neighbourhood where they dwelt . ten to one most of the small shopkeeper in they vicinity see nothing at all in they . for I have observ this remarkable coincidence , that the select nature who pant after the ideal , and find nothing in pantaloon or petticoat great enough to command they reverence and love , be curiously in unison with the narrowest and pettiest . for example , I have often hear , the landlord of the , who use to turn a bloodshot eye on he neighbour in the village of , sum up he opinion of the people in he own parish -- and they be all the people he know -- in these emphatic word : " aye , sir , I have say it often , and I will say it again , they be a poor lot I ' this parish -- a poor lot , sir , big and little . " I think he have a dim idea that if he could migrate to a distant parish , he might find neighbour worthy of he ; and indeed he do subsequently transfer himself to the 's , which be do a thrive business in the back street of a neighbour market - town . but , oddly enough , he have find the people up that back street of precisely the same stamp as the inhabitant of --" a poor lot , sir , big and little , and they as come for a go of ' gin be no better than they as come for a pint of ' twopenny -- a poor lot
lot . " " , , do not you know church begin at two , and it be go half after one a'ready ? have you get nothing better to think on this good as poor old 's to be put into the ground , and he drownd I ' th ' dead of ' the night , as it be enough to make one 's back run cold , but you must be ' dizen yourself as if there be a wedding i'stid of a funeral ? " " well , , " say , " I can not be ready so soon as everybody else , when I have get 's thing to put on . and I would ever such work to make she stand still . " be come downstairs , and , in she plain bonnet and shawl , be stand below . if ever a girl look as if she have be make of rose , that girl be in she hat and frock . for she hat be trim with pink , and she frock have pink spot , sprinkle on a white ground . there be nothing but pink and white about she , except in she dark hair and eye and she little buck shoe . be provoke at herself , for she could hardly keep from smiling , as any mortal be inclined to do at the sight of pretty round thing . so she turn without speak , and join the group outside the house door , follow by , whose heart be flutter so at the thought of some one she expect to see at church that she hardly feel the ground she trod on . and now the little procession set off . be in he suit of drab , with a red - and - green waistcoat and a green watch - ribbon have a large cornelian seal attach , pendant like a plumb - line from that promontory where he watch - pocket be situate ; a silk handkerchief of a yellow tone round he neck ; and excellent grey rib stocking , knit by 's own hand , set off the proportion of he leg . have no reason to be asham of he leg , and suspect that the grow abuse of top - boot and other fashions tend to disguise the nether limb have they origin in a pitiable degeneracy of the human calf . still less have he reason to be asham of he round jolly face , which be good humour itself as he say , " come , Hetty -- come , little un ! " and give he arm to he wife , lead the way through the causeway gate into the yard . the " little un " address be and , boy of nine and seven , in little fustian taile coat and knee - breech , relieve by rosy cheek and black eye , look as much like they father as a very small elephant be like a very large one . walk between they , and behind come patient , whose task it be to carry through the yard and over all the wet place on the road ; for , have speedily recover from she threaten fever , have insist on go to church to - day , and especially on wear she red - and - black necklace outside she tippet . and there be many wet place for she to be carry over this afternoon , for there have be heavy shower in the morning , though now the cloud have roll off and lay in towere silvery mass on the horizon . you might have know it be if you have only wake up in the farmyard . the cocks and hen seem to know it , and make only croon subdue noise ; the very bull - dog look less savage , as if he would have be satisfied with a smaller bite than usual . the sunshine seem to call all thing to rest and not to labour . it be asleep itself on the moss - grow cow - she ; on the group of white duck nestle together with they bill tuck under they wing ; on the old black sow stretch languidly on the straw , while she largest young one find a excellent spring - bed on he mother 's fat rib ; on , the shepherd , in he new smock - frock , take a uneasy siesta , half - sitting , half - stand on the granary step . be of opinion that church , like other luxury , be not to be indulge in often by a foreman who have the weather and the ewe on he mind . " ! Nay -- I and get summat else to think on , " be a answer which he often utter in a tone of bitter significance that silence further question . I feel sure mean no irreverence ; indeed , I know that he mind be not of a speculative , negative cast , and he would on no account have miss go to church on , , and " . " but he have a general impression that public worship and religious ceremony , like other non-productive employment , be intend for people who have leisure . " there be a - stand at the yard - gate , " say . " I reckon he want to watch we down the field . it be wonderful what sight he have , and he turn seventy - five . " " ah , I often think it be wi ' th ' old folk as it be wi's the babby , " say ; " they be satisfied wi's look , no matter what they be look at . it be 's way o's quieten 'em , I reckon ,
, afore they go to sleep . " open the gate as he see the family procession approach , and hold it wide open , lean on he stick -- pleased to do this bit of work ; for , like all old man whose life have be spend in labour , he like to feel that he be still useful -- that there be a better crop of onion in the garden because he be by at the sowing -- and that the cow would be milk the better if he stay at home on a afternoon to look on . he always go to church on , but not very regularly at other time ; on wet , or whenever he have a touch of rheumatism , he use to read the three first chapter of instead . " they will ha ' pute I ' the ground afore ye get to the churchyard , " he say , as he son come up . " it 'uld ha ' be better luck if they would ha ' bury he I ' the forenoon when the rain be fallin ' ; there be no likelihood of a drop now ; an' the moon lie like a boat there , dost see ? that be a sure sign of ' fair weather -- there be a many as be false but that be sure . " " aye , aye , " say the son , " I be in hope it will hold up now . " " mind what the parson say , mind what the parson say , my lad , " say to the black - eye youngster in knee - breech , conscious of a marble or two in they pocket which they look forward to handle , a little , secretly , during the sermon . " Dood - bye , , " say . " I doin ' to church . I det my neklace on . Dive I a peppermint . " , shak with laughter at this " deep little wench , " slowly transfer he stick to he left hand , which hold the gate open , and slowly thrust he finger into the waistcoat pocket on which have fix she eye with a confident look of expectation . and when they be all gone , the old man lean on the gate again , watch they across the lane along the , and through the far gate , till they disappear behind a bend in the hedge . for the hedgerow in those day shut out one 's view , even on the better - manage farm ; and this afternoon , the dog - rose be toss out they pink wreat , the nightshade be in it be yellow and purple glory , the pale honeysuckle grow out of reach , pee high up out of a holly bush , and over all a ash or a sycamore every now and then throw its shadow across the path . there be acquaintance at other gate who have to move aside and let they pass : at the gate of the there be half the dairy of cow stand one behind the other , extremely slow to understand that they large body might be in the way ; at the far gate there be the mare hold she head over the bar , and beside she the liver - coloured foal with its head towards its mother 's flank , apparently still much embarrassed by its own straddling existence . the way lay entirely through 's own field till they reach the main road lead to the village , and he turn a keen eye on the stock and the crop as they go along , while Poyser be ready to supply a run commentary on they all . the woman who manage a dairy have a large share in make the rent , so she may well be allow to have she opinion on stock and they " keep " -- a exercise which strengthen she understanding so much that she find herself able to give she husband advice on most other subject . " there be that shorthorn , " she say , as they enter the , and she catch sight of the meek beast that lay chew the cud and look at she with a sleepy eye . " I begin to hate the sight of ' the cow ; and I say now what I say three week ago , the sooner we get rid of she the better , for there 's that little yallow cow as do not give half the milk , and yet I have twice as much butter from she . " " why , the e't not like the woman in general , " say ; " they like the shorthorn , as give such a lot of ' milk . there be 's wife want he to buy no other sort . " " what be it sinnify what 's wife like ? a poor soft thing , wi' no more head - piece nor a sparrow . she would take a big cullender to strain she lard wig , and then wonder as the scratchin 's run through . I have see enough of she to know as I will niver take a servant from she house again -- all hugger - mugger -- and you would niver know , when you go in , whether it be or , the wash draggin ' on to th' end of ' the week ; and as for she cheese , I know well enough it rise like a loaf in a tin last year . and then she talk of ' the weather bein ' I ' fault , as there be folk 'uld stand on they head and then say the fault be I ' they
they boot . " " well , be be want to buy , so we can get rid of she if thee like 'st , " say , secretly proud of he wife 's superior power of put two and two together ; indeed , on recent market - day he have more than once boast of she discernment in this very matter of shorthorn . " aye , they have choose a soft for a wife may be well buy up the shorthorn , for if you get you head stick in a bog , you leg may 's well go after it . Eh ! talk of ' leg , there be leg for you , " continue , as , who have be set down now the road be dry , toddle on in front of she father and mother . " there be shape ! a ' she have get such a long foot , she will be she father 's own child . " " aye , she will be welly such a one as I ' ten year ' time , on 'y she have get thy coloured eye . I niver remember a blue eye I ' my family ; my mother have eye as black as sloe , just like . " " the child 's ull be no the worse for have summat as be not like . a ' I be none for have she so overpretty . though for the matter of ' that , there be people wi' light hair a ' blue eye as pretty as they wi' black . if have get a bit of ' colour in she cheek , a ' do not stick that cap on she head , enough to frighten the cow , folk 'uld think she as pretty as . " " Nay , nay , " say , with rather a contemptuous emphasis , " thee dostto know the pint of a woman . the man 'uld niver run after as they would after . " " what care I what the man 'uld run after ? it be well see what choice the most of th'ey know how to make , by the poor draggle - tail of ' wife you see , like bit of ' gauze ribbin , good for nothing when the colour 's gone . " " well , well , thee canstna say but what I know how to make a choice when I marry thee , " say , who usually settle little conjugal dispute by a compliment of this sort ; " and thee wast twice as buxom as ten year ago . " " I niver say as a woman have need to be ugly to make a good missis of a house . there be 's wife ugly enough to turn the milk a ' save the rennet , but she will niver save nothing any other way . but as for , poor child , she be niver likely to be buxom as long as she will make she dinner of ' cake and water , for the sake of ' give to they as want . she provoke I past bear sometimes ; and , as I tell she , she go clean again ' the ' , for that say , ' love you neighbour as yourself ' ; ' but ,' I say , ' if you love you neighbour no better nor you do yourself , Dinah , it be little enough you would do for he . you would be think he might do well enough on a half - empty stomach . ' Eh , I wonder where she be this bless ! sit by that sick woman , I daresay , as she would set she heart on go to all of a sudden . " " ah , it be a pity she should take such megrim into she head , when she might ha's stay wi' we all summer , and eat twice as much as she want , and it 'uld niver ha ' be miss . she make no odd in thg house at all , for she sit as still at she sewing as a bird on the nest , and be uncommon nimble at run to fetch anything . if get married , theed 'st like to wi' thee constant . " " it be no use think of ' that , " say . " you might as well beckon to the fly swallow as to come a ' live here comfortable , like other folk . if anything could turn she , I should ha ' turn she , for I have talk to she for a hour on end , and scold she too ; for she be my own sister 's child , and it behove I to do what I can for she . but eh , poor thing , as soon as she have say we ' good - bye ' a ' get into the cart , a ' look back at I with she pale face , as be welly like she aunt come back from heaven , I begin to be frightened to think of ' the set - down I would give she ; for it come over you sometimes as if she have a way of ' know the rights of ' thing more nor other folk have . but I will niver give in as that be 's cause she be a , no more nor a white calf 's white ' cause it eat out of ' the same bucket wi' a black un . " " Nay , " say , with as near a approach to a snarl as he good - nature would allow ; " I be no opinion of ' the . it be on 'y tradesfolk as
as turn Methodists ; you nuver know a farmer bitten wi' they maggot . there be maybe a workman now an' then , as be not overclever at 's work , take to preachin ' a ' that , like . but you see , as have get one of ' the best head - piece hereabout , know better ; he be a good , else I would never encourage he for a sweetheart for . " " why , goodness I , " say , who have look back while she husband be speak , " look where be with they lad ! they be the field 's length behind we . how could you let them do so , Hetty ? anybody might as well set a pictur ' to watch the child as you . run back and tell them to come on . " and Poyser be now at the end of the second field , so they set on the top of one of the large stone form the true stile , and await the loiterer observe with complacency , " naughty , naughty boy -- I dood . " the fact be that this walk through the field be fraught with great excitement to and , who see a perpetual drama go on in the hedgerow , and could no more refrain from stopping and pee than if they have be a couple of spaniel or terrier . be quite sure he see a yellow - hammer on the bough of the great ash , and while he be pee , he miss the sight of a white - throat stoat , which have run across the path and be describe with much fervour by the junior Tommy . then there be a little greenfinch , just fledge , flutter along the ground , and it seem quite possible to catch it , till it manage to flutter under the blackberry bush . Hetty could not be get to give any heed to these thing , so be call on for she ready sympathy , and pee with open mouth wherever she be tell , and say " Lawks ! " whenever she be expect to wonder . hasten on with some alarm when have come back and call to they that she aunt be angry ; but run on first , shout , " we have find the speckled turkey 's nest , mother ! " with the instinctive confidence that people who bring good news be never in fault . " ah , " say . , really forget all discipline in this pleasant surprise , " that be a good lad ; why , where be it ? " " down in ever such a hole , under the hedge . I see it first , look after the greenfinch , and she sit on thg nest . " " you do not frighten she , I hope , " say the mother , " else she will forsake it . " " no , I go away as still as still , and whisper to -- do not I , ? " " well , well , now come on , " say , " and walk before Father and mother , and take you little sister by the hand . we must go straight on now . good boy do not look after the bird of a . " " but , mother , " say , " you say you would give half - a - crown to find the speckled turkey 's nest . may not I have the half - crown put into my money - box ? " " we will see about that , my lad , if you walk along now , like a good boy . " the father and mother exchange a significant glance of amusement at they eldest - born 's acuteness ; but on 's round face there be a cloud . " mother , " he say , half - cry , " 's get ever so much more money in he box nor I have get in mine . " " , I want half - a - toun in my bot , " say . " Hush , hush , hush , " say , " do ever anybody hear such naughty child ? nobody shall ever see they money - boxe any more , if they do not make haste and go on to church . " this dreadful threat have the desired effect , and through the two remain field the three pair of small leg trot on without any serious interruption , notwithstand a small pond full of tadpole , alias " bullhead , " which the lad look at wistfully . the damp hay that must be scatter and turn afresh to - morrow be not a cheer sight to , who during hay and corn harvest have often some mental struggle as to the benefit of a day of rest ; but no temptation would have induce he to carry on any field - work , however early in the morning , on a ; for have not have a pair of oxen " swelter " while he be plough on ? that be a demonstration that work on sacred day be a wicked thing ; and with wickedness of any sort be quite clear that he would have nothing to do , since money get by such means would never prosper . " it a'most make you finger itch to be at the hay now the sun shine so , " he observe , as they pass through the " . " " but it be poor foolishness to think of ' save by go against you conscience . there be that , as they use to call ' , ' use to do the same of a o' weekday
weekday , and take no heed to right or wrong , as if there be nayther nor . a ' what be he come to ? why , I see he myself last market - day a - carry a basket wi' orange I not . " " ah , to be sure , " say . , emphatically , " you make but a poor trap to catch luck if you go and bait it wi' wickedness . the money as be get so 's like to burn hole I ' you pocket . I would niver wish we to leave we lad a sixpence but what be get I ' the rightful way . and as for the weather , there be above make it , and we must put up with i't : it be nothing of a plague to what the wench be . " Notwithstand the interruption in they walk , the excellent habit which 's clock have of take time by the forelock have secure they arrival at the village while it be still a quarter to two , though almost every one who mean to go to church be already within the churchyard gate . those who stay at home be chiefly mother , like 's , who stand at she own door nurse she baby and feel as woman feel in that position -- that nothing else can be expect of they . it be not entirely to see 's funeral that the people be stand about the churchyard so long before service begin ; that be they common practice . the woman , indeed , usually enter the church at once , and the farmer 's wife talk in a undertone to each other , over the tall pew , about they illness and the total failure of doctor 's stuff , recommend dandelion - tea , and other home - make specifics , as far preferable -- about the servants , and they grow exorbitance as to wage , whereas the quality of they service decline from year to year , and there be no girl nowadays to be trust any further than you could see she -- about the bad price , the grocer , be give for butter , and the reasonable doubt that might be hold as to he solvency , notwithstand that . be a sensible woman , and they be all sorry for , for she have very good kin . meantime the man linger outside , and hardly any of they except the singer , who have a humming and fragmentary rehearsal to go through , enter the church until be in the desk . they see no reason for that premature entrance -- what could they do in church if they be there before service begin ?-- and they do not conceive that any power in the universe could take it ill of they if they stay out and talk a little about " bus' ness . " look like quite a new acquaintance to - day , for he have get he clean face , which always make he little granddaughter cry at he as a stranger . but a experienced eye would have fix on he at once as the village blacksmith , after see the humble deference with which the big saucy fellow take off he hat and strok he hair to the farmer ; for be accustom to say that a work - man must hold a candle to a personage understand to be as black as he be himself on weekday ; by which evil - sound rule of conduct he mean what be , after all , rather virtuous than otherwise , namely , that man who have horse to be shod must be treat with respect . and the rougher sort of workman keep aloon from the grave under the white thorn , where the burial be go forward ; but , and several of the farm -labourer , make a group round it , and stand with they hat off , as fellow- mourner with the mother and son . other hold a midway position , sometimes watch the group at the grave , sometimes listen to the conversation of the farmer , who stand in a knot near the church door , and be now join by , while he family pass into the church . on the outside of this knot stood , the landlord of the , in he most striking attitude -- that be to say , with the forefinger of he right hand thrust between the buttons of he waistcoat , he leave hand in he breech pocket , and he head very much on one side ; look , on the whole , like a actor who have only a mono-syllabic part entrust to he , but feel sure that the audience discern he fitness for the lead business ; curiously in contrast with old , who hold he hand behind he and lean forward , coughe asthmatically , with a inward scorn of all knowingness that could not be turn into cash . the talk be in rather a lower tone than usual to - day , hush a little by the sound of 's voice read the final prayer of the burial - service . they have all have they word of pity for poor Thias , but now they have get upon the nearer subject of they own grievance against , the 's bailiff , who play the part of steward so far as it be not perform by old himself , for that gentleman have the meanness to receive he own rent and make bargain about he own timber . this subject of conversation be a additional reason for not be loud , since himself might presently be walk up the pave road to the church door . and soon they become suddenly silent ; for
for 's voice have cease , and the group round the white thorn be disperse itself towards the church . they all move aside , and stand with they hat off , while pass . and be come next , with they mother between they ; for officiate as head sexton as well as clerk , and be not yet ready to follow the rector into the vestry . but there be a pause before the three mourner come on : have turn round to look again towards the grave ! ah ! there be nothing now but the brown earth under the white thorn . yet she cry less to - day than she have do any day since she husband 's death . along with all she grief there be mix a unusual sense of she own importance in have a " burial , " and in 's read a special service for she husband ; and besides , she know the funeral psalm be go to be sung for he . she feel this counter-excitement to she sorrow still more strongly as she walk with she son towards the church door , and see the friendly sympathetic nod of they fellow - parishioner . the mother and son pass into the church , and one by one the loiterer follow , though some still linger without ; the sight of 's carriage , which be win slowly up the hill , perhaps help to make they feel that there be no need for haste . but presently the sound of the bassoon and the key - bugles burst forth ; the evening hymn , which always open the service , have begun , and every one must now enter and take he place . I can not say that the interior of be remarkable for anything except for the grey age of it be oaken pew -- great square pew mostly , range on each side of a narrow aisle . it be free , indeed , from the modern blemish of galleries . the choir have two narrow pew to themselves in the middle of the right - hand row , so that it be a short process for to take he place among they as principal bass , and return to he desk after the singing be over . the pulpit and desk , grey and old as the pew , stand on one side of the arch lead into the chancel , which also have it be grey square pew for 's family and servants . yet I assure you these grey pew , with the buff - wash wall , give a very pleasing tone to this shabby interior , and agree extremely well with the ruddy face and bright waistcoat . and there be liberal touch of crimson toward the chancel , for the pulpit and 's own pew have handsome crimson cloth cushion ; and , to close the vista , there be a crimson altar - cloth , embroider with golden ray by 's own hand . but even without the crimson cloth , the effect must have be warm and cheer when be in the desk , look benignly round on that simple congregation -- on the hardy old man , with bent knee and shoulders , perhaps , but with vigou leave for much hedge - clipping and thatch ; on the tall stalwart frame and roughly cut bronz face of the stone - cutter and carpenter ; on the half - dozen well - to - do farmer , with they apple - cheek family ; and on the clean old woman , mostly farm -labourer ' wife , with they bit of snow - white cap - border under they black bonnet , and with they withered arm , bear from the elbow , fold passively over they chest . for none of the old people hold book -- why should they ? not one of they could read . but they know a few " good word " by heart , and they wither lips now and then move silently , follow the service without any very clear comprehension indeed , but with a simple faith in its efficacy to ward off harm and bring blessing . and now all face be visible , for all be stand up -- the little child on the seat pee over the edge of the grey pew , while good 's evening hymn be be sung to one of those lively psalm -tune which die out with the last generation of rector and choral parish clerk . Melodies die out , like the pipe of , with the ear that love they and listen for they . be not in he usual place among the singer to - day , for he sit with he mother and Seth , and he notice with surprise that be absent too -- all the more agreeable for , who give out he bass note with unusual complacency and throw a extra ray of severity into the glance he send over he spectacle at the recusant Will . I beseech you to imagine look round on this scene , in he ample white surplice that become he so well , with he powdered hair throw back , he rich brown complexion , and he finely cut nostril and upper lip ; for there be a certain virtue in that benignant yet keen countenance as there be in all human face from which a generous soul beam out . and over all stream the delicious sunshine through the old window , with they desultory patch of yellow , red , and blue , that throw pleasant touch of colour on the opposite wall . I think , as look round to - day , he eye rest a instant longer than usual on the square pew occupy by and he family . and there
there be another pair of dark eye that find it impossible not to wander thither , and rest on that round pink - and - white figure . but be at that moment quite careless of any glance -- she be absorb in the thought that would soon be come into church , for the carriage must surely be at the church - gate by this time . she have never see he since she part with he in the wood on evening , and oh , how long the time have see ! thing have go on just the same as ever since that evening ; the wonder that have happen then have bring no change after they ; they be already like a dream . when she hear the church door swing , she heart beat so , she da not look up . she feel that she aunt be curtsy ; she curtsy herself . that must be old -- he always come first , the wrinkle small old man , pee round with short -sighted glance at the bowing and curtsy congregation ; then she know be pass , and though like so much to look at she fashionable little coal -scutle bonnet , with the wreath of small ros round it , she do not mind it to - day . but there be no more curtsy -- no , he be not come ; she feel sure there be nothing else pass the pew door but the house - keeper 's black bonnet and the lady 's maid 's beautiful straw hat that have once be 's , and then the powdered head of the butler and footman . no , he be not there ; yet she would look now -- she might be mistaken -- for , after all , she have not look . so she lift up she eyelid and glance timidly at the cushioned pew in the chancel -- there be no one but old rub he spectacle with he white handkerchief , and open the large gilt - ed prayer - book . the chill disappointment be too hard to bear . she feel herself turn pale , she lip trembl ; she be ready to cry . oh , what should she do ? everybody would know the reason ; they would know she be cry because be not there . and , with the wonderful hothouse plant in he button - hole , be star at she , she know . it be dreadfully long before the begin , so that she could kneel down . two great drop would fall then , but no one see they except good - natured , for she aunt and uncle knelt with they back towards she . , unable to imagine any cause for tear in church except faintness , of which she have a vague traditional knowledge , draw out of she pocket a queer little flat blue smell - bottle , and after much labour in pull the cork out , thrust the narrow neck against 's nostril . " it donna smell , " she whisper , think this be a great advantage which old salt have over fresh one : they do you good without bite you nose . push it away peevishly ; but this little flash of temper do what the salt could not have do -- it rouse she to wipe away the trace of she tear , and try with all she might not to shed any more . have a certain strength in she vain little nature : she would have borne anything rather than be laugh at , or point at with any other feeling than admiration ; she would have press she own nail into she tender flesh rather than people should know a secret she do not want they to know . what fluctuation there be in she busy thought and feeling , while be pronounce the solemn " Absolution " in she deaf ears , and through all the tone of petition that follow ! lay very close to disappointment , and soon win the victory over the conjecture she small ingenuity could devise to account for 's absence on the supposition that he really want to come , really want to see she again . and by the time she rise from she knee mechanically , because all the rest be rise , the colour have return to she cheek even with a heighten glow , for she be fram little indignant speech to herself , say she hate for give she this pain -- she would like he to suffer too . yet while this selfish tumult be go on in she soul , she eye be bend down on she prayer - book , and the eyelid with they dark fringe look as lovely as ever . thought so , as he glance at she for a moment on rising from he knee . but 's thought of do not deafen he to the service ; they rather blend with all the other deep feeling for which the church service be a channel to he this afternoon , as a certain consciousness of we entire past and we imagined future blend itself with all we moment of keen sensibility . and to Adam the church service be the best channel he could have find for he mingled regret , yearning , and resignation ; its interchange of beseeching cry for help with outburst of faith and praise , its recurrent response and the familiar rhythm of its collect , seem to speak for he as no other form of worship could have do ; as , to those early who have worship from they childhood upward in catacomb , the torch - light and shadows must have see nearer the presence than the heathenish daylight of the street . the secret of we
we emotion never lie in the bare object , but in its subtle relation to we own past : no wonder the secret escape the unsympathizing observer , who might as well put on he spectacle to discern odour . but there be one reason why even a chance comer would have find the service in more impressive than in most other village nook in the kingdom -- a reason of which I be sure you have not the slightest suspicion . it be the reading of we friend . where that good shoemaker get he notion of reading from remain a mystery even to he most intimate acquaintance . I believe , after all , he get it chiefly from , who have pour some of she music into this honest conceited soul , as she have be know to do into other narrow soul before he . she have give he , at least , a fine bass voice and a musical ear ; but I can not positively say whether these alone have suffice to inspire he with the rich chant in which he deliver the response . the way he roll from a rich deep forte into a melancholy cadence , subside , at the end of the last word , into a sort of faint resonance , like the linger vibration of a fine violoncello , I can compare to nothing for its strong calm melancholy but the rush and cadence of the wind among the autumn bough . this may seem a strange mode of speak about the reading of a parish clerk -- a man in rusty spectacle , with stubbly hair , a large occiput , and a prominent crown . but that be 's way : she will allow a gentleman of splendid physiognomy and poetic aspiration to s woefully out of tune , and not give he the slightest hint of it ; and take care that some narrow - browed fellow , troll a ballad in the corner of a pot - house , shall be as true to he interval as a bird . himself be less proud of he reading than of he singing , and it be always with a sense of heighten importance that he pass from the desk to the choir . still more to - day : it be a special occasion , for a old man , familiar to all the parish , have die a sad death -- not in he bed , a circumstance the most painful to the mind of the peasant -- and now the funeral psalm be to be sung in memory of he sudden departure . moreover , be not at church , and 's importance in the choir suffer no eclipse . it be a solemn minor strain they sang . the old psalm - tune have many a wail among they , and the word -- thou sweep 'st we off as with a flood ; we vanish hence like dream -- seem to have a closer application than usual in the death of poor Thias . the mother and son listen , each with peculiar feeling . have a vague belief that the psalm be do she husband good ; it be part of that decent burial which she would have think it a greater wrong to withhold from he than to have cause he many unhappy day while he be liive . the more there be say about she husband , the more there be do for he , surely the safer he would be . it be poor 's blind way of feel that human love and pity be a ground of faith in some other love . , who be easily touche , she tear , and try to recall , as he have do continually since he father 's death , all that he have hear of the possibility that a single moment of consciousness at the last might be a moment of pardon and reconcilement ; for be it not write in the very psalm they be singe that the divine dealings be not measure and circumscribe by time ? Adam have never be unable to join in a psalm before . he have know plenty of trouble and vexation since he have be a lad , but this be the first sorrow that have hem in he voice , and strangely enough it be sorrow because the chief source of he past trouble and vexation be for ever go out of he reach . he have not be able to press he father 's hand before they part , and say , " Father , you know it be all right between we ; I never forget what I owed you when I be a lad ; you forgive I if I have be too hot and hasty now and then ! " think but little to - day of the hard work and the earning he have spend on he father : he thought run constantly on what the old man 's feeling have be in moment of humiliation , when he have hold down he head before the rebuke of he son . when we indignation be borne in submissive silence , we be apt to feel twinge of doubt afterwards as to we own generosity , if not justice ; how much more when the object of we anger have go into everlasting silence , and we have see he face for the last time in the meekness of death ! " ah ! I be always too hard , " say to himself . " it be a sore fault in I as I be so hot and out of ' patience with people when they do wrong , and my heart get shut up against th'ey , so as I can not bring myself to forgive th'ey . I see clear enough there
there be more pride nor love in my soul , for I could sooner make a thousand stroke with th 's hammer for my father than bring myself to say a kind word to he . and there go plenty of ' pride and temper to the stroke , as the WILL be have he finger in what we call we duty as well as we sins . Mayhap the best thing I ever do in my life be only do what be easiest for myself . it be allays be easier for I to work nor to sit still , but the real tough job for I 'uld be to master my own will and temper and go right against my own pride . it seem to I now , if I be to find Father at home to - night , I should behave different ; but there be no knowing -- perhaps nothing 'uld be a lesson to we if it do not come too late . it be well we should feel as life be a reckoning we can not make twice over ; there be no real make amend in this world , any more nor you can mmend a wrong subtraction by do you addition right . " this be the key - note to which 's thought have perpetually return since he father 's death , and the solemn wail of the funeral psalm be only a influence that bring back the old thought with stronger emphasis . so be the sermon , which have choose with reference to 's funeral . it speak briefly and simply of the word , " in the midst of life we be in death " -- how the present moment be all we can call we own for work of mercy , of righteous dealing , and of family tenderness . all very old truth -- but what we think the oldest truth become the most start to we in the week when we have look on the dead face of one who have make a part of we own life . for when man want to impress we with the effect of a new and wonderfully vivid light , do they not let it fall on the most familiar object , that we may measure its intensity by remember the former dimness ? then come the moment of the final blessing , when the forever sublime word , " the peace of , which passeth all understanding , " seem to blend with the calm afternoon sunshine that fall on the bow head of the congregation ; and then the quiet rise , the mother tie on the bonnet of the little maiden who have sleep through the sermon , the fathers collect the prayer - book , until all stream out through the old archway into the green churchyard and begin they neighbourly talk , they simple civility , and they invitations to tea ; for on a every one be ready to receive a guest -- it be the day when all must be in they best clothes and they best humour . and pause a minute at the church gate : they be wait for to come up , not be contente to go away without say a kind word to the widow and she son . " well , , " say , as they walk on together , " you must keep up you heart ; husband and wife must be content when they have liv to rear they child and see one another 's hair grey . " " aye , aye , " say ; " they win to have long to wait for one another then , anyhow . and ye have get two of ' the strapping 'st son I ' th ' country ; and well you may , for I remember poor Thias as fine a broad - shouldere fellow as need to be ; and as for you , . Bede , why you be straighter I ' the back nor half the young woman now . " " Eh , " say , " it be poor luck for the platter to wear well when it be break I ' two . the sooner I be lay under the thorn the better . I be no good to nobody now . " never take notice of he mother 's little unjust plaint ; but say , " Nay , mother , thee must to say so . thy son ' ull never get another mother . " " that be true , lad , that be true , " say ; " and it be wrong on we to give way to grief , . ; for it be like the child cryin ' when the fathers and mother take thing from th'ey . there be one above know better nor we . " " ah , " say , " an' it be poor work allay settin ' the dead above the livin ' . we shall all on we be dead some time , I reckon -- it 'uld be better if folk 'uld make much on we beforehand , i'stid of ' beginnin ' when we be go . it be but little good you will do a - water the last year 's crop . " " well , , " say , feel that he wife 's word be , as usual , rather incisive than soothing , and that it would be well to change the subject , " you will come and see we again now , I hope . I han to have a talk with you this long while , and the missis here want you to see what can be do with she best spinning - wheel , for it be get broke , and it will be a nice job to mmend
mmend it -- there will want a bit of ' turning . you will come as soon as you can now , will you ? " pause and look round while he be speak , as if to see where be ; for the child be run on before . be not without a companion , and she have , besides , more pink and white about she than ever , for she hold in she hand the wonderful pink - and - white hot - house plant , with a very long name -- a name , she suppose , since people say the gardener be . take the opportunity of look round too ; and I be sure you will not require of he that he should feel any vexation in observe a pouting expression on 's face as she listen to the gardener 's small talk . yet in she secret heart she be glad to have he by she side , for she would perhaps learn from he how it be have not come to church . not that she care to ask he the question , but she hope the information would be give spontaneously ; for , like a superior man , be very fond of give information . be never aware that he conversation and advance be receive coldly , for to shift one 's point of view beyond certain limit be impossible to the most liberal and expansive mind ; we be none of we aware of the impression we produce on brazilian monkey of feeble understanding -- it be possible they see hardly anything in we . moreover , be a man of sober passion , and be already in he tenth year of hesitation as to the relative advantage of matrimony and bachelorhood . it be true that , now and then , when he have be a little heat by a extra glass of grog , he have be hear to say of that the " lass be well enough , " and that " a man might do worse " ; but on convivial occasion man be apt to express themselves strongly . hold in , as a man who " know he business " and who have great light concern soil and compost ; but he be less of a favourite with , who have more than once say in confidence to she husband , " you be mighty fond of ' , but for my part , I think he be welly like a cock as think the sun 's rose of ' purpose to hear he crow . " for the rest , be a estimable gardener , and be not without reason for have a high opinion of himself . he have also high shoulder and high cheek - bone and hang he head forward a little , as he walk along with he hand in he breech pocket . I think it be he pedigree only that have the advantage of be , and not he " bring up " ; for except that he have a stronger burr in he accent , he speech differ little from that of the people about he . but a gardener be , as a french teacher be parisian . " well , , " he say , before the good slow farmer have time to speak , " ye will not be carry you hay to - morrow , I be think . the glass stick at ' change , ' and ye may rely upo ' my word as we will ha ' more downfall afore twenty - four hour be past . ye see that darkish - blue cloud there upo ' the ' rizon -- ye know what i mean by the ' rizon , where the land and sky seem to meet ? " " aye , aye , I see the cloud , " say , " 'rizon or no ' rizon . it be right of 'er 's fallow , and a foul fallow it be . " " well , you mark my word , as that cloud ' ull spread of 'er the sky pretty nigh as quick as you would spread a tarpaulin over one of ' you hay - ricks . it be a great thing to ha 's study the look of ' the cloud . bless you ! th ' met'orological almaneck can learn I nothing , but there be a pretty sight of ' thing I could let they up to , if they would just come to I . and how be you , ?--think of ' getherin ' the red currant soon , I reckon . you would a deal better gether th'ey afore they be o'erripe , wi' such weather as we have get to look forward to . how do ye do , ? " continue , without a pause , nodd by the way to and . " I hope y's enjoy they spinach and gooseberry as I send with th' other day . if ye want vegetable while ye be in trouble , ye know where to come to . it be well know I be not give other folk ' thing away , for when I have supply the house , the garden 's my own spekilation , and it be to every man th ' old squire could get as 'uld be equil to the undertaking , let alone ask whether he would be willing I have get to run my calkilation fine , I can tell you , to make sure of ' get back the money as I pay the squire . I should like to see some of ' they fellow as make the almaneck look as far before they nos as I have get to do every year as come . " " they look pretty fur , though , "
" say , turn he head on one side and speak in rather a subdue reverential tone . " why , what could come truer nor that pictur of ' the cock wi' the big spur , as have get its head knock down wig th' anchor , a ' thg firin ' , a ' the ship behind ? why , that yopictu be make afore , and yit it be come as true as th' . why , th' cock 's , a ' thg anchor 's -- a ' they tell we that beforehand . " " pee --ee - eh ! " say . " a man do to want to see yofu to know as th' ' ull beat the french . why , I know upo ' good authority as it be a big as reach five foot high , a ' they live upo ' spoon - meat mostly . I know a man as he father have a particular knowledge of ' the . I should like to know what they grasshopper be to do against such fine fellow as we young . why , it 'uld astonish a only to look at he ; he arm 's thicker nor a 's body , I will be bound , for they pinch theirsell in wig stay ; and it be easy enough , for they have get nothing I ' they inside . " " where be the captain , as he wasna at church to - day ? " say . " I be talk to he of ' , and he say nothing about he go away . " " oh , he be only go to for a bit of ' fishing ; I reckon he will be back again afore many day be of 'er , for he be to be at all th ' arrange and prepare of ' thing for the comin ' of ' age of ' the 30th o' . but he be fond of ' get away for a bit , now and then . and th' old squire fit one another like frost and flower . " smile and wink slowly as he make this last observation , but the subject be not develop farther , for now they have reach the turning in the road where and he companion must say " good - bye . " the gardener , too , would have have to turn off in the same direction if he have not accept 's invitation to tea . duly seconde the invitation , for she would have hold it a deep disgrace not to make she neighbour welcome to she house : personal likes and dislike must not interfere with that sacred custom . moreover , have always be full of civility to the family at the , and be scrupulous in declare that she have " nothing to say again ' he , o not 'y it be a pity he could to be hatche of 'er again , a ' hatch different . " so and , with they mother between they , wound they way down to the valley and up again to the old house , where a saddened memory have take the place of a long , long anxiety -- where would never have to ask again as he enter , " 's ? " and the other family party , with for company , go back to the pleasant bright house - place at the -- all with quiet mind , except , who know now where be gone , but be only the more puzzled and uneasy . for it appear that he absence be quite voluntary ; he need not have go -- he would not have go if he have want to see she . she have a sickening sense that no lot could ever be pleasant to she again if she night 's vision be not to be fulfil ; and in this moment of chill , bare , wintry disappointment and doubt , she look towards the possibility of be with again , of meet he loving glance , and hear he soft word with that eager yearning which one may call the " grow pain " of passion . on a 's prophecy , the dark - blue cloud disperse itself without have produce the threatened consequence . " the weather " -- as he observ the next morning -- " the weather , you see , be a ticklish thing , a ' a fool ' ull hit of not sometimes when a wise man miss ; that be why the almaneck get so much credit . it be one of ' they chancy thing as fool thrive on . " this unreasonable behaviour of the weather , however , could displease no one else in besides . all hand be to be out in the meadow this mor as soon as the dew have risen ; the wife and daughter do double work in every farmhouse , that the maid might give they help in toss the hay ; and when be march along the lane , with he basket of tool over he shoulder , he catch the sound of jocose talk and ring laughter from behind the hedge . the jocose talk of hay - maker be best at a distance ; like those clumsy bell round the cow ' necks , it have rather a coarse sound when it come close , and may even grate on you ear painfully ; but hear from far off , it mingle very prettily with the other joyous sound of nature . Men's muscle move better when they soul be make merry music , though they merriment be of a poor blundering sort , not at all like the merriment of bird . and perhaps there be no time in a summer 's day
day more cheer than when the warmth of the sun be just begin to triumph over the freshness of the morning -- when there be just a linger hint of early coolness to keep off languor under the delicious influence of warmth . the reason be walk along the lane at this time be because he work for the rest of the day lay at a country - house about three mile off , which be be put in repair for the son of a neighbour squire ; and he have be busy since early morning with the packing of panel , door , and chimney - piece , in a waggon which be now go on before he , while himself have ridden to the spot on horseback , to await its arrival and direct the workman . this little walk be a rest to , and he be unconsciously under the charm of the moment . it be summer morning in he heart , and he see in the sunshine -- a sunshine without glare , with slanting ray that tremble between the delicate shadow of the leave . he think , yesterday when he put out he hand to she as they come out of church , that there be a touch of melancholy kindness in she face , such as he have not see before , and he take it as a sign that she have some sympathy with he family trouble . poor fellow ! that touch of melancholy come from quite another source , but how be he to know ? we look at the one little woman 's face we love as we look at the face of we mother earth , and see all sort of answer to we own yearning . it be impossible for not to feel that what have happene in the last week have bring the prospect of marriage nearer to he . Hitherto he have feel keenly the danger that some other man might step in and get possession of 's heart and hand , while he himself be still in a position that make he shrink from ask she to accept he . even if he have have a strong hope that she be fond of he -- and he hope be far from be strong -- he have be too heavily burdene with other claim to provide a home for himself and -- a home such as he could expect she to be content with after the comfort and plenty of the farm . like all strong nature , have confidence in he ability to achieve something in the future ; he feel sure he should some day , if he liv , be able to maintain a family and make a good broad path for himself ; but he have too cool a head not to estimate to the full the obstacle that be to be overcome . and the time would be so long ! and there be Hetty , like a bright - cheek apple hang over the orchard wall , within sight of everybody , and everybody must long for she ! to be sure , if she love he very much , she would be content to wait for he : but do she love he ? he hope have never risen so high that he have da to ask she . he be clear- sigh enough to be aware that she uncle and aunt would have look kindly on he suit , and indeed , without this encouragement he would never have persever in go to the farm ; but it be impossible to come to any but fluctuat conclusion about 's feeling . she be like a kitten , and have the same distractingly pretty look , that mean nothing , for everybody that come near she . but now he could not help say to himself that the heaviest part of he burden be remove , and that even before the end of another year he circumstance might be bring into a shape that would allow he to think of marrying . it would always be a hard struggle with he mother , he know : she would be jealous of any wife he might choose , and she have set she mind especially against -- perhaps for no other reason than that she suspect to be the woman he have choose . it would never do , he fear , for he mother to live in the same house with he when he be marry ; and yet how hard she would think it if he ask she to leave he ! yes , there be a great deal of pain to be go through with he mother , but it be a case in which he must make she feel that he will be strong -- it would be better for she in the end . for himself , he would have like that they should all live together till be married , and they might have build a bit themselves to the old house , and make more room . he do not like " to part wi' th ' lad " : they have hardly every be separate for more than a day since they be bear . but have no sooner catch he imagination leap forward in this way -- make arrangement for a uncertain future -- than he check himself . " a pretty building I be make , without either brick or timber . I be up I ' the garret a' ready , and have not so much as dug the foundation . " be strongly convinced of any proposition , it take the form of a principle in he mind : it be knowledge to be act on , as much as the knowledge that damp will cause rust . perhaps here lay the secret of the hardness he
he have accuse himself of : he have too little fellow - feeling with the weakness that err in spite of foreseen consequence . without this fellow - feeling , how be we to get enough patience and charity towards we stumbling , fall companion in the long and changeful journey ? and there be but one way in which a strong determined soul can learn it -- by get he heart - string bound round the weak and erring , so that he must share not only the outward consequence of they error , but they inward suffering . that be a long and hard lesson , and have at present only learn the alphabet of it in he father 's sudden death , which , by annihilating in a instant all that have stimulate he indignation , have send a sudden rush of thought and memory over what have claim he pity and tenderness . but it be 's strength , not its correlative hardness , that influence he meditations this morning . he have long make up he mind that it would be wrong as well as foolish for he to marry a blooming young girl , so long as he have no other prospect than that of grow poverty with a grow family . and he savings have be so constantly draw upon ( besides the terrible sweep of pay for 's substitute in the militia ) that he have not enough money beforehand to furnish even a small cottage , and keep something in reserve against a rainy day . he have good hope that he should be " firmer on he leg " by and by ; but he could not be satisfied with a vague confidence in he arm and brain ; he must have definite plan , and set about they at once . the partnership with be not to be think of at present -- there be thing implicitly tacke to it that he could not accept ; but think that he and might carry on a little business for themselves in addition to they journeyman 's work , by buy a small stock of superior wood and make article of household furniture , for which have no end of contrivance . Seth might gain more by work at separate job under 's direction than by he journeyman 's work , and , in he overhour , could do all the " nice " work that require peculiar skill . the money gain in this way , with the good wage he receive as foreman , would soon enable they to get beforehand with the world , so sparingly as they would all live now . no sooner have this little plan shape itself in he mind than he begin to be busy with exact calculation about the wood to be buy and the particular article of furniture that should be undertake first -- a kitchen cupboard of he own contrivance , with such a ingenious arrangement of slide - door and bolt , such convenient nook for stow household provender , and such a symmetrical result to the eye , that every good housewife would be in rapture with it , and fall through all the gradation of melancholy long till she husband promise to buy it for she . picture to himself Mrs . Poyser examine it with she keen eye and try in vain to find out a deficiency ; and , of course , close to stand , and be again beguil from calculation and contrivance into dream and hope . yes , he would go and see she this evening -- it be so long since he have be at the . he would have like to go to the night - school , to see why have not be at church yesterday , for he fear he old friend be ill ; but , unless he could manage both visit , this last must be put off till to - morrow -- the desire to be near and to speak to she again be too strong . as he make up he mind to this , he be come very near to the end of he walk , within the sound of the hammers at work on the refitting of the old house . the sound of tool to a clever workman who love he work be like the tentative sound of the orchestra to the violinist who have to bear he part in the overture : the strong fibre begin they accustom thrill , and what be a moment before joy , vexation , or ambition , begin its change into energy . all passion become strength when it have a outlet from the narrow limit of we personal lot in the labour of we right arm , the cunning of we right hand , or the still , creative activity of we thought . look at through the rest of the day , as he stand on the scaffolding with the two - foot ruler in he hand , whistling low while he consider how a difficulty about a floor - joist or a window - frame be to be overcome ; or as he push one of the younger workman aside and take he place in upheave a weight of timber , say , " let alone , lad ! 'st get too much gristle I ' thy bone yet " ; or as he fix he keen black eye on the motion of a workman on the other side of the room and warn he that he distance be not right . look at this broad - shouldere man with the bare muscular arm , and the thick , firm , black hair toss about like trodden meadow - grass whenever he take off he paper cap , and with the strong barytone voice burst every now and then into loud and
and solemn psalm - tune , as if seek a outlet for superfluous strength , yet presently check himself , apparently cross by some thought which jar with the singing . perhaps , if you have not be already in the secret , you might not have guess what sad memory what warm affection , what tender flutter hope , have they home in this athletic body with the broken finger - nail -- in this rough man , who know no better lyric than he could find in the and and a occasional hymn ; who know the smallest possible amount of profane history ; and for whom the motion and shape of the earth , the course of the sun , and the change of the season lay in the region of mystery just make visible by fragmentary knowledge . it have cost a great deal of trouble and work in overhour to know what he know over and above the secret of he handicraft , and that acquaintance with mechanic and figure , and the nature of the material he work with , which be make easy to he by inborn inherited faculty -- to get the mastery of he pen , and write a plain hand , to spell without any other mistake than must in fairness be attribute to the unreasonable character of orthography rather than to any deficiency in the speller , and , moreover , to learn he musical note and part-singing . besides all this , he have read he , include the apocryphal book ; 's , 's and , the 's , with 's and , a great deal of 's , and , and part of a History of , which have lent he . he might have have many more book from , but he have no time for reading " the commin print , " as call it , so busy as he be with figure in all the leisure moment which he do not fill up with extra carpentry . , you perceive , be by no means a marvellous man , nor , properly speak , a genius , yet I will not pretend that he be a ordinary character among workman ; and it would not be at all a safe conclusion that the next best man you may happen to see with a basket of tool over he shoulder and a paper cap on he head have the strong conscience and the strong sense , the blended susceptibility and self - command , of we friend Adam . he be not a average man . yet such man as he be rear here and there in every generation of we peasant artisan -- with a inheritance of affection nurture by a simple family life of common need and common industry , and a inheritance of faculty train in skilful courageous labour : they make they way upwards , rarely as geniuse , most commonly as painstak honest man , with the skill and conscience to do well the tasnks that lie before they . they life have no discernible echo beyond the neighbourhood where they dwelt , but you be almost sure to find there some good piece of road , some building , some application of mineral produce , some improvement in farming practice , some reform of parish abuse , with which they name be associate by one or two generation after they . they employer be the richer for they , the work of they hand have wear well , and the work of they brain have guide well the hand of other man . they go about in they youth in flannel or paper cap , in coat black with coal - dust or streak with lime and red paint ; in old age they white hair be see in a place of honou at church and at market , and they tell they well - dress son and daughter , seat round the bright hearth on winter evening , how pleased they be when they first earn they twopence a - day . other there be who die poor and never put off the workman 's coal on weekday . they have not have the art of get rich , but they be man of trust , and when they die before the work be all out of they , it be as if some main screw have get loose in a machine ; the master who employ they say , " where shall I find they like ? " the come back from he work in the empty waggon -- that be why he have change he clothes -- and be ready to set out to the farm when it still want a quarter to seven . " what be thee get thy cloose on for ? " say complainingly , as he come downstairs . " Thee artna goin ' to ' school I ' thy best coat ? " " no , mother , " say , quietly . " I be go to the , but mayhap I may go to the school after , so thee must to wonder if I be a bit late . ' ull be at home in half a hour -- he be only go to the village ; so thee wutna mind . " " Eh , a ' what be thee get thy best cloose on for to go to th' ? the Poyser folk see would thee in 'em yesterday , I warrand . what dost mean by turnin ' worki' day into a - that 'n ? it be poor keepin ' company wi' folk as to like to see thee I ' thy workin ' jacket . " " good - bye , mother , I can not stay , " say , put on he hat and go out . but he have
have no sooner go a few pace beyond the door than become uneasy at the thought that she have vex he . of course , the secret of she objection to the best clothes be she suspicion that they be put on for 's sake ; but deeper than all she peevishness lay the need that she son should love she . she hurry after he , and laid hold of he arm before he have get half - way down to the brook , and say , " Nay , my lad , thee wutto go away angered wi' thy mother , a ' she get nuy to do but to sit by hersen a ' think on thee ? " " Nay , nay , mother , " say , gravely , and stand still while he put he arm on she shoulder , " I be not anger . but I wish , for thy own sake , thee ' dst be more contented to let I do what I have make up my mind to do . I will never be no other than a good son to thee as long as we live . but a man have other feeling besides what he owe to 's father and mother , and thee oughtna to want to rule over I body and soul . and thee must make up thy mind as I will not give way to thee where I have a right to do what I like . so let we have no more word about it . " " Eh , " say , not willing to show that she feel the real bearing of 's word , " and ' who like to see thee I ' thy best cloose better nor thy mother ? a ' when thee 'st get thy face wash as clean as the smooth white pibble , a ' thy hair comb so nice , and thy eye a - sparklin ' -- what else be there as thy old mother should like to look at half so well ? a ' thee sh aot put on thy cloose when thee like 'st for I -- I will ne 'er plague thee no moor about'n . " " well , well ; good - bye , mother , " say , kiss she and hurrie away . he see there be no other means of put a end to the dialogue . stand still on the spot , shade she eye and look after he till he be quite out of sight . she feel to the full all the meaning that have lain in 's word , and , as she lose sight of he and turn back slowly into the house , she say aloud to herself -- for it be she way to speak she thought aloud in the long day when she husband and son be at they work -- " Eh , he will be tellin ' I as he be goin ' to bring she home one o' these day ; a ' she will be missis of 'er I , and I mun look on , belike , while she use the blue - ed platter , and break 'em , mayhap , though there be ne 'er be one broke sin ' my old man and ' I buy th'ey at the fair twenty ' ear come next Whissuntide . Eh ! " she go on , still louder , as she catch up she knitt from the table , " but she will ne 'er knin the lad 's stockin 's , nor foot 'em nayther , while I live ; a ' when I be go , he will bethink he as nobody ' ull ne 'er fit 's leg a ' foot as he old mother do . she will know nothin ' of ' narrowin ' a ' heelin ' , I warrand , a ' she will make a long toe as he can to get 's boot on . that be what come of ' marr 'in ' young wench . I war go thirty , a ' thg feyther too , afore we war marry ; an's young enough too . she will be a poor dratchell by then she be thirty , a -marr 'in ' a - that 'n , afore she tooth 's all come . " walk so fast that he be at the yard - gate before seven . and the grandfather be not yet come in from the meadow : every one be in the meadow , even to the black - and - tan terrier -- no one keep watch in the yard but the bull - dog ; and when reach the house - door , which stand wide open , he see there be no one in the bright clean house - place . but he guess where Poyser and some one else would be , quite within hearing ; so he knock on the door and say in he strong voice , " . Poyser within ? " " come in , , come in , " Poyser call out from the dairy . she always give this title when she receive he in she own house . " you may come into the dairy if you will , for I can to justly leave the cheese . " walk into the dairy , where and be crush the first evening cheese . " why , you might think you war come to a dead - house , " say , as he stand in the open doorway ; " they be all I ' the meadow ; but 's sure to be in afore long , for they be leave the hay cock to - night , ready for carry first thing to - morrow . I have be force t '
' have in , upo ' ' count as must gether the red currant to - night ; the fruit allay ripen so contrairy , just when every hand 's want . a ' there be no trustin ' the child to gether it , for they put more into they own mouth nor into the basket ; you might as well set the wasp to gether the fruit . " longe to say he would go into the garden till come in , but he be not quite courageous enough , so he say , " I could be look at you spinning - wheel , then , and see what want do to it . perhaps it stand in the house , where I can find it ? " " no , I have put it away in the right - hand parlour ; but let it be till I can fetch it and show it you . I would be glad now if you would go into the garden and tell to send in . the child ' ull run in if she be tell , an' I know 's lettin ' she eat too many currant . I will be much oblige to you , , if you will go and send she in ; an' there be the and ros beautiful in the garden now -- you will like to see th'ey . but you would like a drink of ' whey first , p'r 'ap ; I know you be fond of ' whey , as most folk be when they han to get to crush it out . " " thank you , , " say ; " a drink of ' whey be allay a treat to I . I would rather have it than beer any day . " " aye , aye , " say . Poyser , reach a small white basin that stand on the shelf , and dip it into the whey - tub , " the smell of ' bread 's sweet t ' everybody but the baker . the allays say , , . Poyser , I envy you you dairy ; and I envy you you chicken ; and what a beautiful thing a farm - house be , to be sure ! ' I say , ' yes ; a farm - house be a fine thing for they as look on , a ' do not know the liftin ' , a ' the stannin ' , a ' the worritin ' of ' th ' inside as belong t o't . ' " " why , Poyser , you would not like to live anywhere else but in a farm - house , so well as you manage it , " say , take the basin ; " and there can be nothing to look at pleasanter nor a fine milch cow , stand up to't knee in pasture , and the new milk frothing in the pail , and the fresh butter ready for market , and the calf , and the poultry . here be to you health , and may you allay have strength to look after you own dairy , and set a pattern t ' all the farmer 's wife in the country . " be not to be catch in the weakness of smile at a compliment , but a quiet complacency over-spread she face like a stealing sunbeam , and give a milder glance than usual to she blue - grey eye , as she look at drink the whey . ah ! I think I taste that whey now -- with a flavour so delicate that one can hardly distinguish it from a odour , and with that soft gliding warmth that fill one 's imagination with a still , happy dreaminess . and the light music of the dropping whey be in my ears , mingle with the twittering of a bird outside the wire network window -- the window overlook the garden , and shade by tall Guelder rose . " have a little more , ? " say , as set down the basin . " no , thank you ; I will go into the garden now , and send in the little lass . " " aye , do ; and tell she to come to she mother in the dairy . " walk round by the rick - yard , at present empty of rick , to the little wooden gate lead into the garden -- once the well - ten kitchen - garden of a manor - house ; now , but for the handsome brick wall with stone coping that run along one side of it , a true farmhouse garden , with hardy perennial flower , unpruned fruit - tree , and kitchen vegetable grow together in , half - neglect abundance . in that leafy , flowery , bushy time , to look for any one in this garden be like play at " hide - and - seek . " there be the tall hollyhock begin to flower and dazzle the eye with they pink , white , and yellow ; there be the syringa and Guelder rose , all large and disorderly for want of trimming ; there be leafy wall of scarlet bean and late pea ; there be a row of bushy filbert in one direction , and in another a huge apple - tree make a barren circle under its low - spread bough . but what signify a barren patch or two ? the garden be so large . there be always a superfluity of broad beans -- it take nine or ten of 's stride to get to the end of the uncut grass walk that run by the side of they ; and as for other vegetables , there be so much more room than be
be necessary for they that in the rotation of crop a large flourishing bed of groundsel be of yearly occurrence on one spot or other . the very rose -tree at which stop to pluck one look as if they grow wild ; they be all huddle together in bushy mass , now flaunt with wide - open petal , almost all of they of the streak pink - and - white kind , which doubtless date from the union of the house of and . be wise enough to choose a compact Provence rose that pee out half - smother by its flaunting scentless neighbour , and hold it in he hand -- he think he should be more at ease hold something in he hand -- as he walk on to the far end of the garden , where he remember there be the largest row of currant - tree , not far off from the great yew - tree arbour . but he have not go many step beyond the rose , when he hear the shaking of a bough , and a boy 's voice say , " now , then , Totty , hold out you pinny -- there be a duck . " the voice come from the bough of a tall cherry - tree , where have no difficulty in discern a small blue - pinafored figure perch in a commodious position where the fruit be thickest . be below , behind the screen of pea . yes -- with she bonnet hang down she back , and she fat face , dreadfully smear with red juice , turn up towards the cherry - tree , while she hold she little round hole of a mouth and she red - stain pinafore to receive the promise downfall . I be sorry to say , more than half the cherry that fall be hard and yellow instead of juicy and red ; but spend no time in useless regret , and she be already suck the third juiciest when say , " there now , , you have get you cherry . run into the house with 'em to mother -- she want you -- she be in the dairy . run in this minute -- there be a good little girl . " he lift she up in he strong arm and kiss she as he speak , a ceremony which regard as a tiresome interruption to cherry - eat ; and when he set she down she trot off quite silently towards the house , suck she cherry as she go along . " Tommy , my lad , take care you be not shoot for a little thieving bird , " say , as he walk on towards the currant - tree . he could see there be a large basket at the end of the row : Hetty would not be far off , and already feel as if she be look at he . yet when he turn the corner she be stand with she back towards he , and stoop to gather the low - hang fruit . strange that she have not hear he come ! perhaps it be because she be make the leave rustle . she start when she become conscious that some one be near -- start so violently that she drop the basin with the currant in it , and then , when she see it be , she turn from pale to deep red . that blush make he heart beat with a new happiness . Hetty have never blush at see he before . " I frightene you , " he say , with a delicious sense that it do not signify what he say , since seem to feel as much as he do ; " let I pick the currant up . " that be soon do , for they have only fall in a tangle mass on the grass - plot , and , as he rise and give she the basin again , look straight into she eye with the subdued tenderness that belong to the first moment of hopeful love . Hetty do not turn away she eye ; she blush have subside , and she meet he glance with a quiet sadness , which contente because it be so unlike anything he have see in she before . " there be not many more currant to get , " she say ; " I shall soon ha ' do now . " " I will help you , " say ; and he fetch the large basket , which be nearly full of currant , and set it close to they . not a word more be speak as they gather the currant . 's heart be too full to speak , and he think know all that be in it . she be not indifferent to he presence after all ; she have blush when she see he , and then there be that touch of sadness about she which must surely mean love , since it be the opposite of she usual manner , which have often impress he as indifference . and he could glance at she continually as she bend over the fruit , while the level evening sunbeam steal through the thick apple - tree bough , and rest on she round cheek and neck as if they too be in love with she . it be to Adam the time that a man can least forget in after - life , the time when he believe that the first woman he have ever love betray by a slight something -- a word , a tone , a glance , the quivering of a lip or a eyelid -- that she be at least begin to love he in return . the sign be so slight , it be scarcely perceptible
perceptible to the ear or eye -- he could describe it to no one -- it be a mere feather - touch , yet it seem to have change he whole being , to have merge a uneasy yearning into a delicious unconsciousness of everything but the present moment . so much of we early gladness vanish utterly from we memory : we can never recall the joy with which we lay we head on we mother 's bosom or ride on we father 's back in childhood . Doubtless that joy be wrotch up into we nature , as the sunlight of long - past morning be wrotch up in the soft mellowness of the apricot , but it be gone for ever from we imagination , and we can only believe in the joy of childhood . but the first glad moment in we first love be a vision which return to we to the last , and bring with it a thrill of feeling intense and special as the recurrent sensation of a sweet odou breathe in a far - off hour of happiness . it be a memory that give a more exquisite touch to tenderness , that feed the madness of jealousy and add the last keenness to the agony of despair . bend over the red bunch , the level ray pierce the screen of apple - tree bough , the length of bushy garden beyond , he own emotion as he look at she and believe that she be think of he , and that there be no need for they to talk -- remember it all to the last moment of he life . and ? you know quite well that be mistaken about she . like many other man , he think the sign of love for another be sign of love towards himself . when be approach unseen by she , she be absorb as usual in think and wonder about 's possible return . the sound of any man 's footstep would have affect she just in the same way -- she would have feel it might be before she have time to see , and the blood that forsook she cheek in the agitation of that momentary feeling would have rush back again at the sight of any one else just as much as at the sight of . he be not wrong in think that a change have come over Hetty : the anxiety and fear of a first passion , with which she be trembl , have become stronger than vanity , have give she for the first time that sense of helpless dependence on another 's feeling which awaken the clinging deprecat womanhood even in the shallowest girl that can ever experience it , and create in she a sensibility to kindness which find she quite hard before . for the first time feel that there be something soothing to she in 's timid yet manly tenderness . she want to be treat lovingly -- oh , it be very hard to bear this blank of absence , silence , apparent indifference , after those moment of glow love ! she be not afraid that would tease she with love - make and flatter speech like she other admirer ; he have always be so reserve to she ; she could enjoy without any fear the sense that this strong brave man love she and be near she . it never enter into she mind that be pitiable too -- that too must suffer one day . Hetty , we know , be not the first woman that have behave more gently to the man who love she in vain because she have herself begin to love another . it be a very old story , but know nothing about it , so he drank in the sweet delusion . " that will do , " say , after a little while . " aunt want I to leave some on the tree . I will take th'ey in now . " " it be very well I come to carry the basket , " say " for it 'uld ha ' be too heavy for you little arm . " " no ; I could ha ' carry it with both hand . " " oh , I daresay , " say , smile , " and be as long get into the house as a little ant carry a caterpillar . have you ever see those tiny fellow carry thing four time as big as themselves ? " " no , " say , indifferently , not care to know the difficulty of ant life . " oh , I use to watch them often when I be a lad . but now , you see , I can carry the basket with one arm , as if it be a empty nutshell , and give you th ' other arm to lean on . will not you ? such big arm as mine be make for little arm like yours to lean on . " smile faintly and put she arm within he . look down at she , but she eye be turn dreamily towards another corner of the garden . " have you ever be to ? " she say , as they walk slowly along . " yes , " say , please to have she ask a question about himself . " ten year ago , when I be a lad , I go with father to see about some work there . it be a wonderful sight -- rock and cafe such as you never see in you life . I never have a right notion of ' rock till I go there . " " how long do it take to get there ? " " why , it take we the best part of ' two
two day ' walking . but it be nothing of a day 's journey for anybody as have get a first - rate nag . the captain 'uld get there in nine or ten hour , I will be bound , he be such a rider . and I should not wonder if he be back again to - morrow ; he be too active to rest long in that lonely place , all by himself , for there be nothing but a bit of a inn I ' that part where he be go to fish . I wish he would get th ' estate in he hand ; that 'uld be the right thing for he , for it 'uld give he plenty to do , and he would would o't well too , for all he be so young ; he be get better notion of ' thing than many a man twice he age . he speak very handsome to I th ' other day about lend I money to set up I ' business ; and if thing come round that way , I would rather be beholde to he nor to any man I ' the world . " poor Adam be lead on to speak about because he think would be pleased to know that the young squire be so ready to befriend he ; the fact enter into he future prospect , which he would like to seem promise in she eye . and it be true that listen with a interest which bring a new light into she eye and a half - smile upon she lip . " how pretty the ros be now ! " continue , pause to look at they . " see ! I steal the prettiest , but I do to mean to keep it myself . I think these as be all pink , and have get a finer sort of ' green leave , be prettier than the striped un , do not you ? " he set down the basket and take the rose from he button - hole . " it smell very sweet , " he say ; " those stripe und have no smell . stick it in you frock , and then you can put it in water after . it 'uld be a pity to let it fade . " take the rose , smile as she do so at the pleasant thought that yoArthu could so soon get back if he like . there be a flash of hope and happiness in she mind , and with a sudden impulse of gaiety she do what she have very often do before -- stick the rose in she hair a little above the left ear . the tender admiration in 's face be slightly shadow by reluctant disapproval . 's love of finery be just the thing that would most provoke he mother , and he himself dislike it as much as it be possible for he to dislike anything that belong to she . " ah , " he say , " that be like the ladie in the picture at the chase ; they have mostly get flower or feather or gold thing I ' they hair , but somehow I do not like to see them they allay put I I ' mind of ' the painted woman outside the show at Treddles 'on . what can a woman have to set she off better than she own hair , when it curl so , like yours ? if a woman 's young and pretty , I think you can see she good look all the better for she be aplain dress . why , look very nice , for all she wear such a plain cap and gown . it seem to I as a woman 's face do to want flower ; it be almost like a flower itself . I be sure yours be . " " oh , very well , " say , with a little playful pout , take the rose out of she hair . " I will put one of ' 's cap on when we go in , and you will see if I look better in it . she leave one behind , so I can take the pattern . " " Nay , nay , I do not want you to wear a cap like 's . I daresay it be a very ugly cap , and I use to think when I see she here as it be nonsense for she to dress different t ' other people ; but I never rightly notice she till she come to see mother last week , and then I think the cap seem to fit she face somehow as th ' acorn - cup fit th ' acorn , and I should not like to see she so well without it . but you have get another sort of ' face ; I would have you just as you be now , without anything t ' interfere with you own look . it be like when a man 's singe a good tune -- you do not want t ' hear bell tinkling and interfere wi' the sound . " he take she arm and put it within he again , look down on she fondly . he be afraid she should think he have lecture she , imagine , as we be apt to do , that she have perceive all the thought he have only half - expressed . and the thing he dread most be lest any cloud should come over this evening 's happiness . for the world he would not have speak of he love to yet , till this commencing kindness towards he should have grow into unmistakable love . in he imagination he see long year of he
he future life stretch before he , blest with the right to call he own : he could be content with very little at present . so he take up the basket of currant once more , and they go on towards the house . the scene have quite change in the half - hour that have be in the garden . the yard be full of life now : be let the screaming geese through the gate , and wickedly provoke the gander by hiss at he ; the granary - door be groan on its hinge as shut it , after deal out the corn ; the horse be be lead out to water , amidst much barking of all the three dog and many " whup " from the ploughman , as if the heavy animal who hold down they meek , intelligent head , and lift they shaggy foot so deliberately , be likely to rush wildly in every direction but the right . everybody be come back from the meadow ; and when and enter the house - place , be seat in the three - corner chair , and the grandfather in the large arm -chair opposite , look on with pleasant expectation while the supper be be laid on the oak table . have lay the cloth herself -- a cloth make of homespun linen , with a shining checker pattern on it , and of a agreeable whitey - brown hue , such as all sensible housewive like to see -- none of you bleached " shop -rag " that would wear into hole in no time , but good homespun that would last for two generation . the cold veal , the fresh lettuces , and the stuffe chine might well look tempting to hungry man who have dine at half - past twelve o'clock . on the large deal table against the wall there be bright pewter plate and spoon and can , ready for and he companion ; for the master and servants eat they supper not far off each other ; which be all the pleasanter , because if a remark about to - morrow morning 's work occur to , be at hand to hear it . " well , , I be glad to see ye , " say . " what ! ye have be help to gether the curran 's , eh ? come , sit ye down , sit ye down . why , it be pretty near a three - week since y's have you supper with we ; and the missis have get one of she rare stuffed chine . I be glad ye be come . " " Hetty , " say , as she look into the basket of currant to see if the fruit be fine , " run upstairs and send down . she be put to bed , and I want she to draw th ' ale , for 's busy yet I ' the dairy . you can see to the child . but whativer do you let she run away from you along wi' for , and stuff herself wi' fruit as she can not eat a bit of ' good victual ? " this be say in a lower tone than usual , while she husband be talk to ; for Poyser be strict in adherence to she own rule of propriety , and she consider that a young girl be not to be treat sharply in the presence of a respectable man who be court she . that would not be fair - play : every woman be young in she turn , and have she chance of matrimony , which it be a point of honour for other woman not to spoil -- just as one market- woman who have sell she own egg must not try to balk another of a customer . Hetty make haste to run away upstairs , not easily find a answer to she aunt 's question , and go out to see after and and bring they in to supper . they be all seat -- the two rosy lad , one on each side , by the pale mother , a place be leave for between and she uncle . Alick too be come in , and be seat in he far corner , eat cold broad bean out of a large dish with he pocket - knife , and find a flavour in they which he would not have exchange for the finest pineapple . " what a time that gell be draw th ' ale , to be sure ! " say , when she be dispense she slex of stuff chine . " I think she set 's the jug under and forget to turn the tap , as there be nothing you can not believe of ' they wench : they will set the empty kettle of ' the fire , and then come a hour after to see if the water boil . " " she have drawin ' for the man too , " say . " Thee shouldst ha ' tell she to bring we jug up first . " " tell she ? " say . " yes , I might spend all the wind I ' my body , a ' take the bellow too , if I be to tell they gell everything as they own sharpness win to tell th'ey . , will you take some vinegar with you lettuce ? aye you be I ' the right not . it spoil the flavour of ' the chine , to my thinking . it be poor eat where the flavour of ' the meat lie I ' the cruet . there be folk as make bad butter and trusten to the salt t ' hide it . " 's attention be here divert by
by the appearance of , carry a large jug , two small mug , and four drinking - can , all full of ale or small beer -- a interesting example of the prehensile power possess by the human hand . 's mouth be rather wider open than usual , as she walk along with she eye fix on the double cluster of vessel in she hand , quite innocent of the expression in she mistress 's eye . " , I niver know you equil -- to think of ' you poor mother as be a widow , an' I take you wi' as good as no character , a ' the time a ' time I have tell you .... " have not see the lightning , and the thunder shook she nerve the more for the want of that preparation . with a vague alarm sense that she must somehow comport herself differently , she hasten she step a little towards the far deal table , where she might set down she cans -- catch she foot in she apron , which have become untied , and fall with a crash and a splash into a pool of beer ; whereupon a tittering explosion from and , and a serious " ! " from , who see he dratch of ale unpleasantly defer . " there you go ! " resume , in a cutting tone , as she rise and go towards the cupboard while begin dolefully to pick up the fragment of pottery . " it be what I tell you 'uld come , over and over again ; and there be you month 's wage gone , and more , to pay for that jug as I have have I ' the house this ten year , and nothing ever happen t o't before ; but the crockery you have break sin' here in thg house you have be 'uld make a parson swear -- forgi ' I for say so -- a ' if it have be boil wort out of ' the copper , it 'uld ha ' be the same , and you would ha ' be scald and very like lam for life , as there be no knowing but what you will be some day if you go on ; for anybody 'uld think you would get the 's , to see the thing you have throw down . it be a pity but what the bit be stack up for you to see , though it be neither see nor hearing as ' ull make much odd to you -- anybody 'uld think you war case - harden . " 's tear be drop fast by this time , and in she desperation at the lively movement of the beer - stream towards 's leg , she be convert she apron into a mop , while , open the cupboard , turn a blighting eye upon she . " ah , " she go on , " you will do no good wig cry a ' make more wet to wipe up . it be all you own wilfulness , as I tell you , for there be nobody no call to break anything if they will only go the right way to work . but wooden folk have need ha ' wooden thing t ' handle . and here must I take the brown - and - white jug , as it be niver be use three time this year , and go down I ' the cellar myself , and belike catch my death , and be laid up wi' inflammation .... " have turn round from the cupboard with the brown - and - white jug in she hand , when she catch sight of something at the other end of the kitchen ; perhaps it be because she be already trembl and nervous that the apparition have so strong a effect on she ; perhaps jug - breaking , like other crime , have a contagious influence . however it be , she star and start like a ghost - seer , and the precious brown - and - white jug fall to the ground , part for ever with its spout and handle . " do ever anybody see the like ? " she say , with a suddenly lowered tone , after a moment 's bewilder glance round the room . " the jug be bewitch , I think . it be they nasty glazed handle -- they slip o 'er the finger like a snail . " " why , thee 'st let thy own whip fly I ' thy face , " say she husband , who have now join in the laugh of the young one . " it be all very fine to look on and grin , " rejoin Poyser ; " but there be time when the crockery seem alive a ' fly out of ' you hand like a bird . it be like the glass , sometimes , ' ull crack as it stand . what be to be broke will be break , for I never drop a thing I ' my life for want o ' hold it , else I should never ha ' keep the crockery all these ' ear as I buy at my own wedding . and , be you mad ? Whativer do you mean by come down I ' that way , and make one think as there be a ghost a - walk I ' th ' house ? " a new outbreak of laughter , while Poyser be speak , be cause , less by she sudden conversion to a fatalistic view of jug - break than by that strange appearance of , which have start she aunt . the little minx have find a black gown of she aunt 's , and pinne it
it close round she neck to look like 's , have make she hair as flat as she could , and have tie on one of 's high - crowned borderless net cap . the thought of 's pale grave face and mild grey eye , which the sight of the gown and cap bring with it , make it a laughable surprise enough to see they replace by 's round rosy cheek and coquettish dark eye . the boy get off they chair and jumpe round she , clapp they hand , and even give a low ventral laugh as he look up from he bean . under cover of the noise , . go into the back kitchen to send into the cellar with the great pewter measure , which have some chance of be free from bewitchment . " why , Hetty , lass , be ye turn ? " say , with that comfortable slow enjoyment of a laugh which one only see in stout people . " you must pull you face a deal longer before you will do for one ; mustna she , ? how come you put they thing on , eh ? " " say he like 's cap and gow better nor my clothes , " say , sit down demurely . " he say folk look better in ugly clothes . " " Nay , nay , " say , look at she admiringly ; " I only say they seem to suit . but if I would say you would look pretty in 'em , I should ha ' say nothing but what be true . " " why , thee think 'st war a ghost , didstna ? " say to he wife , who now come back and take she seat again . " Thee look' dst as scared as scared . " " it little sinnify how I look , " say ; " look ' ull mmend no jug , nor laugh neither , as I see . , I be sorry you have to wait so long for you ale , but it be come in a minute . make yourself at home wi' th ' cold potatoe : I know you like th'ey . Tommy , I will send you to be this minute , if you do not give over laughing . what be there to laugh at , I should like to know ? I would sooner cry nor laugh at the sight of ' that poor thing 's cap ; and there be they as 'uld be better if they could make theirselves like she I ' more way nor put on she cap . it little become anybody I ' this house to make fun of ' my sister 's child , a ' she just go away from we , as it go to my heart to part wi' she . An' I know one thing , as if trouble be to come , an' I be to be lay up I ' my bed , a ' the child be to die -- as there be no knowing but what they will -- a ' the murrain be to come among the cattle again , a ' everything go to rack a ' ruin , I say we might be glad to get sight of ' 's cap again , wi' she own face under it , border or no border . for she be one of ' they thing as look the brightest on a rainy day , and love you the best when you be most I ' need o not . " , you perceive , be aware that nothing would be so likely to expel the comic as the terrible . , who be of a susceptible disposition , and very fond of he mother , and who have , besides , eat so many cherry as to have he feeling less under command than usual , be so affect by the dreadful picture she have make of the possible future that he begin to cry ; and the good - natured father , indulgent to all weakness but those of negligent farmer , say to , " you would better take the thing off again , my lass ; it hurt you aunt to see th'ey . " go upstairs again , and the arrival of the ale make a agreeable diversion ; for have to give he opinion of the new tap , which could not be otherwise than complimentary to ; and then follow a discussion on the secret of good brewing , the folly of stinginess in " hopping , " and the doubtful economy of a farmer 's make he own malt . have so many opportunity of express herself with weight on these subject that by the time supper be end , the ale - jug refill , and 's pipe alight she be once more in high good humour , and ready , at 's request , to fetch the broken spinning - wheel for he inspection . " ah , " say , look at it carefully , " here be a nice bit of ' turning want . it be a pretty wheel . I must have it up at the turning - shop in the village and do it there , for I have no convenence for turn at home . if you will send it to 's shop I ' the morning , I will get it do for you by . I have be turn it over in my mind , " he continue , look at , " to make a bit more convenence at home for nice job of ' cabinet - make . I have always do a deal at such little thing in odd hour , and they be profitable , for there be more workmanship nor
nor material in 'em . I look for I and to get a little business for ourselves I ' that way , for I know a man at as ' ull take as many thing as we should make , besides what we could get order for round about . " enter with interest into a project which see a step towards 's become a " master-man , " and give she approbation to the scheme of the movable kitchen cupboard , which be to be capable of contain grocery , pickle , crockery , and house - linen in the utmost compactness without confusion . Hetty , once more in she own dress , with she neckerchief push a little backward on this warm evening , be seat picking currant near the window , where could see she quite well . and so the time pass pleasantly till get up to go . he be press to come again soon , but not to stay longer , for at this busy time sensible people would not run the risk of be sleepy at five og clock in the morning . " I shall take a step farther , " say , " and go on to see , for he be not at church yesterday , and I have not see he for a week past . I have never hardly know he to miss church before . " " aye , " say , " we have hear nothing about he , for it be the boy 's holloday now , so we can give you no account . " " but you will niver think of ' go there at this hour of ' the night ? " say , fold up she knitting . " oh , sit up late , " say . " a ' the night - school be not over yet . some of ' the man do not come till late -- they have get so far to walk . and himself be never in bed till it be go eleven . " " I would to have he to live wi' I , then , " say , " a -dropping candle - grease about , as you be like to tumble down of ' the floor the first thing I ' the morning . " " aye , eleven o'clock 's late -- it be late , " say old . " I ne 'er sot up so i' my life , not to say as it warna a marr 'in ' , or a christenin ' , or a wake , or th' harvest supper . 's late . " " why , I sit up till after twelve often , " say , laugh , " but it be not t ' eat and drink extry , it be to work extry . good - night , ; good - night , . " Hetty could only smile and not shake hand , for hers be dyed and damp with currant - juice ; but all the rest give a hearty shake to the large palm that be hold out to they , and say , " come again , come again ! " " aye , think of ' that now , " say , when be out of on the causeway . " sit up till past twelve to do extry work ! ye will not find many man of ' six - a ' twenty as ' ull do to put I ' the shaft wi' he . if you can catch for a husband , Hetty , you will ride I ' you own spring - cart some day , I will be you warrant . " be move across the kitchen with the currant , so she uncle do not see the little toss of the head with which she answer he . to ride in a spring - cart seem a very miserable lot indeed to she now . the night - School and the 's be one of a few scatter house on the edge of a common , which be divide by the road to . reach it in a quarter of a hour after leave the ; and when he have he hand on the door - latch , he could see , through the curtainless window , that there be eight or nine head bend over the desk , light by thin dip . when he enter , a reading lesson be go forward and merely nod , leave he to take he place where he please . he have not come for the sake of a lesson to - night , and he mind be too full of personal matter , too full of the last two hour he have pass in 's presence , for he to amuse himself with a book till school be over ; so he sit down in a corner and look on with a absent mind . it be a sort of scene which have beheld almost weekly for year ; he know by heart every arabesque flourish in the framed specimen of 's handwriting which hang over the schoolmaster 's head , by way of keep a lofty ideal before the mind of he pupil ; he know the back of all the book on the shelf run along the whitewashed wall above the peg for the slate ; he know exactly how many grain be go out of the ear of indian corn that hang from one of the rafter ; he have long ago exhaust the resource of he imagination in try to think how the bunch of leathery seaweed have look and grow in its native element ; and from the place where he sit , he could make nothing of the old map of that hang against the opposite wall , for age have turn it
it of a fine yellow brown , something like that of a well - seaso meerschaum . the drama that be go on be almost as familiar as the scene , nevertheless habit have not make he indifferent to it , and even in he present self - absorb mood , feel a momentary stirring of the old fellow - feeling , as he look at the rough man painfully hold pen or pencil with they cramped hand , or humbly labour through they reading lesson . the read class now seat on the form in front of the schoolmaster 's desk consiste of the three most backward pupil . would have know it only by see 's face as he look over he spectacle , which he have shift to the ridge of he nose , not require they for present purpose . the face wear its mildest expression : the grizzl bushy eyebrow have take they more acute angle of compassionate kindness , and the mouth , habitually compress with a pout of the lower lip , be relaxed so as to be ready to speak a helpful word or syllable in a moment . this gentle expression be the more interesting because the schoolmaster 's nose , a irregular aquiline twiste a little on one side , have rather a formidable character ; and he brow , moreover , have that peculiar tension which always impress one as a sign of a keen impatient temperament : the blue vein stand out like cord under the transparent yellow skin , and this intimidating brow be soften by no tendency to baldness , for the grey bristly hair , cut down to about a inch in length , stand round it in as close ranks as ever . " Nay , , nay , " be say in a kind tone , as he nod to , " begin that again , and then perhaps , it will come to you what would -r -y spell . it be the same lesson you read last week , you know . " " " be a sturdy fellow , aged four - and - twenty , a excellent stone - sawyer , who could get as good wage as any man in the trade of he year ; but he find a reading lesson in word of one syllable a harder matter to deal with than the hardest stone he have ever have to see . the letter , he complain , be so " uncommon alike , there be no tellin 's 'em one from another , " the sawyer 's business not be concerned with minute difference such as exist between a letter with its tail turn up and a letter with its tail turn down . but have a firm determination that he would learn to read , foun chiefly on two reason : first , that , he cousin , could read anything " right off , " whether it be print or write , and have send he a letter from twenty mile off , say how he be prosper in the world and have get a overlooker 's place ; secondly , that , who sawed with he , have learn to read when he be turn twenty , and what could be do by a little fellow like , consider , could be do by himself , see that he could pound into wet clay if circumstance require it . so here he be , point he big finger towards three word at once , and turn he head on one side that he might keep better hold with he eye of the one word which be to be discriminate out of the group . the amount of knowledge must possess be something so dim and vast that 's imagination recoil before it : he would hardly have venture to deny that the schoolmaster might have something to do in bring about the regular return of daylight and the change in the weather . the man seat next to be of a very different type : he be a brickmaker who , after spend thirty year of he life in perfect satisfaction with he ignorance , have lately " get religion , " and along with it the desire to read the . but with he , too , learn be a heavy business , and on he way out to - night he have offer as usual a special prayer for help , see that he have undertake this hard task with a single eye to the nourishment of he soul -- that he might have a greater abundance of text and hymn wherewith to banish evil memory and the temptation of old habit -- or , in brief language , the devil . for the brickmaker have be a notorious poacher , and be suspect , though there be no good evidence against he , of be the man who have shot a neighbour gamekeeper in the leg . however that might be , it be certain that shortly after the accident refer to , which be coincident with the arrival of a awakening preacher at , a great change have be observe in the brickmaker ; and though he be still know in the neighbourhood by he old sobriquet of " , " there be nothing he hold in so much horror as any further transaction with that evil - smell element . he be a broad - chest fellow with a fervid temperament , which help he better in imbib religious idea than in the dry process of acquire the mere human knowledge of the alphabet . indeed , he have be already a little shaken in he resolution by a brother , who assure he that the letter be a mere obstruction to the Spirit , and express a fear that be too eager for the knowledge that puffeth
puffeth up . the third beginner be a much more promising pupil . he be a tall but thin and wiry man , nearly as old as , with a very pale face and hand stain a deep blue . he be a dyer , who in the course of dipping homespun wool and old woman 's petticoat have get fire with the ambition to learn a great deal more about the strange secret of colour . he have already a high reputation in the district for he dyes , and he be bent on discover some method by which he could reduce the expense of crimson and scarlet . the druggist at have give he a notion that he might save himself a great deal of labour and expense if he could learn to read , and so he have begin to give he spare hour to the night - school , resolve that he " little chap " should lose no time in come to 's day - school as soon as he be old enough . it be touch to see these three big man , with the mark of they hard labour about they , anxiously bend over the worn book and painfully make out , " the grass be green , " " the stick be dry , " " the corn be ripe " -- a very hard lesson to pass to after column of single word all alike except in the first letter . it be almost as if three rough animal be make humble effort to learn how they might become human . and it touch the tenderest fibre in 's nature , for such full - grow child as these be the only pupil for whom he have no severe epithet and no impatient tone . he be not gif with a imperturbable temper , and on music - night it be apparent that patience could never be a easy virtue to he ; but this evening , as he glance over he spectacle at , the sawyer , who be turn he head on one side with a desperate sense of blankness before the letter d - r -y , he eye she they mildest and most encourage light . after the read class , two youth between sixteen and nineteen come up with the imaginary bill of parcel , which they have be write out on they slate and be now require to calculate " off - hand " -- a test which they stand with such imperfect success that , whose eye have be glar at they ominously through he spectacle for some minute , at length burst out in a bitter , high - pitch tone , pause between every sentence to rap the floor with a knob stick which rest between he leg . " now , you see , you do not do this thing a bit better than you do a fortnight ago , and I will tell you what be the reason . you want to learn account -- that be well and good . but you think all you need do to learn account be to come to I and do sum for a hour or so , two or three time a - week ; and no sooner do you get you cap on and turn out of door again than you sweep the whole thing clean out of you mind . you go whistling about , and take no more care what you be think of than if you head be gutter for any rubbish to swill through that happen to be in the way ; and if you get a good notion in 'em , it be pretty soon wash out again . you think knowledge be to be get cheap -- you will come and pay sixpence a - week , and he will make you clever at figure without you take any trouble . but knowledge be not to be get with pay sixpence , let I tell you . if you be to know figure , you must turn th'ey over in you head and keep you thought fix on th'ey . there be nothing you can not turn into a sum , for there be nothing but what be get number in it -- even a fool . you may say to yourselves , 'I be one fool , and 's another ; if my fool 's head weigh four pound , and 's three pound three ounce and three quarter , how many pennyweight heavier would my head be than 's ? ' a man that have get he heart in learning figure would make sum for himself and work th'ey in he head . when he sit at he shoemaking , he would count he stitch by fives , and then put a price on he stitch , say half a farthing , and then see how much money he could get in a hour ; and then ask himself how much money he would get in a day at that rate ; and then how much ten workman would get work three , or twenty , or a hundred year at that rate -- and all the while he needle would be go just as fast as if he leave he head empty for the devil to dance in . but the long and the short of it be -- I will have nobody in my night - school that do not strive to learn what he come to learn , as hard as if he be strive to get out of a dark hole into broad daylight . I will send no man away because he be stupid : if , the idiot , want to learn anything , I would not refuse to teach he . but I will not throw away good knowledge on people who think they can get
get it by the sixpenn'orth , and carry it away with 'em as they would a ounce of snuff . so never come to I again , if you can not show that you have be work with you own head , instead of think that you can pay for mine to work for you . that be the last word I have get to say to you . " with this final sentence , give a sharper rap than ever with he knobbed stick , and the discomfited lad get up to go with a sulky look . the other pupil have happily only they writing - book to show , in various stage of progress from pot -hook to round text ; and mere pen-stroke , however perverse , be less exasperat to than false arithmetic . he be a little more severe than usual on 's , of which poor have write a pageful , all with they tops turn the wrong way , with a puzzl sense that they be not right " somehow . " but he observ in apology , that it be a letter you never want hardly , and he think it have only be there " to finish off th ' alphabet , like , though ampusand ( & ) would ha ' do as well , for what he could see . " at last the pupil have all take they hat and say they " good - night , " and , know he old master 's habit , rose and say , " shall I put the candle out , ? " " yes , my boy , yes , all but this , which I will carry into the house ; and just lock the outer door , now you be near it , " say , get he stick in the fitting angle to help he in descending from he stool . he be no sooner on the ground than it become obvious why the stick be necessary -- the left leg be much shorter than the right . but the school - master be so active with he lameness that it be hardly think of as a misfortune ; and if you have see he make he way along the schoolroom floor , and up the step into he kitchen , you would perhaps have understood why the naughty boy sometimes feel that he pace might be indefinitely quicken and that he and he stick might overtake they even in they swiftest run . the moment he appear at the kitchen door with the candle in he hand , a faint whimpering begin in the chimney - corner , and a brown - and - tan - coloured bitch , of that wise - look breed with short leg and long body , know to a unmechanical generation as turnspit , come creeping along the floor , wag she tail , and hesitat at every other step , as if she affections be painfully divide between the hamper in the chimney - corner and the master , whom she could not leave without a greeting . " well , , well then , how be the babby ? " say the schoolmaster , make haste towards the chimney - corner and hold the candle over the low hamper , where two extremely blind puppy lift up they head towards the light from a nest of flannel and wool . could not even see she master look at they without painful excitement : she get into the hamper and get out again the next moment , and behave with true feminine folly , though look all the while as wise as a dwarf with a large old - fashioned head and body on the most abbreviated leg . " why , you have get a family , I see , ? " say , smile , as he come into the kitchen . " how be that ? I think it be against the law here . " " Law ? what be the use of ' law when a man 's once such a fool as to let a woman into he house ? " say , turn away from the hamper with some bitterness . he always call a woman , and seem to have lose all consciousness that he be use a figure of speech . " if I would know be a woman , I would never have hold the boy from drown she ; but when I would get she into my hand , I be force to take to she . and now you see what she be bring I to -- the sly , hypocritical wench " -- speak these last word in a rasping tone of reproach , and look at , who pok down she head and turn up she eye towards he with a keen sense of opprobrium -- " and contrive to be bring to be on a at church - time . I have wish again and again I would be a bloody minded man , that I could have strangle the mother and the brat with one cord . " " I be glad it be no worse a cause keep you from church , " say . " I be afraid you must be ill for the first time I ' you life . and I be particularly sorry not to have you at church yesterday . " " ah , my boy , I know why , I know why , " say kindly , go up to and raise he hand up to the shoulder that be almost on a level with he own head . " you have have a rough bit of ' road to get over since I see you -- a rough bit of ' road . but I be in hope there be better time come
come for you . I have get some news to tell you . but I must get my supper first , for I be hungry , I be hungry . sit down , sit down . " go into he little pantry , and bring out a excellent home - bake loaf ; for it be he one extravagance in these dear time to eat bread once a - day instead of oat - cake ; and he justify it by observe , that what a schoolmaster want be brain , and oat - cake run too much to bone instead of brain . then come a piece of cheese and a quart jug with a crown of foam upon it . he place they all on the round deal table which stand against he large arm - chair in the chimney - corner , with 's hamper on one side of it and a window - shelf with a few book pile up in it on the other . the table be as clean as if have be a excellent housewife in a checker apron ; so be the quarry floor ; and the old carve oaken press , table , and chair , which in these day would be buy at a high price in aristocratic house , though , in that period of spider - leg and inlaid cupid , have get they for a old song , where as free from dust as thing could be at the end of a summer 's day . " now , then , my boy , draw up , draw up . we will not talk about business till we have have we supper . no man can be wise on a empty stomach . but , " say , rise from he chair again , " I must give she supper too , confound she ! though she will do nothing with it but nourish those unnecessary babby . that be the way with these woman -- they have get no head - piece to nourish , and so they food all run either to fat or to brat . " he bring out of the pantry a dish of scrap , which at once fix she eye on , and jump out of she hamper to lick up with the utmost dispatch . " I have have my supper , , " say , " so I will look on while you eat yours . I have be at the , and they always have they supper betime , you know : they do not keep you late hour . " " I know little about they hour , " say dryly , cut he bread and not shrink from the crust . " it be a house I seldom go into , though I be fond of the boy , and 's a good fellow . there be too many woman in the house for I : I hate the sound of woman 's voice ; they be always either a - buzz or a - squeak -- always either a - buzz or a - squeak . keep at the top of ' the talk like a fife ; and as for the young lass , I would as soon look at water-grub . I know what they will turn to -- stinge gnat , stinge gnat . here , take some ale , my boy : it be be draw for you -- it be be draw for you . " " , , " say , who take he old friend 's whim more seriously than usual to - night , " do not be so hard on the have make to be companion for we . a working -man 'uld be badly off without a wife to see to th' house and the victual , and make thing clean and comfortable . " " Nonsense ! it be the silliest lie a sensible man like you ever believe , to say a woman make a house comfortable . it be a story get up because the woman be there and something must be find for th'ey to do . I tell you there be not a thing under the sun that need to be do at all , but what a man can do better than a woman , unless it be bearing child , and they do that in a poor make - shift way ; it have better ha ' be leave to the man -- it have better ha ' be leave to the man . I tell you , a woman ' ull bake you a pie every week of she life and never come to see that the hotter th ' ove the shorter the time . I tell you , a woman ' ull make you porridge every day for twenty year and never think of measure the proportion between the meal and the milk -- a little more or less , she will think , do not signify . the porridge will be awk 'ard now and then : if it be wrong , it be summat in the meal , or it be summat in the milk , or it be summat in the water . look at I ! I make my own bread , and there be no difference between one batch and another from year 's end to year 's end ; but if I would get any other woman besides in the house , I must pray to the every baking to give I patience if the bread turn out heavy . and as for cleanliness , my house be cleaner than any other house on the common , though the half of 'em swarm with woman . will 's lad come to help I in a morning , and we get as much cleaning do in one hour , without
without any fuss , as a woman 'uld get do in three , and all the while be send buckets of ' water after you ankle , and let the fender and the fire - iron stand in the middle of ' the floor half the day for you to break you shins against th'ey . do not tell I about have make such creature to be companion for we ! I do not say but he might make to be a companion to Adam in paradise -- there be no cooking to be spoil there , and no other woman to cackle with and make mischief , though you see what mischief she do as soon as she ' a opportunity . but it be a impious , unscriptural opinion to say a woman be a blessing to a man now ; you might as well say adder and wasp , and fox and wild beasts be a blessing , when they be only the evils that belong to this state of ' probation , which it be lawful for a man to keep as clear of as he can in this life , hope to get quit of th'ey for ever in another -- hope to get quit of th'ey for ever in another . " have become so excited and angry in the course of he invective that he have forget he supper , and only use the knife for the purpose of rapp the table with the haft . but towards the close , the rap become so sharp and frequent , and he voice so quarrelsome , that feel it incumbent on she to jump out of the hamper and bark vaguly . " , ! " snarl , turn round upon she . " you be like the rest of ' the woman -- always put in you word before you know why . " return to she hamper again in humiliation , and she master continue he supper in a silence which do not choose to interrupt ; he know the old man would be in a better humour when he have have he supper and light he pipe . be use to hear he talk in this way , but have never learn so much of 's past life as to know whether he view of married comfort be found on experience . on that point Bartle be mute , and it be even a secret where he have liv previous to the twenty year in which happily for the peasant and artisan of this neighbourhood he have be settle among they as they only schoolmaster . if anything like a question be venture on this subject , always reply , " oh , I have see many place -- I have be a deal in the south , " and the Loamshire man would as soon have think of ask for a particular town or village in as in " the south . " " now then , my boy , " say , at last , when he have pour out he second mug of ale and light he pipe , " now then , we will have a little talk . but tell I first , have you hear any particular news to - day ? " " no , " say , " not as I remember . " " ah , they will keep it close , they will keep it close , I daresay . but I find it out by chance ; and it be news that may concern you , , else I be a man that do not know a superficial square foot from a solid . " here give a series of fierce and rapid puffs , look earnestly the while at . you impatient loquacious man have never any notion of keep he pipe alight by gentle measure puffs ; he be always let it go nearly out , and then punish it for that negligence . at last he say , " 's get a paralytic stroke . I find it out from the lad they send to for the doctor , before seven o'clock this morning . he be a good way beyond sixty , you know ; it be much if he get over it . " " well , " say , " I daresay there would be more rejoicing than sorrow in the parish at he be lay up . he be be a selfish , tale - bear , mischievous fellow ; but , after all , there be nobody he be do so much harm to as th' old squire . though it be the squire himself as be to blame -- make a stupid fellow like that a sort of ' man - of - all - work , just to save th' expense of have a proper steward to look after thg estate . and he be lose more by ill management of ' the wood , I will be bound , than 'uld pay for two steward . if he be laid on the shelf , it be to be hope he will make way for a better man , but I do not see how it be like to make any difference to I . " " but I see it , but I see it , " say , " and other besides I . the captain 's come of age now -- you know that as well as I do -- and it be to be expect he will have a little more voice in thing . and I know , and you know too , what 'uld be the 's wish about the wood , if there be a fair opportunity for make a change . he be say in plenty of people 's hearing that he would make you manager of the wood to - morrow ,
, if he would the power . why , , 's butler , hear he say so to the parson not many day ago . look in when we be smoke we pipe o' night at 's , and he tell we about it ; and whenever anybody say a good word for you , the parson 's ready to back it , that I will answer for . it be pretty well talk over , I can tell you , at 's , and one and another have they fling at you ; for if donkey set to work to s , you be pretty sure what the tune will be . " " why , do they talk it over before ? " say ; " or be not he there o' ? " " oh , he go away before come ; and -- he be always for setting other folk right , you know -- would have it be the man to have the management of the woods . 'a substantial man , ' say he , ' with pretty near sixty year ' experience of ' timber : it 'uld be all very well for to act under he , but it be not to be suppose the squire 'uld appoint a young fellow like , when there be he elder and better at hand ! ' but I say , ' that be a pretty notion of ' yours , . why , be the man to buy timber ; would you put the wood into he hand and let he make he own bargain ? I think you do not leave you customer to score they own drink , do you ? and as for age , what that be worth depend on the quality of ' the liquor . it be pretty well know who be the backbone of 's business . ' " " I thank you for you good word , , " say . " but , for all that , be partly i ' the right for once . there be not much likelihood that th ' old squire 'uld ever consent t ' employ I . I offend he about two year ago , and he be never forgive I . " " why , how be that ? you never tell I about it , " say . " oh , it be a bit o' nonsense . I would make a frame for a screen for -- she be allays make something with she worsted - work , you know -- and she would give I particular order about this screen , and there be as much talking and measure as if we have be plan a house . however , it be a nice bit of ' work , and I like do it for she . but , you know , those little friggling thing take a deal of ' time . I only work at it in overhour -- often late at night -- and I have to go to over a ' over again about little bits of ' brass nail and such gear ; and I turn the little knob and the leg , and carve th ' open work , after a pattern , as nice as could be . and I be uncommon pleased with it when it be done . and when I take it home , send for I to bring it into she drawing - room , so as she might give I direction about fasten on the work -- very fine needlework , and a -kissing one another among the sheep , like a picture -- and th' old squire be sit there , for he mostly sit with she . well , she be mighty pleased with the screen , and then she want to know what pay she be to give I . I do not speak at random -- you know it be not my way ; I would calculate pretty close , though I have not make out a bill , and I say , ' one pound thirty . ' that be pay for the mater'al and pay I , but none too much , for my work . th ' old squire look up at this , and pee in he way at the screen , and say , ' one pound thirteen for a gimcrack like that ! , my dear , if you must spend money on these thing , why do not you get they at , instead of pay double price for clumsy work here ? such thing be not work for a carpenter like . give he a guinea , and no more . ' well , , I reckon , believe what he tell she , and she be not overfond of ' part with the money herself -- she be not a bad woman at bottom , but she be be bring up under he thumb ; so she begin fidgeting with she purse , and turn as red as she ribbon . but I make a bow , and say , ' no , thank you , madam ; I will make you a present of ' the screen , if you please . I have charge the regular price for my work , and I know it be do well ; and I know , begge he 's pardon , that you could not get such a screen at under two guinea . I be willing to give you my work -- it be be do in my own time , and nobody be get anything to do with it but I ; but if I be pay , I can not take a smaller price than I ask , because that 'uld be like say I would ask more than be just . with you leave , madam ,
, I will bid you good - morning . ' I make my bow and go out before she have time to say any more , for she stand with the purse in she hand , look almost foolish . I do not mean to be disrespectful , and I speak as polite as I could ; but I can give in to no man , if he want to make it out as I be try to overreach he . and in the evening the footman bring I the one pound thirteen wrap in paper . but since then I have see pretty clear as th' old squire can not abide I . " " that be likely enough , that be likely enough , " say meditatively . " the only way to bring he round would be to show he what be for he own interest , and that the captain may do -- that the captain may do . " " Nay , I do not know , " say ; " the squire 's ' cute enough but it take something else besides ' cuteness to make folk see what will be they interest in the long run . it take some conscience and belief in right and wrong , I see that pretty clear . you would hardly ever bring round th' old squire to believe he would gain as much in a straightfor 'ard way as by trick and turn . and , besides , I have not much mind to work under he : I do not want to quarrel with any gentleman , more particular a old gentleman turn eighty , and I know we could not agree long . if the captain be master of ' th ' estate , it 'uld be different : he have get a conscience and a will to do right , and I would sooner work for he nor for any man liive . " " well , well , my boy , if good luck knock at you door , do not you put you head out at window and tell it to be go about its business , that be all . you must learn to deal with odd and even in life , as well as in figure . I tell you now , as I tell you ten year ago , when you pommell young for want to pass a bad shilling before you know whether he be in jest or earnest -- you be overhasty and proud , and apt to set you tooth against folk that do not square to you notion . it be no harm for I to be a bit fiery and stiff - back -- I be a old schoolmaster , and shall never want to get on to a higher perch . but where be the use of all the time I have spend in teaching you write and mapping and mensuration , if you be not to get for 'ard in the world and show folk there be some advantage in have a head on you shoulders , instead of a turnip ? do you mean to go on turn up you nose at every opportunity because it be get a bit of a smell about it that nobody find out but yourself ? it be as foolish as that notion of ' yours that a wife be to make a work - man comfortable . stuff and nonsense ! stuff and nonsense ! leave that to fool that never get beyond a sum in simple addition . simple addition enough ! add one fool to another fool , and in six year ' time six fool more -- they be all of the same denomination , big and little be nothing to do with the sum ! " during this rather heat exhortation to coolness and discretion the pipe have go out , and give the climax to he speech by strike a light furiously , after which he puffe with fierce resolution , fix he eye still on , who be try not to laugh . " there be a good deal o's sense in what you say , , " begin , as soon as he feel quite serious , " as there always be . but you will give in that it be no business of ' mine to be build on chance that may never happen . what I have get to do be to work as well as I can with the tool and mater'al I have get in my hand . if a good chance come to I , I will think of ' what you have be say ; but till then , I have get nothing to do but to trust to my own hand and my own head - piece . I be turn over a little plan for and I to go into the cabinet - make a bit by ourselves , and win a extra pound or two in that way . but it be get late now -- it will be pretty near eleven before I be at home , and mother may happen to lie awake ; she be more fidgety nor usual now . so I will bid you good - night . " " well , well , we will go to the gate with you -- it be a fine night , " say , take up he stick . be at once on she leg , and without further word the three walk out into the starlight , by the side of 's potato - bed , to the little gate . " come to the music o' night , if you can , my boy , " say the old man , as he close the gate after and lean against it . " aye , aye , " say , strid along towards
towards the streak of pale road . he be the only object move on the wide common . the two grey donkey , just visible in front of the gorse bushes , stand as still as limestone image -- as still as the grey - thatch roof of the mud cottage a little farther on . keep he eye on the move figure till it pass into the darkness , while , in a state of divided affection , have twice run back to the house to bestow a parenthetic lick on she puppy . " aye , aye , " mutter the schoolmaster , as disappear , " there you go , stalk along -- stalk along ; but you would not have be what you be if you have not have a bit of old lame inside you . the strongest calf must have something to suck at . there be plenty of these big , lumber fellow 'ud never have know they a if it have not be for . well , well , , you foolish wench , what be it , what be it ? I must go in , must I ? aye , aye , I be never to have a will of ' my own any more . and those pup -- what do you think I be to do with th'ey , when they be twice as big as you ? for I be pretty sure the father be that hulk bull - terrier of 's -- be not he now , eh , you sly hussy ? " ( here tuck she tail between she leg and run forward into the house . Subjects be sometimes broach which a well - breed female will ignore . ) " but where be the use of talk to a woman with babby ? " continue . " she have get no conscience -- no conscience ; it be all run to milk . " go to the the thirtieth of be come , and it be one of those half - dozen warm day which sometimes occur in the middle of a rainy English summer . no rain have fall for the last three or four day , and the weather be perfect for that time of the year : there be less dust than usual on the dark - green hedge - row and on the wild camomile that starr the roadside , yet the grass be dry enough for the little child to roll on it , and there be no cloud but a long dash of light , downy ripple , high , high up in the far - off blue sky . perfect weather for a outdoor merry - make , yet surely not the best time of year to be bear in . seem to make a hot pause just then : all the loveliest flower be go ; the sweet time of early growth and vague hope be past ; and yet the time of harvest and ingathering be not come , and we tremble at the possible storm that may ruin the precious fruit in the moment of its ripeness . the woods be all one dark monotonous green ; the waggon - load of hay no longer creep along the lane , scatter they sweet - smell fragment on the blackberry branch ; the pasture be often a little tanned , yet the corn have not get it be last splendour of red and gold ; the lambs and calve have lose all trace of they innocent frisky prettiness , and have become stupid young sheep and cow . but it be a time of leisure on the farm -- that pause between hay - and corn -harvest , and so the farmer and labourer in and think the captain do well to come of age just then , when they could give they undivided mind to the flavour of the great cask of ale which have be brew the autumn after " the heir " be bear , and be to be tap on he twenty - first birthday . the air have be merry with the ringing of church - bell very early this morning , and every one have make haste to get through the needful work before twelve , when it would be time to think of get ready to go to the chase . the midday sun be stream into 's bedchamber , and there be no blind to temper the heat with which it fall on she head as she look at herself in the old specked glass . still , that be the only glass she have in which she could see she neck and arm , for the small hang glass she have fetch out of the next room -- the room that have be 's -- would show she nothing below she little ching ; and that beautiful bit of neck where the roundness of she cheek melt into another roundness shadow by dark delicate curl . and to - day she think more than usual about she neck and arm ; for at the dance this even she be not to wear any neckerchief , and she have be busy yesterday with she spot pink - and - white frock , that she might make the sleeve either long or short at will . she be dress now just as she be to be in the evening , with a tucker make of " real " lace , which she aunt have lent she for this unparalleled occasion , but with no ornament besides ; she have even take out she small round ear -ring which she wear every day . but there be something more to be do , apparently , before she put on she neckerchief and long sleeve , which she be to wear in the day - time , for now
now she unlock the drawer that hold she private treasure . it be more than a month since we see she unlock that drawer before , and now it hold new treasure , so much more precious than the old one that these be thrust into the corner . Hetty would not care to put the large coloured glass ear- ring into she ear now ; for see ! she have get a beautiful pair of gold and pearl and garnet , lie snugly in a pretty little box line with white satin . oh , the delight of take out that little box and look at the ear- ring ! do not reason about it , my philosphical reader , and say that , be very pretty , must have know that it do not signify whether she have on any ornament or not ; and that , moreover , to look at ear - ring which she could not possibly wear out of she bedroom could hardly be a satisfaction , the essence of vanity be a reference to the impression produce on other ; you will never understand woman 's nature if you be so excessively rational . try rather to divest yourself of all you rational prejudice , as much as if you be study the psychology of a canary bird , and only watch the movement of this pretty round creature as she turn she head on one side with a unconscious smile at the ear-ring nestle in the little box . ah , you think , it be for the sake of the person who have give they to she , and she thought be go back now to the moment when they be put into she hand . no ; else why should she have care to have ear-ring rather than anything else ? and I know that she have longe for ear- ring from among all the ornament she could imagine . " , little ears ! " yoArthu have say , pretend to pinch they one evening , as sit beside he on the grass without she hat . " I wish I have some pretty ear - ring ! " she say in a moment , almost before she know what she be say -- the wish lay so close to she lip , it would flutter past they at the slightest breath . and the next day -- it be only last week -- yoArthu have ride over to on purpose to buy they . that little wish so naively utter seem to he the prettiest bit of childishness ; he have never hear anything like it before ; and he have wrap the box up in a great many cover , that he might see unwrapp it with grow curiosity , till at last she eye flash back they new delight into he . no , she be not think most of the giver when she smile at the ear - ring , for now she be take they out of the box , not to press they to she lip , but to fasten they in she ear -- only for one moment , to see how pretty they look , as she peep at they in the glass against the wall , with first one position of the head and then another , like a listen bird . it be impossible to be wise on the subject of ear - ring as one look at she ; what should those delicate pearl and crystal be make for , if not for such ear ? one can not even find fault with the tiny round hole which they leave when they be take out ; perhaps water-nixy , and such lovely thing without soul , have these little round holes in they ear by nature , ready to hang jewel in . and must be one of they : it be too painful to think that she be a woman , with a woman 's destiny before she -- a woman spinning in young ignorance a light web of folly and vain hope which may one day close round she and press upon she , a rancorous poisoned garment , change all at once she flutter , trivial butterfly sensation into a life of deep human anguish . but she can not keep in the ear-ring long , else she may make she uncle and aunt wait . she put they quickly into the box again and shut they up . some day she will be able to wear any ear-ring she like , and already she live in a invisible world of brilliant costume , shimmer gauze , soft satin , and velvet , such as the lady 's maid at the chase have show she in 's wardrobe . she feel the bracelet on she arm , and tread on a soft carpet in front of a tall mirror . but she have one thing in the drawer which she can venture to wear to - day , because she can hang it on the chain of dark - brown berry which she have be use to wear on grand day , with a tiny flat scent - bottle at the end of it tuck inside she frock ; and she must put on she brown berry -- she neck would look so unfinished without it . be not quite as fond of the locket as of the ear - ring , though it be a handsome large locket , with enamell flower at the back and a beautiful gold border round the glass , which show a light - bry slightly wave lock , form a background for two little dark ring . she must keep it under she clothes , and no one would see it . but have another passion , only a little less strong than she love of finery , and
and that other passion make she like to wear the locket even hide in she bosom . she would always have wear it , if she have da to encounter she aunt 's question about a ribbon round she neck . so now she slip it on along she chain of dark - brown berry , and snap the chain round she neck . it be not a very long chain , only allow the locket to hang a little way below the edge of she frock . and now she have nothing to do but to put on she long sleeve , she new white gauze neckerchief , and she straw hat trim with white to - day instead of the pink , which have become rather fad under the sun . that hat make the drop of bitterness in 's cup to - day , for it be not quite new -- everybody would see that it be a little tanned against the white ribbon -- and , she feel sure , would have a new hat or bonnet on . she look for consolation at she fine white cotton stocking : they really be very nice indeed , and she have give almost all she spare money for they . 's dream of the future could not make she insensible to triumph in the present . to be sure , love she so that he would never care about look at other people , but then those other people do not know how he love she , and she be not satisfied to appear shabby and insignificant in they eye even for a short space . the whole party be assemble in the house - place when go down , all of course in they clothes ; and the bell have be ring so this morning in honour of the 's twenty - first birthday , and the work have all be get done so early , that and be not quite easy in they minds until they mother have assure they that go to church be not part of the day 's festivity . have once suggest that the house should be shut up and leave to take care of itself ; " for , " say he , " there be no danger of anybody 's break in -- everybody will be at the chase , thieve a ' all . if we lock th's house up , all the man can go : it be a day they win to see twice I ' they life . " but answer with great decision : " I never leave the house to take care of itself since I be a missis , and I never will . there be be ill - look tramp enoo ' about the place this last week , to carry off every ham a ' every spoon we and get ; and they all collogue together , they tramp , as it be a mercy they han to come and poisone the dog and murder we all in we bed afore we know , some night when we and get the money in thg house to pay the man . and it be like enough the tramp know where we be go as well as we do oursen ; for if want any work do , you may be sure he will find the means . " " Nonsense about murder we in we bed , " say ; " I have get a gun I ' we room , han na I ? and thee 'st get ear as 'uld find it out if a mouse be gnaw the bacon . Howiver , if thee wouldst to be easy , can stay at home I ' the forepart of ' the day , and can come back tow'rd five o'clock , and let have he turn . they may let loose if anybody offer to do mischief , and there be 's dog too , ready enough to set he tooth in a tramp if give he a wink . " accept this compromise , but think it advisable to bar and bolt to the utmost ; and now , at the last moment before start , , the dairy -maid , be close the shutter of the house - place , although the window , lie under the immediate observation of and the dog , might have be suppose the least likely to be select for a burglarious attempt . the covered cart , without spring , be stand ready to carry the whole family except the men-servant . and the grandfather sit on the seat in front , and within there be room for all the woman and child ; the fuller the cart the better , because then the jolting would not hurt so much , and 's broad person and thick arm be a excellent cushion to be pitch on . but drive at no more than a walking pace , that there might be as little risk of jolt as possible on this warm day , and there be time to exchange greeting and remark with the foot-passenger who be go the same way , speck the path between the green meadow and the golden cornfield with bit of movable bright colour -- a scarlet waistcoat to match the poppy that nod a little too thickly among the corn , or a dark - blue neckerchief with end flaunt across a brand - new white smock - frock . all and all be to be at the chase , and make merry there in honour of " th ' heir " ; and the old man and woman , who have never be so far down this side of the hill for the last twenty year , be be bring from and in one of the farmer 's waggon , at 's suggestion . the
the church - bell have strike up again now -- a last tune , before the ringer come down the hill to have they share in the festival ; and before the bell have finish , other music be hear approaching , so that even , the sober horse that be draw 's cart , begin to prick up he ear . it be the band of the , which have muster in all its glory -- that be to say , in bright - blue scarf and blue favour , and carry its banner with the motto , " let brotherly love continue , " encircle a picture of a stone - pit . the cart , of course , be not to enter the chase . every one must get down at the lodg , and the vehicle must be send back . " why , the chase be like a fair ag ready , " say , as she get down from the cart , and see the group scatter under the great oak , and the boy run about in the hot sunshine to survey the tall pole surmount by the fluttering garment that be to be the prize of the successful climber . " I should ha ' think there wasna so many people I ' the two parish . mercy on we ! how hot it be out of ' the shade ! come here , Totty , else you little face ' ull be burnt to a scratchin ' ! they might ha's cook the dinner I ' that open space a ' save the fire . I shall go to . 's room a ' sit down . " " stop a bit , stop a bit , " say . " there be th ' waggin come wi' th ' old folk I not ; it will be such a sight as win to come o 'er again , to see them get down a ' walk along all together . you remember some on them I ' they prime , eh , ? " " aye , aye , " say old , walk slowly under the shade of the lodge porch , from which he could see the a party descend . " I remember walk fifty mile after the raybel , when they turn back from . " he feel himself quite a youngster , with a long life before he , as he see the patriarch , old , descmend from the waggon and walk towards he , in he brown nightcap , and lean on he two stick . " well , , " shoute old , at the utmost stretch of he voice -- for though he know the old man be stone deaf , he could not omit the propriety of a greeting --" you be hearty yet . you can enjoy yoursen to - day , for - all you be ninety a ' better . " " you sarvant , mester , you sarvant , " say in a treble tone , perceive that he be in company . the aged group , under care of son or daughter , themselves wear and grey , pass on along the least - win carriage - road towards the house , where a special table be prepare for they ; while the Poyser party wisely strike across the grass under the shade of the great tree , but not out of view of the house - front , with its sloping lawn and flower - bed , or of the pretty striped marquee at the edge of the lawn , stand at right angles with two larger marquee on each side of the open green space where the game be to be play . the house would have be nothing but a plain square mansion of 's time , but for the remnant of a old abbey to which it be united at one end , in much the same way as one may sometimes see a new farmhouse rise high and prim at the end of older and lower farm -office . the fine old remnant stand a little backward and under the shadow of tall beech , but the sun be now on the taller and more advanced front , the blind be all down , and the house seem asleep in the hot midday . it make quite sad to look at it : yoArthu must be somewhere in the back room , with the grand company , where he could not possibly know that she be come , and she should not see he for a long , long while -- not till after dinner , when they say he be to come up and make a speech . but be wrong in part of she conjecture . no grand company be come except the , for whom the carriage have be send early , and be at that moment not in a back room , but walk with the rector into the broad stone cloister of the old abbey , where the long table be laid for all the cottage tenant and the farm -servant . a very handsome young he look to - day , in high spirit and a bright - blue frock - coat , the highest mode -- he arm no longer in a sling . so open - look and candid , too ; but cando people have they secret , and secret leave no line in young face . " upon my word , " he say , as they enter the cool cloister , " I think the cottager have the best of it : these cloister make a delightful dining - room on a hot day . that be capital advice of yours , , about the dinner -- to let they be as orderly and comfortable as possible , and only
only for the tenant : especially as I have only a limited sum after all ; for though my grandfather talk of a carte blanche , he could not make up he mind to trust I , when it come to the point . " " never mind , you will give more pleasure in this quiet way , " say . " in this sort of thing people be constantly confound liberality with riot and disorder . it sound very grand to say that so many sheep and oxen be roast whole , and everybody eat who like to come ; but in the end it generally happen that no one have have a enjoyable meal . if the people get a good dinner and a moderate quantity of ale in the middle of the day , they will be able to enjoy the game as the day cool . you can not hinder some of they from get too much towards evening , but drunkenness and darkness go better together than drunkenness and daylight . " " well , I hope there will not be much of it . I have keep the people away by have a feast for they in the town ; and I have get and and some other good fellow to look to the give out of ale in the boot , and to take care thing do not go too far . come , let we go up above now and see the dinner - table for the large tenant . " they go up the stone staircase lead simply to the long gallery above the cloister , a gallery where all the dusty worthless old picture have be banish for the last three generation -- mouldy portrait of and she lady , with he eye knock out , very much in the dark among the lions , and on horseback , with a high nose and laurel crown , hold he Commentary in he hand . " what a capital thing it be that they save this piece of the old abbey ! " say . " if I be ever master here , I shall do up the gallery in first - rate style . we have get no room in the house a third as large as this . that second table be for the farmer 's wife and child : . best say it would be more comfortable for the mother and child to be by themselves . I be determined to have the child , and make a regular family thing of it . I shall be ' the old squire ' to those little lad and lass some day , and they will tell they child what a much finer young fellow I be than my own son . there be a table for the woman and child below as well . but you will see they all -- you will come up with I after dinner , I hope ? " " yes , to be sure , " say . " I would not miss you maiden speech to the tenantry . " " and there will be something else you will like to hear , " say . " let we go into the library and I will tell you all about it while my grandfather be in the drawing - room with the ladie . someth that will surprise you , " he continue , as they sit down . " my grandfather have come round after all . " " what , about ? " " yes ; I should have ride over to tell you about it , only I be so busy . you know i tell you I have quite give up argue the matter with he -- I think it be hopeless -- but yesterday morning he ask I to come in here to he before I go out , and astonished I by say that he have decide on all the new arrangement he should make in consequence of old be oblige to lay by work , and that he intend to employ in superintend the wood at a salary of a guinea a - week , and the use of a pony to be keep here . I believe the secret of it be , he see from the first it would be a profitable plan , but he have some particular dislike of to get over -- and besides , the fact that I propose a thing be generally a reason with he for reject it . there be the most curious contradiction in my grandfather : I know he mean to leave I all the money he have save , and he be likely enough to have cut off poor , who have be a slave to he all she life , with only five hundr a - year , for the sake of give I all the more ; and yet I sometimes think he positively hate I because I be he heir . I believe if I be to break my neck , he would feel it the greatest misfortune that could befall he , and yet it seem a pleasure to he to make my life a series of petty annoyance . " " ah , my boy , it be not only woman 's love that be [ two greek word omit ] as old call it . there be plenty of ' unlove love ' in the world of a masculine kind . but tell I about . have he accept the post ? I do not see that it can be much more profitable than he present work , though , to be sure , it will leave he a good deal of time on he own hand . " well , I feel some doubt about it when I speak to he and he seem to hesitate
hesitate at first . he objection be that he think he should not be able to satisfy my grandfather . but I beg he as a personal favour to I not to let any reason prevent he from accept the place , if he really like the employment and would not be give up anything that be more profitable to he . and he assure I he should like it of all thing -- it would be a great step forward for he in business , and it would enable he to do what he have long wished to do , to give up work for . he say he shall have plenty of time to superintend a little business of he own , which he and will carry on , and will perhaps be able to enlarge by degree . so he have agree at last , and I have arrange that he shall dine with the large tenant to - day ; and I mean to announce the appointment to they , and ask they to drink 's health . it be a little drama I have get up in honour of my friend . he be a fine fellow , and I like the opportunity of let people know that I think so . " " a drama in which friend pique himself on have a pretty part to play , " say , smile . but when he see Arthur colour , he go on relentingly , " my part , you know , be always that of the old fogy who see nothing to admire in the young folk . I do not like to admit that I be proud of my pupil when he do graceful thing . but I must play the amiable old gentleman for once , and second you toast in honour of . have you grandfather yield on the other point too , and agree to have a respectable man as steward ? " " oh no , " say , rise from he chair with a air of impatience and walk along the room with he hand in he pocket . " he have get some project or other about let the and bargain for a supply of milk and butter for the house . but I ask no question about it -- it make I too angry . I believe he mean to do all the business himself , and have nothing in the shape of a steward . it be amazing what energy he have , though . " " well , we will go to the ladie now , " say , rise too . " I want to tell my mother what a splendid throne you have prepare for she under the marquee . " " yes , and we must be go to luncheon too , " say . " it must be two o'clock , for there be the gong begin to sound for the tenant 's dinner . " dinner - time when hear that he be to dine upstairs with the large tenant , he feel rather uncomfortable at the idea of be exalt in this way above he mother and Seth , who be to dine in the cloister below . but , the butler , assure he that have give particular order about it , and would be very angry if be not there . nod and go up to , who be stand a few yard off . " Seth , lad , " he say , " the captain have send to say i be to dine upstairs -- he wish it particular , say , so I suppose it 'uld be behave ill for I not to go . but I do not like sit up above thee and mother , as if I be better than my own flesh and blood . the e't not take it unkind , I hope ? " " Nay , nay , lad , " say , " thy honou be we honour ; and if thee get 'st respect , thee 'st win it by thy own desert . the further I see thee above I , the better , so long as thee feel 'st like a brother to I . it be because o ' thy be appoint over the wood , and it be nothing but what be right . that be a place of ' trust , and the e't above a common workman now . " " aye , " say , " but nobody know a word about it yet . I have not give notice to about leave he , and I do not like to tell anybody else about it before he know , for he will be a good bit hurt , I doubt . people ' ull be wonder to see I there , and they will like enough be guess the reason and ask question , for there be be so much talk up and down about my have the place , this last three week . " " well , thee canst say thee wast order to come without be tell the reason . that be the truth . and mother ' ull be fine and joyful about it . let 's go and tell she . " be not the only guest invite to come upstairs on other grounds than the amount he contribute to the rent-roll . there be other people in the two parish who derive dignity from they function rather than from they pocket , and of these be one . he lame walk be rather slower than usual on this warm day , so linger behind when the bell rang for dinner , that he might walk up with he old friend ; for he be a little too shy to join the Poyser party on this public occasion . opportunity of
of get to 's side would be sure to turn up in the course of the day , and contente himself with that for he dislike any risk of be " joke " about -- the big , outspoken , fearless man be very shy and diffident as to he love - making . " well , , " say , as come up " I be go to dine upstairs with you to - day : the 's send I order . " " ah ! " say , pause , with one hand on he back . " then there be something in the wind -- there be something in the wind . have you hear anything about what the old squire mean to do ? " " why , yes , " say ; " I will tell you what I know , because I believe you can keep a still tongue in you head if you like , and I hope you will not let drop a word till it be common talk , for I have particular reasons against its be know . " " trust to I , my boy , trust to I . I have get no wife to worm it out of I and then run out and cackle it in everybody 's hearing . if you trust a man , let he be a bachelor -- let he be a bachelor . " " well , then , it be so far settle yesterday that I be to take the management of ' the woods . the send for I t ' offer it I , when I be see to the pole and thing here and I have agree toot . but if anybody ask any question upstairs , just you take no notice , and turn the talk to something else , and I will be oblige to you . now , let we go on , for we be pretty nigh the last , I think . " " I know what to do , never fear , " say , move on . " the news will be good sauce to my dinner . aye , aye , my boy , you will get on . I will back you for a eye at measuring and a head - piece for figure , against any man in this county and you have have good teaching -- you have have good teaching . " when they get upstairs , the question which have leave unsettled , as to who be to be , and who vice , be still under discussion , so that 's entrance pass without remark . " it stand to sense , " be say , " as old , as be th's oldest man I ' the room , should sit at top of ' the table . I be not butler fifteen year without learn the rights and the wrongs about dinner . " " Nay , nay , " say old , " I and gi'en up to my son ; I be no tenant now : let my son take my place . th ' would foulk ha ' have they turn : they mun make way for the young un . " " I should ha ' think the biggest tenant have the best right , more nor th ' oldest , " say , who be not fond of the critical ; " there be have more land nor anybody else on thg estate . " " well , " say , " suppose we say the man wi' the foulest land shall sit at top ; then whoever get thg honour , there will be no envying on he . " " Eh , here be , " say , who , be a neutral in the dispute , have no interest but in conciliation ; " the schoolmaster ought to be able to tell you what be right . who be to sit at top of ' the table , ? " " why , the broadest man , " say ; " and then he will not take up other folk ' room ; and the next broadest must sit at bottom . " this happy mode of settle the dispute produce much laughter -- a smaller joke would have suffice for that , however , do not feel it compatible with he dignity and superior knowledge to join in the laugh , until it turn out that he be fix on as the second broadest man . the younger , as the broadest , be to be , and , as next broadest , be to be vice . Ow to this arrangement , , be , of course , at the bottom of the table , fall under the immediate observation of , who , too much occupy with the question of precedence , have not hithertoo notice he entrance . , we have see , consider " rather lift up and peppery - like " : he think the gentry make more fuss about this young carpenter than be necessary ; they make no fuss about , although he have be a excellent butler for fifteen year . " well , , you be one of ' they as mount hup'ard apace , " he say , when sit down . " you have niver dine here before , as I remember . " " no , , " say , in he strong voice , that could be hear along the table ; " I have never dine here before , but I come by 's wish , and I hope it be not disagreeable to anybody here . " " Nay , nay , " say several voice at once , " we be glad ye be come . who be get anything to say again ' it ? "
" " and ye will se we ' over the hill and far away , ' after dinner , wonna ye ? " say . " that be a song I be uncommon fond on . " " Peeh ! " say ; " it be not to be name by side of ' the tune . I have never care about singe myself ; I have have something better to do . a man that have get the name and the natur of ' plant in 's head be na likely to keep a hollow place t ' hold tune in . but a second cousin of ' mine , a drovier , be a rare hand at remembere the tune . he would get nothing else to think on . " " the tune ! " say , contemptuously ; " I have hear enough of ' the tune to last I while I live . they be fit for nothing but to frighten the bird with -- that be to say , the english bird , for the Scotch bird may s for what I know . give the lad a bagpipe instead of a rattle , and I will answer for it the corn will be safe . " " yes , there be folk as find a pleasure in undervally what they know but little about , " say . " why , the Scotch tune be just like a scolding , nag woman , " go on , without deign to notice 's remark . " they go on with the same thing over and over again , and never come to a reasonable end . anybody 'uld think the tune have always be ask a question of somebody as deaf as old , and have never get a answer yet . " mind the less about sit by , because this position enable he to see , who be not far off he at the next table . Hetty , however , have not even notice he presence yet , for she be give angry attention to , who insist on draw up she foot on to the bench in antique fashion , and thereby threaten to make dusty mark on 's pink - and - white frock . no sooner be the little fat leg push down than up they come again , for 's eye be too busy in staring at the large dish to see where the plum pudding be for she to retain any consciousness of she leg . get quite out of patience , and at last , with a frown and pout , and gather tear , she say , " oh dear , aunt , I wish you would speak to ; she keep put she leg up so , and mess my frock . " " what be the matter wi' the child ? she can niver please you , " say the mother . " let she come by the side of ' I , then . I can put up wi' she . " be look at , and see the frown , and pout , and the dark eye seem to grow larger with pettish half - gather tear . , who sit near enough to see that be cross and that 's eye be fix on she , think that so sensible a man as must be reflec on the small value of beauty in a woman whose temper be bad . be a good girl , not give to indulge in evil feeling , but she say to herself , that , since have a bad temper , it be better should know it . and it be quite true that if have be plain , she would have look very ugly and unamiable at that moment , and no one 's moral judgment upon she would have be in the least beguil . but really there be something quite charme in she pettishness : it look so much more like innocent distress than ill humour ; and the severe feel no movement of disapprobation ; he only feel a sort of amused pity , as if he have see a kitten set up its back , or a little bird with its feather ruffle . he could not gather what be vex she , but it be impossible to he to feel otherwise than that she be the prettiest thing in the world , and that if he could have he way , nothing should ever vex she any more . and presently , when be go , she catch he eye , and she face break into one of its brightest smile , as she nod to he . it be a bit of flirtation -- she know be look at they . but the smile be like wine to . the health - drink when the dinner be over , and the first draught from the great cask of birthday ale be bring up , room be make for the at the side of the table , and two chair be place at the head . it have be settle very definitely what be to do when the young squire should appear , and for the last five minute he have be in a state of abstraction , with he eye fix on the dark picture opposite , and he hand busy with the loose cash and other article in he breech pocket . when the young squire enter , with by he side , every one stand up , and this moment of homage be very agreeable to . he like to feel he own importance , and besides that , he care a great deal for the good - will of these people : he be fond of think that they have a hearty , special regard for he . the pleasure he feel be in
in he face as he say , " my grandfather and I hope all we friend here have enjoy they dinner , and find my birthday ale good . and I be come to taste it with you , and I be sure we shall all like anything the better that the rector share with we . " all eyes be now turn on , who , with he hand still busy in he pocket , begin with the deliberateness of a slow - striking clock . " , my neighbour have put it upo ' I to speak for th'ey to - day , for where folk think pretty much alike , one spokesman 's as good as a score . and though we have mayhappen get contrairy way o ' think about a many thing -- one man lay down he land one way a ' another another -- ang I will not take it upon I to speak to no man 's farming , but my own -- this I will say , as we be all o' one mind about we young squire . we have pretty nigh all on we know you when you war a little un , a ' we have niver know anything on you but what be good a ' honorable . you speak fair a ' y ' act fair , a ' we be joyful when we look forrard to you be we landlord , for we b'lieve you mean to do right by everybody , an' ' ull make no man 's bread bitter to he if you can help it . that be what I mean , a ' that be what we all mean ; and when a man 's say what he mean , he would better stop , for th ' ale ' ull be no the better for stannin ' . An' I will not say how we like th's ale yet , for we could na well taste it till we would drink you health in it ; but the dinner be good , a ' if there be anybody hasto enjoy it , it must be the fault of he own inside . a ' as for the rector 's company , it be well know as that be welcome t ' all the parish wherever he may be ; an' I hope , a ' we all hope , as he will live to see we old folk , a ' we child grow to men a ' woman a ' you a family man . I have no more to say as concern the present time , a ' so we will drink we young squire 's health -- three time three . " Hereupon a glorious shouting , a rapping , a jingling , a clattering , and a shouting , with plentiful day capo , pleasanter than a strain of sublimest music in the ears that receive such a tribute for the first time . yoArthu have feel a twinge of conscience during 's speech , but it be too feeble to nullify the pleasure he feel in be praise . do he not deserve what be say of he on the whole ? if there be something in he conduct that would not have like if he have know it , why , no man 's conduct will bear too close a inspection ; and be not likely to know it ; and , after all , what have he do ? go a little too far , perhaps , in flirtation , but another man in he place would have ac much worse ; and no harm would come -- no harm should come , for the next time he be alone with , he would explain to she that she must not think seriously of he or of what have pass . it be necessary to , you perceive , to be satisfied with himself . Uncomfortable thought must be get rid of by good intention for the future , which can be form so rapidly that he have time to be uncomfortable and to become easy again before 's slow speech be finished , and when it be time for he to speak he be quite light - hear . " I thank you all , my good friend and neighbour , " yoArthu say , " for the good opinion of I , and the kind feeling towards I which have be express on you behalf and on he own , and it will always be my heartiest wish to deserve they . in the course of thing we may expect that , if I live , I shall one day or other be you landlord ; indeed , it be on the ground of that expectation that my grandfather have wish I to celebrate this day and to come among you now ; and I look forward to this position , not merely as one of power and pleasure for myself , but as a means of benefit my neighbours . it hardly become so young a man as I be to talk much about farme to you , who be most of you so much older , and be man of experience ; still , I have interested myself a good deal in such matter , and learn as much about they as my opportunity have allow ; and when the course of event shall place the estate in my hand , it will be my first desire to afford my tenant all the encouragement a landlord can give they , in improve they land and try to bring about a better practice of husbandry . it will be my wish to be look on by all my deserving tenant as they best friend , and nothing would make I so happy as to be able to respect every man on
on the estate , and to be respect by he in return . it be not my place at present to enter into particular ; I only meet you good hope concern I by tell you that my own hope correspond to they -- that what you expect from I I desire to fulfil ; and I be quite of 's opinion , that when a man have say what he mean , he have better stop . but the pleasure I feel in have my own health drink by you would not be perfect if we do not drink the health of my grandfather , who have fill the place of both parent to I . I will say no more , until you have join I in drink he health on a day when he have wish I to appear among you as the future representative of he name and family . " perhaps there be no one present except who thoroughly understand and approve 's graceful mode of propose he grandfather 's health . the farmer think the young squire know well enough that they hate the old squire , and say , " he would better not ha' stir a kettle of ' sour broth . " the bucolic mind do not readily apprehend the refinement of good taste . but the toast could not be reject and when it have be drink , yoArthu say , " I thank you , both for my grandfather and myself ; and now there be one more thing I wish to tell you , that you may share my pleasure about it , as I hope and believe you will . I think there can be no man here who have not a respect , and some of you , I be sure , have a very high regard , for my friend . it be well know to every one in this neighbourhood that there be no man whose word can be more depend on than he ; that whatever he undertake to do , he do well , and be as careful for the interest of those who employ he as for he own . I be proud to say that I be very fond of when I be a little boy , and I have never lose my old feeling for he -- I think that show that I know a good fellow when I find he . it have long be my wish that he should have the management of the wood on the estate , which happen to be very valuable , not only because I think so highly of he character , but because he have the knowledge and the skill which fit he for the place . and I be happy to tell you that it be my grandfather 's wish too , and it be now settle that shall manage the wood -- a change which I be sure will be very much for the advantage of the estate ; and I hope you will by and by join I in drink he health , and in wish he all the prosperity in life that he deserve . but there be a still older friend of mine than present , and I need not tell you that it be . I be sure you will agree with I that we must drink no other person 's health until we have drink he . I know you have all reason to love he , but no one of he parishioner have so much reason as I . come , charge you glass , and let we drink to we excellent rector -- three time three ! " this toast be drink with all the enthusiasm that be want to the last , and it certainly be the most picturesque moment in the scene when get up to speak , and all the face in the room be turn towards he . the superior refinement of he face be much more striking than that of 's when see in comparison with the people round they . be be a much commoner british face , and the splendour of he new - fashioned clothes be more akin to the young farmer 's taste in costume than 's powder and the well - brush but well - worn black , which seem to be he chosen suit for great occasion ; for he have the mysterious secret of never wear a new - look coat . " this be not the first time , by a great many , " he say , " that I have have to thank my parishioner for give I token of they goodwill , but neighbourly kindness be among those thing that be the more precious the older they get . indeed , we pleasant meeting to - day be a proof that when what be good come of age and be likely to live , there be reason for rejoice , and the relation between we as clergyman and parishioner come of age two year ago , for it be three - and - twenty year since I first come among you , and I see some tall fine - look young man here , as well as some blooming young woman , that be far from look as pleasantly at I when I christen they as I be happy to see they look now . but I be sure you will not wonder when I say that among all those young man , the one in whom I have the strongest interest be my friend , for whom you have just express you regard . I have the pleasure of be he tutor for several year , and have naturally have opportunity of know he intimately which can not have occur to any one else who be present ; and I have some pride as well as
as pleasure in assure you that I share you high hope concern he , and you confidence in he possession of those quality which will make he a excellent landlord when the time shall come for he to take that important position among you . we feel alike on most matter on which a man who be get towards fifty can feel in common with a young man of one - and - twenty , and he have just be express a feeling which I share very heartily , and I would not willingly omit the opportunity of say so . that feeling be he value and respect for . people in a high station be of course more thought of and talk about and have they virtue more praise , than those whose life be pass in humble every day work ; but every sensible man know how necessary that humble every day work be , and how important it be to we that it should be do well . and I agree with my friend in feeling that when a man whose duty lie in that sort of work show a character which would make he a example in any station , he merit should be acknowledge . he be one of those to whom honou be due , and he friend should delight to honour he . I know well -- I know what he be as a workman , and what he have be as a son and brother -- and I be say the simplest truth when I say that I respect he as much as I respect any man liive . but I be not speak to you about a stranger ; some of you be he intimate friend , and I believe there be not one here who do not know enough of he to join heartily in drink he health . " as pause , yoArthu jump up and , fill he glass , say , " a bumper to , and may he live to have son as faithful and clever as himself ! " no hearer , not even , be so delighted with this toast as . " tough work " as he first speech have be , he would have start up to make another if he have not know the extreme irregularity of such a course . as it be , he find a outlet for he feeling in drink he ale unusually fast , and set down he glass with a swing of he arm and a determined rap . if and a few other feel less comfortable on the occasion , they try they best to look contente , and so the toast be drink with a goodwill apparently unanimous . be rather paler than usual when he get up to thank he friend . he be a good deal move by this public tribute -- very naturally , for he be in the presence of all he little world , and it be uniting to do he honour . but he feel no shyness about speak , not be trouble with small vanity or lack of word ; he look neither awkward nor embarrassed , but stand in he usual firm upright attitude , with he head throw a little backward and he hand perfectly still , in that rough dignity which be peculiar to intelligend , honest , well - build workman , who be never wonder what be they business in the world . " I be quite take by surprise , " he say . " I do not expect anything of ' this sort , for it be a good deal more than my wage . but I have the more reason to be grateful to you , , and to you , , and to all my friend here , who have drink my health and wish I well . it 'uld be nonsense for I to be say , I do not at all deserve th ' opinion you have of I ; that 'uld be poor thanks to you , to say that you have know I all these year and yet have not sense enough to find out a great deal of ' the truth about I . you think , if I undertake to do a bit of ' work , I will do it well , be my pay big or little -- and that be true . I would be asham to stand before you here if it be to true . but it seem to I that be a man 's plain duty , and nothing to be conceit about , and it be pretty clear to I as I have never do more than my duty ; for let we do what we will , it be only make use of ' the sperrit and the power that ha ' be give to we . and so this kindness of ' yours , I be sure , be no debt you owe I , but a free gift , and as such I accept it and be thankful . and as to this new employment I have take in hand , I will only say that I take it at 's desire , and that I will try to fulfil he expectation . I would wish for no better lot than to work under he , and to know that while I be get my own bread I be take care of he int'rest . for I believe he be one of those gentleman as wish to do the right thing , and to leave the world a bit better than he find it , which it be my belief every man may do , whether he be gentle or simple , whether he set a good bit of ' work go and find the money , or whether he do the
the work with he own hand . there be no occasion for I to say any more about what I feel towards he : I hope to show it through the rest o' my life in my action . " there be various opinion about 's speech : some of the woman whisper that he do not show himself thankful enough , and seem to speak as proud as could be ; but most of the man be of opinion that nobody could speak more straightfor 'ard , and that be as fine a chap as need to be . while such observation be be buzze about , mingl with wonderings as to what the old squire mean to do for a bailiff , and whether he be go to have a steward , the two gentleman have risen , and be walk round to the table where the wife and child sat . there be none of the strong ale here , of course , but wine and dessert -- sparkl gooseberry for the young one , and some good sherry for the mother . be at the head of this table , and be now seat in she lap , bend she small nose deep down into a wine - glass in search of the nut float there . " how do you do , ? " say . " be not you please to hear you husband make such a good speech to - day ? " " oh , sir , the man be mostly so tongue - tie -- you be force partly to guess what they mean , as you do wi' the dumb creaturs . " " what ! you think you could have make it better for he ? " say , laugh . " well , sir , when I want to say anything , I can mostly find word to say it in , thank . not as I be a -finding faut wi' my husband , for if he be a man of ' few word , what he say he will stand to . " " I be sure I never see a prettier party than this , " yoArthu say , look round at the apple - cheek child . " my aunt and the will come up and see you presently . they be afraid of the noise of the toast , but it would be a shame for they not to see you at table . " he walk on , speak to the mother and pat the child , while satisfi himself with stand still and nodd at a distance , that no one 's attention might be disturb from the young squire , the hero of the day . yoArthu do not venture to stop near , but merely bow to she as he pass along the opposite side . the foolish child feel she heart swell with discontent ; for what woman be ever satisfied with apparent neglect , even when she know it to be the mask of love ? think this be go to be the most miserable day she have have for a long while , a moment of chill daylight and reality come across she dream : , who have see so near to she only a few hour before , be separate from she , as the hero of a great procession be separate from a small outsider in the crowd . the game the great dance be not to begin until eight o'clock , but for any lad and lass who like to dance on the shady grass before then , there be music always at hand -- for be not the band of the capable of play excellent jig , reel , and hornpipe ? and , besides this , there be a grand band hire from , who , with they wonderful wind - instrument and puffe -out cheek , be themselves a delightful show to the small boy and girl . to say nothing of 's fiddle , which , by a act of generous forethotch , he have provide himself with , in case any one should be of sufficiently pure taste to prefer dancing to a solo on that instrument . meantime , when the sun have move off the great open space in front of the house , the game begin . there be , of course , well - soape pole to be clim by the boy and youth , races to be run by the old woman , race to be run in sack , heavy weight to be lift by the strong man , and a long list of challenge to such ambitious attempt as that of walking as many yard possible on one leg -- feat in which it be generally remark that , be " the lissom 'st , springest fellow I ' the country , " be sure to be pre-eminent . to cry all , there be to be a donkey - race -- that sublimest of all races , conduct on the grand socialistic idea of everybody encourage everybody else 's donkey , and the sorriest donkey win . and soon after four o'clock , splendo old . , in she damask satin and jewel and black lace , be lead out by , follow by the whole family party , to she raise seat under the striped marquee , where she be to give out the prize to the victor . , formal have request to resign that queenly office to the old lady , and be pleased with this opportunity of gratify he godmother 's taste for stateliness . , the delicately clean , finely scent , wither old man , lead out , with he air of punctilious , acid politeness ; bring , look neutral and stiff in a elegant peach - blossom silk ; and come last with
with he pale sister . no other friend of the family , besides , be invite to - day ; there be to be a grand dinner for the neighbour gentry on the morrow , but to - day all the force be require for the entertainment of the tenant . there be a sunk fence in front of the marquee , divide the lawn from the park , but a temporary bridge have be make for the passage of the victor , and the group of people stand , or seate here and there on bench , stretch on each side of the open space from the white marquee up to the sunk fence . " upon my word it be a pretty sight , " say the old lady , in she deep voice , when she be seat , and look round on the bright scene with its dark - green background ; " and it be the last fete - day I be likely to see , unless you make haste and get married , . but take care you get a charming bride , else I would rather die without see she . " " you be so terribly fastidious , , " say , " I be afraid I should never satisfy you with my choice . " " well , I will not forgive you if she be not handsome . I can not be put off with amiability , which be always the excuse people be make for the existence of plain people . and she must not be silly ; that will never do , because you will want manage , and a silly woman can not manage you . who be that tall young man , Dauphin , with the mild face ? there , stand without he hat , and take such care of that tall old woman by the side of he -- he mother , of course . I like to see that . " " what , do not you know he , mother ? " say . " that be , 's brother -- a , but a very good fellow . poor Seth have look rather down - heart of late ; I think it be because of he father 's die in that sad way , but tell I he want to marry that sweet little preacher who be here about a month ago , and I suppose she refuse he . " " ah , I remember hear about she . but there be no end of people here that I do not know , for they be grow up and alte so since I use to go about . " " what excellent sight you have ! " say old , who be hold a double glass up to he eye , " to see the expression of that young man 's face so far off . he face be nothing but a pale blurred spot to I . but I fancy I have the advantage of you when we come to look close . I can read small print without spectacle . " " ah , my dear sir , you begin with be very near- sighted , and those near- sight eye always wear the best . I want very strong spectacle to read with , but then I think my eye get better and better for thing at a distance . I suppose if I could live another fifty year , I should be blind to everything that be not out of other people 's sight , like a man who stand in a well and see nothing but the star . " " see , " say , " the old woman be ready to set out on they race now . which do you bet on , ? " " the long - leg one , unless they be go to have several heats , and then the little wiry one may win . " " there be the Poyser , mother , not far off on the right hand , " say . " Mr . Poyser be look at you . do take notice of she . " " to be sure I will , " say the old lady , give a gracious bow to . " a woman who send I such excellent cream - cheese be not to be neglect . bless I ! what a fat child that be she be hold on she knee ! but who be that pretty girl with dark eye ? " " that be , " say , " 's niece -- a very likely young person , and well - look too . my maid have teach she fine needlework , and she have mende some lace of mine very respectably indeed -- very respectably . " " why , she have live with the Poyser six or seven year , mother ; you must have see she , " say . " no , I have never see she , child -- at least not as she be now , " say . , continue to look at . " well - look , indeed ! she be a perfect beauty ! I have never see anything so pretty since my young day . what a pity such beauty as that should be throw away among the farmer , when it be want so terribly among the good family without fortune ! I daresay , now , she will marry a man who would have think she just as pretty if she have have round eye and red hair . " yoArthu da not turn he eye towards while . be speak of she . he feign not to hear , and to be occupy with something on the opposite side . but he see she plainly enough without look ; see she
she in heighten beauty , because he hear she beauty praise -- for other man 's opinion , you know , be like a native climate to 's feeling : it be the air on which they thrive the best , and grow strong . yes ! she be enough to turn any man 's head : any man in he place would have do and feel the same . and to give she up after all , as he be determined to do , would be a act that he should always look back upon with pride . " no , mother , " and , reply to she last word ; " I can not agree with you there . the common people be not quite so stupid as you imagine . the commonest man , who have he ounce of sense and feeling , be conscious of the difference between a lovely , delicate woman and a coarse one . even a dog feel a difference in they presence . the man may be no better able than the dog to explain the influence the more refined beauty have on he , but he feel it . " " bless I , , what do a old bachelor like you know about it ? " " oh , that be one of the matter in which old bachelor be wiser than marry man , because they have time for more general contemplation . you fine critic of woman must never shackle he judgment by call one woman he own . but , as a example of what I be say , that pretty preacher I mention just now tell I that she have preach to the roughest miner and have never be treat with anything but the utmost respect and kindness by they . the reason be -- though she do not know it -- that there be so much tenderness , refinement , and purity about she . such a woman as that bring with she ' air from heaven ' that the coarsest fellow be not insensible to . " " here be a delicate bit of womanhood , or girlhood , come to receive a prize , I suppose , " say . " she must be one of the racer in the sack , who have set off before we come . " the " bit of womanhood " be we old acquaintance , otherwise 's , whose large red cheek and blowsy person have undergone a exaggeration of colour , which , if she have happen to be a heavenly body , would have make she sublime . Bessy , I be sorry to say , have take to she ear - ring again since 's departure , and be otherwise deck out in such small finery as she could muster . any one who could have look into poor 's heart would have see a striking resemblance between she little hope and anxiety and 's . the advantage , perhaps , would have be on 's side in the matter of feeling . but then , you see , they be so very different outside ! you would have be inclin to box 's ear , and you would have long to kiss . have be tempt to run the arduous race , partly from mere hedonish gaiety , partly because of the prize . some one have say there be to be cloak and other nice clothes for prize , and she approach the marquee , fan herself with she handkerchief , but with exultation sparkling in she round eye . " here be the prize for the first sack - race , " say , take a large parcel from the table where the prize be laid and give it to before come up , " a excellent grogram gown and a piece of flannel . " " you do not think the winner be to be so young , I suppose , ? " say . " could not you find something else for this girl , and save that grim - look gown for one of the older woman ? " " I have buy nothing but what be useful and substantial , " say , adjust she own lace ; " I should not think of encourage a love of finery in young woman of that class . I have a scarlet cloak , but that be for the old woman who win . " this speech of 's produce rather a mocking expression in . 's face as she look at , while come up and drop a series of curtsy . " this be Bessy Cranage , mother , " say , kindly , " 's daughter . you remember , the blacksmith ? " " yes , to be sure , " say . " well , , here be you prize -- excellent warm thing for winter . I be sure you have have hard work to win they this warm day . " 's lip fall as she see the ugly , heavy gown -- which feel so hot and disagreeable too , on this day , and be such a great ugly thing to carry . she drop she curtsy again , without look up , and with a grow tremulousness about the corner of she mouth , and then turn away . " poor girl , " say ; " I think she be disappoint . I wish it have be something more to she taste . " " she be a bold - look young person , " observe . " not at all one I should like to encourage . " silently resolve that he would make a present of money before the day be over , that she might buy something more to she mind ; but she , not aware of the consolation in store for
for she , turn out of the open space , where she be visible from the marquee , and throw down the odious bundle under a tree , begin to cry -- very much titter at the while by the small boy . in this situation she be descry by she discreet matronly cousin , who lose no time in come up , have just give the baby into she husband 's charge . " what be the matter wi' ye ? " say Bess the matron , take up the bundle and examine it . " ye and swelter yoursen , I reckon , run that 's race . a ' here , they 'n gi 'en you lot of ' good grogram and flannel , as should ' be gi'en by good rights to they as have the sense to keep away from such foolery . ye might spare I a bit of ' this grogram to make clothes for the lad -- ye war ne 'er ill - natured , ; I ne 'er say that on ye . " " ye may take it all , for what I care , " say Bess the maiden , with a pettish movement , begin to wipe away she tear and recover herself . " well , I could do wiot , if so be ye want to get rid o not , " say the disinterested cousin , walk quickly away with the bundle , lest 's Bess should change she mind . but that bonny - cheeked lass be bless with a elasticity of spirit that secure she from any rankling grief ; and by the time the grand climax of the donkey - race come on , she disappointment be entirely lost in the delightful excitement of attempting to stimulate the last donkey by hiss , while the boy apply the argument of stick . but the strength of the donkey mind lie in adopt a course inversely as the argument urge , which , well consider , require as great a mental force as the direct sequence ; and the present donkey prove the first - rate order of he intelligence by come to a dead standstill just when the blow be thickest . great be the shouting of the crowd , radiant the grinning of the stone - sawyer and the fortunate rider of this superior beast , which stand calm and stiff - leg in the midst of its triumph . yoArthu himself have provide the prize for the man , and be make happy with a splendid pocket - knife , supply with blade and gimlet enough to make a man at home on a desert island . he have hardly return from the marquee with the prize in he hand , when it begin to be understand that propose to amuse the company , before the gentry go to dinner , with a impromptu and gratuitous performance -- namely , a hornpipe , the main idea of which be doubtless borrowed ; but this be to be develop by the dancer in so peculiar and complex a manner that no one could deny he the praise of originality . 's pride in he dancing -- a accomplishment productive of great effect at the yearly wake -- have need only slightly elevate by a extra quantity of good ale to convince he that the gentry would be very much struck with he performance of he hornpipe ; and he have be decidedly encourage in this idea by , who observe that it be nothing but right to do something to please the young squire , in return for what he have do for they . you will be the less surprised at this opinion in so grave a personage when you learn that have request to accompany he on the fiddle , and feel quite sure that though there might not be much in the dancing , the music would make up for it . , who be present in one of the large marquee , where the plan be be discuss , tell he have better not make a fool of himself - - a remark which at once fix 's determination : he be not go to let anything alone because turn up he nose at it . " what be this , what be this ? " say old . " be it something you have arrange , ? here be the clerk come with he fiddle , and a smart fellow with a nosegay in he button - hole . " " no , " say ; " I know nothing about it . by , he be go to dance ! it be one of the carpenter -- I forget he name at this moment . " " it be -- , they call he , " say ; " rather a loose fish , I think . , my dear , I see that fiddle - scraping be too much for you : you be get tired . let I take you in now , that you may rest till dinner . " rise assentingly , and the good brother take she away , while 's preliminary scraping burst into the " , " from which he intend to pass to a variety of tune , by a series of transition which he good ear really teach he to execute with some skill . it would have be a exasperat fact to he , if he have know it , that the general attention be too thoroughly absorb by 's dancing for any one to give much heed to the music . have you ever see a real perform a solo dance ? perhaps you have only see a ballet rustic , smile like a merry countryman in crockery , with graceful turn of the haunch and insinuat movement of the head . that be as
as much like the real thing as the " " be like the song of bird . never smile : he look as serious as a dancing monkey -- as serious as if he have be a experimental philosopher ascertain in he own person the amount of shaking and the variety of angularity that could be give to the human limb . to make amend for the abundant laughter in the striped marquee , clap he hand continually and cry " ! " but have one admirer whose eye follow he movement with a fervid gravity that equall he own . it be , who be seat on a bench , with between he leg . " what dost think of ' that ? " he say to he wife . " he go as pat to the music as if he be make of ' clockwork . I use to be a pretty good un at dancing myself when I be lighter , but I could niver ha ' hit it just to ' hair like that . " " it be little matter what he limb be , to my think , " re-turn . " he be empty enough I ' the upper story , or he would niver come jigge a ' stampe I ' that way , like a mad grasshopper , for the gentry to look at he . they be fit to die wi's laugh , I can see . " " well , well , so much the better , it amuse th'ey , " say , who do not easily take a irritable view of thing . " but they be go away now , t ' have they dinner , I reckon . well move about a bit , shall we , and see what 's do . he be get to look after the drinking and thing : I doubt he hasto have much fun . " the dance yoArthu have choose the entrance - hall for the ballroom : very wisely , for no other room could have be so airy , or would have have the advantage of the wide door open into the garden , as well as a ready entrance into the other room . to be sure , a stone floor be not the pleasantest to dance on , but then , most of the dancer have know what it be to enjoy a dance on kitche quarry . it be one of those entrance - hall which make the surround room look like closet -- with stucco angel , trumpet , and flower - wreat on the lofty ceiling , and great medallion of miscellaneous heroe on the wall , alternate with statue in nich . just the sort of place to be ornament well with green bough , and have be proud to show he taste and he hothouse plant on the occasion . the broad step of the stone staircase be cover with cushion to serve as seat for the child , who be to stay till half - past nine with the servant - maid to see the dancing , and as this dance be confine to the chief tenant , there be abundant room for every one . the light be charmingly dispose in coloured - paper lamps , high up among green bough , and the farmer 's wife and daughter , as they pee in , believe no scene could be more splendid ; they know now quite well in what sort of room the king and queen liv , and they thought glance with some pity towards cousin and acquaintance who have not this fine opportunity of know how thing go on in the great world . the lamp be already lit , though the sun have not long set , and there be that calm light out of door in which we seem to see all object more distinctly than in the broad day . it be a pretty scene outside the house : the farmer and they family be move about the lawn , among the flower and shrub , or along the broad straight road lead from the east front , where a carpet of mossy grass spread on each side , stud here and there with a dark flat - bough cedar , or a grand pyramidal fy sweep the ground with its branch , all tip with a fringe of paler green . the group of cottager in the park be gradually diminish , the young one be attract towards the light that be begin to gleam from the window of the gallery in the abbey , which be to be they dancing - room , and some of the sober elder one think it time to go home quietly . one of these be , and go with she -- not from filial attention only , for he conscience would not let he join in dancing . it have be rather a melancholy day to : have never be more constantly present with he than in this scene , where everything be so unlike she . he see she all the more vividly after look at the thoughtless face and gay - coloured dress of the young woman -- just as one feel the beauty and the greatness of a picture to the more when it have be for a moment screen from we by a vulgar head in a bonnet . but this presence of in he mind only help he to bear the better with he mother 's mood , which have be become more and more querulous for the last hour . poor be suffer from a strange conflict of feeling . she joy and pride in the honour pay to she darling son be begin to be worst in the conflict with the jealousy and fretfulness which have revive when come to tell she that desire he
he to join the dancers in the hall . be get more and more out of she reach ; she wish all the old trouble back again , for then it matter more to what he mother say and do . " Eh , it be fine talkin ' of ' dancin ' , " she say , " a ' thy father not a five week in 's grave . An' I wish I war there too , i'stid of ' bein ' leave to take up merrier folk 's room above ground . " " Nay , do not look at it I ' that way , mother , " say , who be determined to be gentle to she to - day . " I do not mean to dance -- I shall only look on . and since the captain wish I to be there , it 'uld look as if I think I know better than he to say as I would rather not stay . and thee know 'st how he be behave to I to - day . " " Eh , the e't do as thee like 'st , for thy old mother 's get no right t ' hinder thee . she be notch but th ' old husk , and thee 'st slipp away from she , like the ripe nut . " " well , mother , " say , " I will go and tell the captain as it hurt thy feeling for I to stay , and I would rather go home upo ' that account : he will not take it ill then , I daresay , and I be willing . " he say this with some effort , for he really long to be near this evening . " Nay , nay , I wonna ha ' thee do that -- the young squire ' ull be angered . go a ' do what the e't order to do , a ' I and ' ull go whome . I know it be a grit honour for thee to be so look on -- ang who be to be prouder on it nor thy mother ? have to she the cumber of ' rearin ' thee a ' doin ' for thee all these ' ear ? " " well , good - bye , then , mother -- good - bye , lad -- remember Gyp when you get home , " say , turn away towards the gate of the pleasure - grounds , where he hope he might be able to join the Poyser , for he have be so occupy throughout the afternoon that he have have no time to speak to . he eye soon detect a distant group , which he know to be the right one , return to the house along the broad gravel road , and he hasten on to meet they . " why , , I be glad to get sight on y ' again , " say , who be carry Totty on he arm . " you be go t ' have a bit of ' fun , I hope , now you work 's all do . and here be have promise no end of ' partner , an' I have just be askin' she if she would agree to dance wi' you , a ' she say no . " " well , I do not think of ' dance to - night , " say , already temp to change he mind , as he look at . " Nonsense ! " say . " why , everybody be goin ' to dance to - night , all but th ' old squire and . best be be tellin ' we as and 's ull dance , a ' the young squire ' ull pick my wife for he first partner , t ' open the ball : so she will be force to dance , though she be laid by ever sin ' the afore the little un be bear . you can na for shame stand still , , a ' you a fine young fellow and can dance as well as anybody . " " Nay , nay , " say , " it 'uld be unbecomin ' . I know the dancin 's nonsense , but if you stick at everything because it be nonsense , you wonna go far I ' this life . when you broth 's ready - make for you , you mun swallow the thickenin ' , or else let the broth alone . " " then if ' ull dance with I , " say , yield either to 's argument or to something else , " I will dance whichever dance she be free . " " I have get no partner for the fourth dance , " say ; " I will dance that with you , if you like . " " ah , " say , " but you mun dance the first dance , , else it will look partic'ler . there be plenty of ' nice partner to pick a ' choose from , an' it be hard for the gell when the man stan ' by and do not ask th'ey . " feel the justice of 's observation : it would not do for he to dance with no one besides ; and remember that have some reason to feel hurt to - day , he resolve to ask to dance with he the first dance , if she have no other partner . " there be the big clock strikin ' eight , " say ; " we must make haste in now , else the squire and the lady 's ull be in afore we , a ' that would to look well . " when they have enter
enter the hall , and the three child under 's charge have be seat on the stair , the folding - door of the drawing - room be thrown open , and enter in he regimental , lead . to a carpet - cover dais ornament with hot - house plant , where she and be to be seat with old , that they might look on at the dancing , like the king and queens in the play . yoArthu have put on he uniform to please the tenant , he say , who think as much of he milition dignity as if it have be a elevation to the premiership . he have not the least objection to gratify they in that way : he uniform be very advantageous to he figure . the old squire , before sit down , walk round the hall to greet the tenant and make polite speech to the wife : he be always polite ; but the farmer have find out , after long puzzling , that this polish be one of the sign of hardness . it be observ that he give he most elaborate civility to to - night , inquire particularly about she health , recommend she to strengthen herself with cold water as he do , and avoid all drug . curtsy and thanke he with great self - command , but when he have pass on , she whisper to she husband , " I will lay my life he be brewin ' some nasty turn against we . do to wag he tail so for nothing '. " have no time to answer , for now come up and say , " . Poyser , I be come to request the favour of you hand for the first dance ; and , , you must let I take you to my aunt , for she claim you as she partner . " the wife 's pale cheek flush with a nervous sense of unwonted honour as yoArthu lead she to the top of the room ; but , to whom a extra glass have restore he youthful confidence in he good look and good dancing , walk along with they quite proudly , secretly flatter himself that have never have a partner in Her life who could lift she off the ground as he would . in order to balance the honour give to the two parish , dance with , the largest farmer , and lead out . , after seat he sister , have go to the abbey gallery , as he have agree with , to see how the merriment of the cottager be prosper . meanwhile , all the less distinguished couple have take they place : be lead out by the inevitable , and by ; and now the music struck up , and the glorious country - dance , best of all dance , begin . Pity it be not a board floor ! then the rhythmic stamping of the thick shoe would have be better than any drum . that merry stamp , that gracious nodding of the head , that wave bestowal of the hand -- where can we see they now ? that simple dancing of well - cover matron , lay aside for a hour the care of house and dairy , remember but not affect youth , not jealous but proud of the young maiden by they side -- that holiday sprightliness of portly husband pay little compliment to they wife , as if they courting day be come again -- those lad and lass a little confused and awkward with they partner , have nothing to say -- it would be a pleasant variety to see all that sometimes , instead of low dress and large skirt , and scan glance exploring costume , and languid man in lacquered boot smile with double meaning . there be but one thing to mar 's pleasure in this dance : it be that he be always in close contact with , that slovenly farmer . he think of throw a little glazed coldness into he eye in the crossing of hand ; but then , as be opposite to he instead of the offensive Luke , he might freeze the wrong person . so he give he face up to hilarity , unchill by moral judgment . how 's heart beat as yoArthu approached she ! he have hardly look at she to - day : now he must take she hand . would he press it ? would he look at she ? she think she would cry if he give she no sign of feeling . now he be there -- he have take she hand -- yes , he be press it . turn pale as she look up at he for a instant and meet he eye , before the dance carry he away . that pale look come upon like the beginning of a dull pain , which cling to he , though he must dance and smile and joke all the same . Hetty would look so , when he tell she what he have to tell she ; and he should never be able to bear it -- he should be a fool and give way again . 's look do not really mean so much as he think : it be only the sign of a struggle between the desire for he to notice she and the dread lest she should betray the desire to other . but 's face have a language that transcend she feeling . there be face which nature charge with a meaning and patho not belong to the single human soul that flutter beneath they , but speak the joy and sorrow of foregone generation -- eye that tell of deep love which doubtless have be and be somewhere , but not pair
pair with these eye -- perhaps pair with pale eye that can say nothing ; just as a national language may be instinct with poetry unfelt by the lip that use it . that look of 's oppress Arthur with a dread which yet have something of a terrible unconfessed delight in it , that she love he too well . there be a hard task before he , for at that moment he feel he would have give up three year of he youth for the happiness of abandon himself without remorse to he passion for . these be the incongruous thought in he mind as he lead , who be pante with fatigue , and secretly resolve that neither judge nor jury should force she to dance another dance , to take a quiet rest in the dining - room , where supper be lay out for the guest to come and take it as they choose . " I have desire to remember as she be get to dance wi' you , sir , " say the good innocent woman ; " for she be so thoughtless , she would be like enough to go a ' engage herself for ivery dance . so I tell she not to promise too many . " " thank you , , " say , not without a twinge . " now , sit down in this comfortable chair , and here be ready to give you what you would like best . " he hurry away to seek another matronly partner , for due honou must be pay to the married woman before he ask any of the young one ; and the country - dance , and the stamping , and the gracious nodding , and the waving of the hand , go on joyously . at last the time have come for the fourth dance -- longe for by the strong , grave Adam , as if he have be a delicate - hand youth of eighteen ; for we be all very much alike when we be in we first love ; and have hardly ever touch 's hand for more than a transient greeting -- have never dance with she but once before . he eye have follow she eagerly to - night in spite of himself , and have take in deeper draught of love . he think she behave so prettily , so quietly ; she do not seem to be flirt at all she smile less than usual ; there be almost a sweet sadness about she . " bless she ! " he say inwardly ; " I would make she life a happy 'un , if a strong arm to work for she , and a heart to love she , could do it . " and then there steal over he delicious thought of come home from work , and draw to he side , and feel she cheek softly press against he , till he forget where he be , and the music and the tread of foot might have be the falling of rain and the roaring of the wind , for what he know . but now the third dance be end , and he might go up to she and claim she hand . she be at the far end of the hall near the staircase , whisper with , who have just give the sleeping Totty into she arm before run to fetch shawl and bonnet from the landing . have take the two boy away into the dining - room to give they some cake before they go home in the cart with and be to follow as fast as possible . " let I hold she , " say , as turn upstairs ; " the child be so heavy when they be asleep . " be glad of the relief , for to in she arm , stand , be not at all a pleasant variety to she . but this second transfer have the unfortunate effect of rousing , who be not behind any child of she age in peevishness at a unseasonable awaking . while be in the act of place she in 's arm , and have not yet withdraw she own , open she eye , and forthwith fight out with she left fist at 's arm , and with she right catch at the string of brown bead round 's neck . the locket leape out from she frock , and the next moment the string be break , and , helpless , saw bead and locket scatter wide on the floor . " my locket , my locket ! " she say , in a loud frightene whisper to ; " never mind the bead . " Adam have already see where the locket fall , for it have attract he glance as it leape out of she frock . it have fall on the raise wooden dais where the band sit , not on the stone floor ; and as pick it up , he see the glass with the dark and light lock of hair under it . it have fall that side upward , so the glass be not break . he turn it over on he hand , and see the enamell gold back . " it be not hurt , " he say , as he hold it towards , who be unable to take it because both she hand be occupy with . " oh , it do not matter , I do not mind about it , " say , who have be pale and be now red . " not matter ? " say , gravely . " you seem very frightened about it . I will hold it till you be ready to take it , " he add , quietly close he hand over it ,
, that she might not think he want to look at it again . by this time have come with bonnet and shawl , and as soon as she have take , place the locket in 's hand . she take it with a air of indifference and put it in she pocket , in she heart vex and angry with Adam because he have see it , but determine now that she would show no more sign of agitation . " see , " she say , " they be take they place to dance ; let we go . " Adam assent silently . a puzzled alarm have take possession of he . have a lover he do not know of ? for none of she relation , he be sure , would give she a locket like that ; and none of she admirer , with whom he be acquaint , be in the position of a accept lover , as the giver of that locket must be . be lose in the utter impossibility of find any person for he fear to alight on . he could only feel with a terrible pang that there be something in 's life unknown to he ; that while he have be rock himself in the hope that she would come to love he , she be already love another . the pleasure of the dance with be gone ; he eye , when they rest on she , have a uneasy questioning expression in they ; he could think of nothing to say to she ; and she too be out of temper and disinclin to speak . they be both glad when the dance be end . be determined to stay no longer ; no one want he , and no one would notice if he slipp away . as soon as he get out of door , he begin to walk at he habitual rapid pace , hurrie along without know why , busy with the painful thought that the memory of this day , so full of honour and promise to he , be poisoned for ever . suddenly , when he be far on through the chase , he stop , start by a flash of revive hope . after all , he might be a fool , make a great misery out of a trifle . Hetty , fond of finery as she be , might have buy the thing herself . it look too expensive for that -- it look like the thing on white satin in the great jeweller 's shop at . but have very imperfect notions of the value of such thing , and he think it could certainly not cost more than a guinea . perhaps Hetty have have as much as that in box , and there be no knowing but she might have be childish enough to spend it in that way ; she be such a young thing , and she could not help love finery ! but then , why have she be so frightened about it at first , and change colour so , and afterwards pretend not to care ? oh , that be because she be asham of he see that she have such a smart thing -- she be conscious that it be wrong for she to spend she money on it , and she know that disapprove of finery . it be a proof she care about what he like and dislike . she must have think from he silence and gravity afterwards that he be very much displease with she , that he be inclin to be harsh and severe towards she foible . and as he walk on more quietly , chew the cud of this new hope , he only uneasiness be that he have behave in a way which might chill 's feel towards he . for this last view of the matter must be the true one . how could Hetty have a accept lover , quite unknown to he ? she be never away from she uncle 's house for more than a day ; she could have no acquaintance that do not come there , and no intimacy unknown to she uncle and aunt . it would be folly to believe that the locket be give to she by a lover . the little ring of dark hair he feel sure be she own ; he could form no guess about the light hair under it , for he have not see it very distinctly . it might be a bit of she father 's or mother 's , who have die when she be a child , and she would naturally put a bit of she own along with it . and so go to bed comforte , have woven for himself a ingenious web of probability -- the surest screen a wise man can place between himself and the truth . he last waking thought melt into a dream that he be with again at the , and that he be ask she to forgive he for be so cold and silent . and while he be dream this , be lead Hetty to the dance and say to she in low hurried tone , " I shall be in the wood the day after to - morrow at seven ; come as early as you can . " and 's foolish joy and hope , which have fly away for a little space , scare by a mere nothing , now all come fluttering back , unconscious of the real peril . she be happy for the first time this long day , and wish that dance would last for hour . yoArthu wish it too ; it be the last weakness he mean to indulge in ; and a man never lie with more delicious languor under the influence
influence of a passion than when he have persuade himself that he shall subdue it to - morrow . but 's wish be quite the reverse of this , for she mind be fill with dreary foreboding as to the retardation of to - morrow morning 's cheese in consequence of these late hour . now that have do she duty and dance one dance with the young squire , must go out and see if the cart be come back to fetch they , for it be half - past ten o'clock , and notwithstand a mild suggestion on he part that it would be bad manners for they to be the first to go , be resolute on the point , " manners or no manners . " " what ! go already , ? " say old , as she come to curtsy and take leave ; " I think we should not part with any of we guest till eleven . and I , who be elderly people , think of sit out the dance till then . " " oh , you , it be all right and proper for gentlefolk to stay up by candlelight -- they have get no cheese on they minds . we be late enough as it be , an's there be no lettin ' the cow know as they must not want to be milk so early to - morrow mornin ' . so , if you will please t ' excuse we , we will take we leave . " " Eh ! " she say to she husband , as they set off in the cart , " I would sooner ha ' brewin ' day and washing ' day together than one o' these pleasurin ' day . there be no work so tirin ' as danglin ' about a ' starin ' a ' not rightly knowin ' what you be goin ' to do next ; and keepin ' you face I ' smilin ' order like a grocer of ' market - day for fear people should to think you civil enough . a ' you have nothing to show for r't when it be do , if it be not a yallow face wi' eatin ' thing as disagree . " " Nay , nay , " say , who be in he merriest mood , and feel that he have have a great day , " a bit of ' pleasuring 's good for thee sometimes . a ' thee danc 'st as well as any of th'ey , for I will back thee against all the wife I ' the parish for a light foot a ' ankle . a ' it be a great honour for the young squire to ask thee first -- I reckon it be because I sit at th ' head of ' the table a ' make the speech . a ' Hetty too -- she never have such a partner before -- a fine young gentleman in reg'mental . it will serve you to talk on , , when you be a old woman -- how you dance wi's th' young squire the day he come o ' age . " a crisis it be beyond the middle of -- nearly three week after the birthday feast . the reaping of the wheat have begin in we north midland county of , but the harvest be likely still to be retarde by the heavy rain , which be cause inundation and much damage throughout the country . from this last trouble the and farmer , on they pleasant upland and in they brook - watere valley , have not suffer , and as I can not pretend that they be such exceptional farmer as to love the general good better than they own , you will infer that they be not in very low spirit about the rapid rise in the price of bread , so long as there be hope of gather in they own corn undamage ; and occasional day of sunshine and dry wind flatter this hope . the eighteenth of be one of these day when the sunshine look brighter in all eye for the gloom that go before . grand mass of cloud be hurry across the blue , and the great round hill behind the chase seem alive with they fly shadow ; the sun be hide for a moment , and then shine out warm again like a recover joy ; the leave , still green , be toss off the hedgerow tree by the wind ; around the farmhouse there be a sound of clapp door ; the apple fall in the orchard ; and the stray horse on the green side of the lane and on the common have they mane blow about they face . and yet the wind seem only part of the general gladness because the sun be shine . a merry day for the child , who run and shoute to see if they could top the wind with they voice ; and the grow - up people too be in good spirit , inclin to believe in yet finer day , when the wind have fall . if only the corn be not ripe enough to be blow out of the husk and scatter as untimely see ! and yet a day on which a blighting sorrow may fall upon a man . for if it be true that nature at certain moments seem charge with a presentiment of one individual lot must it not also be true that she seem unmindful unconscious of another ? for there be no hour that have not it be birt of gladness and despair , no morning brightness that do not bring new sickness to desolation as well as new force to genius and love . there be so many of we ,
, and we lot be so different , what wonder that 's mood be often in harsh contrast with the great crisis of we life ? we be child of a large family , and must learn , as such child do , not to expect that we hurt will be make much of -- to be content with little nurture and caressing , and help each other the more . it be a busy day with , who of late have do almost double work , for he be continue to act as foreman for , until some satisfactory person could be find to supply he place , and be slow to find that person . but he have do the extra work cheerfully , for he hope be buoyant again about . every time she have see he since the birthday , she have seem to make a effort to behave all the more kindly to he , that she might make he understand she have forgive he silence and coldness during the dance . he have never mention the locket to she again ; too happy that she smile at he -- still happier because he observe in she a more subdued air , something that he interpret as the growth of womanly tenderness and seriousness . " ah ! " he think , again and again , " she be only seventeen ; she will be thoughtful enough after a while . and she aunt allay say how clever she be at the work . she will make a wife as mother will have no occasion to grumble at , after all . " to be sure , he have only see she at home twice since the birthday ; for one , when he be intend to go from church to the , have join the party of upper servants from the chase and have go home with they -- almost as if she be inclin to encourage . " she be takin ' too much likin ' to they folk I ' the house keeper 's room , " remark . " for my part , I be never overfond o' gentlefolk 's servant -- they be mostly like the fine lady ' fat dog , nayther good for barking nor butcher 's meat , but on 'y for show . " and another evening she be go to to buy some thing ; though , to he great surprise , as he be return home , he see she at a distance get over a stile quite out of the road . but , when he hasten to she , she be very kind , and ask he to go in again when he have take she to the yard gate . she have go a little farther into the field after come from because she do not want to go in , she say : it be so nice to be out of door , and she aunt always make such a fuss about it if she want to go out . " oh , do come in with I ! " she say , as he be go to shake hand with she at the gate , and he could not resist that . so he go in , and Poyser be contente with only a slight remark on 's be later than be expect ; while , who have look out of spirits when he meet she , smile and talk and wait on they all with unusual promptitude . that be the last time he have see she ; but he mean to make leisure for go to the to - morrow . to -day , he know , be she day for go to the chase to sow with the lady 's maid , so he would get as much work do as possible this evening , that the next might be clear . one piece of work that be superintending be some slight repair at the , which have be hithertoo occupy by , as bailiff , but which it be now rumour that the old squire be go to let to a smart man in top - boot , who have be see to ride over it one day . nothing but the desire to get a tenant could account for the squire 's undertaking repair , though the - evening party at 's agree over they pipe that no man in he sense would take the chase farm unless there be a bit more ploughland laid to it . however that might be , the repair be order to be execute with all dispatch , and , act for , be carry out the order with he usual energy . but to - day , have be occupy elsewhere , he have not be able to arrive at the till late in the afternoon , and he then discover that some old roofing , which he have calculate on preserving , have give way . there be clearly no good to be do with this part of the building without pull it all down , and immediately see in he mind a plan for build it up again , so as to make the most convenient of cow - shed and calf - pens , with a hovel for implement ; and all without any great expense for material . so , when the workman be go , he sit down , take out he pocket - book , and busy himself with sketch a plan , and make a specification of the expense that he might show it to Burge the next morning , and set he on persuade the squire to consent . to " make a good job " of anything , however small , be always a pleasure to , and he sit on a block , with he book rest on
on a planing - table , whistl low every now and then and turn he head on one side with a just perceptible smile of gratification -- of pride , too , for if love a bit of good work , he love also to think , " I do it ! " and I believe the only people who be free from that weakness be those who have no work to call they own . it be nearly seven before he have finish and put on he jacket again ; and on give a last look round , he observe that , who have be work here to - day , have leave he basket of tool behind he . " why , th ' lad 's forget he tool , " think , " and he be get to work up at the shop to - morrow . there never be such a chap for wool - gather ; he would leave he head behind he , if it be loose . however , it be lucky I have see th'ey ; I will carry th'ey home . " the building of the lay at one extremity of the chase , at about ten minute ' walking distance from the . have come thither on he pony , intend to ride to the stable and put up he nag on he way home . at the stable he encounter , who have come to look at the captain 's new horse , on which he be to ride away the day after to - morrow ; and detain he to tell how all the servants be to collect at the gate of the courtyard to wish the young squire luck as he ride out ; so that by the time have get into the chase , and be strid along with the basket of tool over he shoulder , the sun be on the point of setting , and be send level crimson ray among the great trunk of the old oak , and touch every bare patch of ground with a transient glory that make it look like a jewel dropt upon the grass . the wind have fall now , and there be only enough breeze to stir the delicate - stem leave . any one who have be sit in the house all day would have be glad to walk now ; but have be quite enough in the open air to wish to shorten he way home , and he bethotch himself that he might do so by strike across the chase and go through the , where he have never be for year . he hurry on across the chase , stalk along the narrow path between the fern , with at he heel , not linger to watch the magnificent change of the light -- hardly once think of it -- yet feel its presence in a certain calm happy awe which mingl itself with he busy work - day thought . how could he help feel it ? the very deer feel it , and be more timid . presently 's thought recur to what have say about , and picture he go away , and the change that might take place before he come back ; then they travel back affectionately over the old scene of boyish companionship , and dwelt on 's good quality , which have a pride in , as we all have in the virtue of the superior who honour we . a nature like 's , with a great need of love and reverence in it , depend for so much of its happiness on what it can believe and feel about other ! and he have no ideal world of dead heroe ; he know little of the life of man in the past ; he must find the being to whom he could cling with loving admiration among those who come within speech of he . these pleasant thought about bring a milder expression than usual into he keen rough face : perhaps they be the reason why , when he open the old green gate lead into the , he pause to pat and say a kind word to he . after that pause , he strode on again along the broad win path through the . what grand beech ! Adam delighte in a fine tree of all thing ; as the fisherman 's sight be keenest on the sea , so 's perception be more at home with tree than with other object . he keep they in he memory , as a painter do , with all the fleck and knot in they bark , all the curve and angles of they bough , and have often calculate the height and contents of a trunk to a nicety , as he stand look at it . no wonder that , not -withstand he desire to get on , he could not help pause to look at a curiious large beech which he have see stand before he at a turning in the road , and convince himself that it be not two tree wedde together , but only one . for the rest of he life he remember that moment when he be calmly examine the beech , as a man remember he last glimpse of the home where he youth be pass , before the road turn , and he see it no more . the beech stand at the last turning before the end in a archway of bough that let in the eastern light ; and as step away from the tree to continue he walk , he eye fell on two figure about twenty yard before he . he remain as motionless as a statue , and turn almost as pale . the two figure be stand opposite to each other , with clasp hand about
about to part ; and while they be bend to kiss , , who have be run among the brushwood , come out , catch sight of they , and give a sharp bark . they separate with a start -- one hurrie through the gate out of the , and the other , turn round , walk slowly , with a sort of saunter , towards who still stand transfix and pale , clutching tighter the stick with which he hold the basket of tool over he shoulder , and look at the approaching figure with eye in which amazement be fast turn to fierceness . look flushed and excited ; he have try to make unpleasant feeling more bearable by drink a little more wine than usual at dinner to - day , and be still enough under its flattering influence to think more lightly of this unwished - for rencontre with than he would otherwise have do . after all , be the best person who could have happen to see he and together -- he be a sensible fellow , and would not babble about it to other people . yoArthu feel confident that he could laugh the thing off and explain it away . and so he saunter forward with elaborate carelessness -- he flush face , he evening dress of fine cloth and fine linen , he hand half - thrust into he waistcoat pocket , all shone upon by the strange evening light which the light clouds have catch up even to the zenith , and be now shed down between the topmost branch above he . be still motionless , look at he as he come up . he understand it all now -- the locket and everything else that have be doubtful to he : a terrible scorching light show he the hidden letter that change the meaning of the past . if he have move a muscle , he must inevitably have spring upon like a tiger ; and in the conflict emotions that fill those long moment , he have tell himself that he would not give loose to passion , he would only speak the right thing . he stand as if petrify by a unseen force , but the force be he own strong will . " well , , " say , " you have be look at the fine old beech , eh ? they be not to be come near by the hatchet , though ; this be a sacred grove . I overtake pretty little as I be come to my den -- the Hermitage , there . she ought not to come home this way so late . so I take care of she to the gate , and ask for a kiss for my pain . but I must get back now , for this road be confoundedly damp . good -night , . I shall see you to - morrow -- to say good - bye , you know . " yoArthu be too much preoccupy with the part he be play himself to be thoroughly aware of the expression in 's face . he do not look directly at , but glance carelessly round at the tree and then lift up one foot to look at the sole of he boot . he care to say no more -- he have throw quite dust enough into honest 's eye -- and as he speak the last word , he walk on . " stop a bit , sir , " say , in a hard peremptory voice , without turn round . " I have get a word to say to you . " yoArthu pause in surprise . Susceptible person be more affect by a change of tone than by unexpected word , and have the susceptibility of a nature at once affectionate and vain . he be still more surprised when he see that have not move , but stand with he back to he , as if summon he to return . what do he mean ? he be go to make a serious business of this affair . yoArthu feel he temper rise . a patronising disposition always have its meaner side , and in the confusion of he irritation and alarm there enter the feeling that a man to whom he have show so much favour as to be not in a position to criticize he conduct . and yet he be dominate , as one who feel himself in the wrong always be , by the man whose good opinion he care for . in spite of pride and temper , there be as much deprecation as anger in he voice when he say , " what do you mean , ? " " I mean , sir " -- answer , in the same harsh voice , still without turn round -- " I mean , sy , that you do not deceive I by you light word . this be not the first time you have meet in this grove , and this be not the first time you have kiss she . " yoArthu feel a start uncertainty how far be speak from knowledge , and how far from mere inference . and this uncertainty , which prevent he from contrive a prudent answer , heighten he irritation . he say , in a high sharp tone , " well , sir , what then ? " " why , then , instead of acting like thg upright , honourable man we have all believe you to be , you have be act the part of a selfish light - minded scoundrel . you know as well as I do what it be to lead to when a gentleman like you kiss and make love to a young woman like , and give she present as she be frightene for other
other folk to see . and I say it again , you be act the part of a selfish light - minde scoundrel though it cut I to th' heart to say so , and I would rather ha ' lose my right hand . " " let I tell you , , " say , bridl he grow anger and try to recur to he careless tone , " you be not only devilishly impertinent , but you be talk nonsense . every pretty girl be not such a fool as you , to suppose that when a gentleman admire she beauty and pay she a little attention , he must mean something particular . every man like to flirt with a pretty girl , and every pretty girl like to be flirt with . the wider the distance between they , the less harm there be , for then she be not likely to deceive herself . " " I do not know what you mean by flirt , " say , " but if you mean behave to a woman as if you love she , and yet not love she all the while , I say that be not th ' action of a honest man , and what be not honest do come t ' harm . I be not a fool , and you be not a fool , and you know better than what you be say . you know it could not be make public as you have behave to as y's have do without she lose she character and bring shame and trouble on she and she relation . what if you mean nothing by you kissing and you present ? other folk will not believe as you have mean nothing ; and do not tell I about she not deceive herself . I tell you as you have fill she mind so with the thought of you as it will mayhap poison she life , and she will never love another man as 'uld make she a good husband . " yoArthu have feel a sudden relief while be speak ; he perceive that have no positive knowledge of the past , and that there be no irrevocable damage do by this evening 's unfortunate rencontre . Adam could still be deceiv . the candid yoArthu have bring himself into a position in which successful lying be he only hope . the hope allay he anger a little . " well , , " he say , in a tone of friendly concession , " you be perhaps right . perhaps I have go a little too far in take notice of the pretty little thing and steal a kiss now and then . you be such a grave , steady fellow , you do not understand the temptation to such trifling . I be sure I would not bring any trouble or annoyance on she and the good Poyser on any account if I could help it . but I think you look a little too seriously at it . you know I be go away immediately , so I sha not make any more mistake of the kind . but let we say good - night " -- here turn round to walk on -- " and talk no more about the matter . the whole thing will soon be forget . " " no , by ! " burst out with rage that could be control no longer , throw down the basket of tool and strid forward till he be right in front of . all he jealousy and sense of personal injury , which he have be hithertoo try to keep under , have leape up and master he . what man of we , in the first moments of a sharp agony , could ever feel that the fellow - man who have be the medium of inflict it do not mean to hurt we ? in we instinctive rebellion against pain , we be child again , and demand a active will to wreak we vengeance on . Adam at this moment could only feel that he have be rob of -- rob treacherously by the man in whom he have trust -- and he stand close in front of , with fierce eye glar at he , with pale lip and clench hand , the hard tone in which he have hitherto be constrain himself to express no more than a just indignation give way to a deep agitated voice that seem to shake he as he speak . " no , it will not be soon forget , as you have come in between she and I , when she might ha's love I -- it will not soon be forgot as you have rob I of ' my happiness , while I think you be my best friend , and a noble - minded man , as I be proud to work for . and you have be kiss she , and mean nothing , have you ? and I never kiss she I ' my life -- but I would ha ' work hard for year for the right to kiss she . and you make light of it . you think little of ' do what may damage other folk , so as you get you bit of ' trifling , as mean nothing . I throw back you favour , for you be not the man I take you for . I will never count you my friend any more . I would rather you would act as my enemy , and fight I where I stand -- it be all th ' amend you can make I . " poor Adam , possess by rage that could find no other vent , begin to throw off he coat and he cap , too blind with passion to
to notice the change that have take place in while he be speak . 's lip be now as pale as 's ; he heart be beate violently . the discovery that love be a shock which make he for the moment see himself in the light of 's indignation , and regard 's suffering as not merely a consequence , but a element of he error . the word of hatred and contempt -- the first he have ever hear in he life -- see like scorch missile that be make ineffaceable scars on he . all screen self - excuse , which rarely fall quite away while other respect we , forsook he for a instant , and he stand face to face with the first great irrevocable evil he have ever commit . he be only twenty - one , and three month ago -- nay , much later -- he have think proudly that no man should ever be able to reproach he justly . he first impulse , if there have be time for it , would perhaps have be to utter word of propitiation ; but have no sooner throw off he coat and cap than he become aware that be stand pale and motionless , with he hand still thrust in he waistcoat pocket . " what ! " he say , " will not you fight I like a man ? you know I will not strike you while you stand so . " " go away , , " say , " I do not want to fight you . " " no , " say , bitterly ; " you do not want to fight I -- you think I be a common man , as you can injure without answer for it . " " I never mean to injure you , " say , with return anger . " I do not know you love she . " " but you have make she love you , " say . " you be a double - faced man -- I will never believe a word you say again . " " go away , I tell you , " say , angrily , " or we shall both repent . " " no , " say , with a convulse voice , " I swear I will not go away without fight you . do you want provoke any more ? I tell you you be a coward and a scoundrel , and I despise you . " the colour have all rush back to 's face ; in a moment he right hand be clench , and deal a blow like lightning , which send stagger backward . he blood be as thoroughly up as 's now , and the two man , forget the emotion that have go before , fight with the instinctive fierceness of panther in the deepening twilight darken by the tree . the delicate - hand be a match for the workman in everything but strength , and be skill enable he to protract the struggle for some long moment . but between unarmed man the battle be to the strong , where the strong be no blunderer , and yoArthu must sink under a well - plan blow of 's as a steel rod be break by a iron bar . the blow soon come , and fell , he head lie conceal in a tuft of fern , so that could only discern he darkly clad body . he stand still in the dim light wait for to rise . the blow have be give now , towards which he have be strain all the force of nerve and muscle -- and what be the good of it ? what have he do by fighting ? only satisfie he own passion , only wreak he own vengeance . he have not rescue , nor change the past -- there it be , just as it have be , and he sicken at the vanity of he own rage . but why do not Arthur rise ? he be perfectly motionless , and the time seem long to . ! have the blow be too much for he ? shudder at the thought of he own strength , as with the oncoming of this dread he knelt down by 's side and lifte he head from among the fern . there be no sign of life : the eye and tooth be set . the horror that rush over completely master he , and force upon he its own belief . he could feel nothing but that death be in 's face , and that he be helpless before it . he make not a single movement , but knelt like a image of despair gaze at a image of death . it be only a few minute measure by the clock -- though always think it have be a long while -- before he perceive a gleam of consciousness in 's face and a slight shiver through he frame . the intense joy that flood he soul bring back some of the old affection with it . " do you feel any pain , sir ? " he say , tenderly , loose 's cravat . yoArthu turn he eye on with a vague stare which give way to a slightly start motion as if from the shock of return memory . but he only shiver again and say nothing . " do you feel any hurt , sir ? " say again , with a trembling in he voice . yoArthu put he hand up to he waistcoat button , and when have unbutton it , he take a longer breath . " Lay my head down , " he say , faintly , " and get I some water if you can . " lay the head down gently
gently on the fern again , and empty the tool out of the flag - basket , hurrie through the tree to the edge of the border on the chase , where a brook run below the bank . when he return with he basket leak , but still half - full , look at he with a more thoroughly reawaken consciousness . " can you drink a drop out of ' you hand , sir ? " say , knee down again to lift up 's head . " no , " say , " dip my cravat in and souse it on my head . " the water seem to do he some good , for he presently raise himself a little higher , rest on 's arm . " do you feel any hurt inside sy ? " ask again " no -- no hurt , " say , still faintly , " but rather do up . " after a while he say , " I suppose I faint away when you knock I down . " " yes , sir , thank , " say . " I think it be worse . " " what ! you think you would do for I , eh ? come help I on my leg . " " I feel terribly shaky and dizzy , " yoArthu say , as he stand lean on 's arm ; " that blow of yours must have come against I like a battering - ram . I do not believe I can walk alone . " " lean on I , sir ; I will get you along , " say . " or , will you sit down a bit longer , on my coat here , and I will prop y ' up . you will perhaps be better in a minute or two . " " no , " say . " I will go to the Hermitage -- I think I have get some brandy there . there be a short road to it a little farther on , near the gate . if you will just help I on . " they walk slowly , with frequent pause , but without speak again . in both of they , the concentration in the present which have attend the first moment of 's revival have now give way to a vivid recollection of the previous scene . it be nearly dark in the narrow path among the tree , but within the circle of fir -tree round the Hermitage there be room for the grow moonlight to enter in at the window . they step be noiseless on the thick carpet of fir-needle , and the outward stillness seem to heighten they inward consciousness , as yoArthu take the key out of he pocket and place it in 's hand , for he to open the door . have not know before that have furnish the old Hermitage and make it a retreat for himself , and it be a surprise to he when he open the door to see a snug room with all the sign of frequent habitation . yoArthu loose 's arm and throw himself on the ottoman . " you will see my hunting - bottle somewhere , " he say . " a leather case with a bottle and glass in . " be not long in find the case . " there be very little brandy in it , sir , " he say , turn it downwards over the glass , as he hold it before the window ; " hardly this little glassful . " " well , give I that , " say , with the peevishness of physical depression . when he have take some sip , say , " have not I better run to ' house , sir , and get some more brandy ? I can be there and back pretty soon . it will be a stiff walk home for you , if you do not have something to revive you . " " yes -- go . but do not say I be ill . ask for my man , and tell he to get it from , and not to say i be at the Hermitage . get some water too . " be relieved to have a active task -- both of they be relieved to be apart from each other for a short time . but 's swift pace could not still the eager pain of thinking -- of live again with concentrate suffer through the last wretch hour , and look out from it over all the new sad future . yoArthu lay still for some minute after be gone , but presently he rise feebly from the ottoman and pee about slowly in the broken moonlight , seek something . it be a short bit of wax candle that stand amongst a confusion of writing and draw material . there be more searching for the means of light the candle , and when that be do , he go cautiously round the room , as if wishing to assure himself of the presence or absence of something . at last he have find a slight thing , which he put first in he pocket , and then , on a second thought , take out again and thrust deep down into a waste - paper basket . it be a woman 's little , pink , silk neckerchief . he set the candle on the table , and throw himself down on the ottoman again , exhaust with the effort . when come back with he supplies , he entrance awoke from a doze . " that be right , " yoArthu say ; " I be tremendously in want of some brandy - vigour . " " I be glad to see you have get a
a light , sir , " say . " I have be think I would better have ask for a lanthorn . " " no , no ; the candle will last long enough -- I shall soon be up to walk home now . " " I can not go before I have see you safe home , sir , " say , hesitatingly . " no : it will be better for you to stay -- sit down . " sit down , and they remain opposite to each other in uneasy silence , while Arthur slowly drank brandy - and - water , with visibly renovat effect . he begin to lie in a more voluntary position , and look as if he be less overpowered by bodily sensation . be keenly alive to these indication , and as he anxiety about 's condition begin to be allay , he feel more of that impatience which every one know who have have he just indignation suspend by the physical state of the culprit . yet there be one thing on he mind to be do before he could recur to remonstrance : it be to confess what have be unjust in he own word . perhaps he longe all the more to make this confession , that he indignation might be free again ; and as he see the sign of return ease in , the word again and again come to he lip and go back , check by the thought that it would be better to leave everything till to - morrow . as long as they be silent they do not look at each other , and a foreboding come across that if they begin to speak as though they remember the past -- if they look at each other with full recognition -- they must take fire again . so they sit in silence till the bit of wax candle flicker low in the socket , the silence all the while become more irksome to . yoArthu have just pour out some more brandy - and - water , and he throw one arm behind he head and draw up one leg in a attitude of recovere ease , which be a irresistible temptation to to speak what be on he mind . " you begin to feel more yourself again , sir , " he say , as the candle go out and they be half - hide from each other in the faint moonlight . " yes : I do not feel good for much -- very lazy , and not inclin to move ; but I will go home when I have take this dose . " there be a slight pause before say , " my temper get the better of I , and I say thing as be not true . I would know right to speak as if you would know you be do I a injury : you ' no grounds for know it ; I have always keep what I feel for she as secret as I could . " he pause again before he go on . " and perhaps I judge you too harsh -- I be apt to be harsh -- and you may have act out of ' thoughtlessness more than I should ha's believe be possible for a man with a heart and a conscience . we be not all put together alike , and we may misjudge one another . know , it be all the joy I could have now , to think the best of you . " yoArthu want to go home without say any more -- he be too painfully embarrassed in mind , as well as too weak in body , to wish for any further explanation to - night . and yet it be a relief to he that reopen the subject in a way the least difficult for he to answer . be in the wretched position of a open , generous man who have commit a error which make deception seem a necessity . the native impulse to give truth in return for truth , to meet trust with frank confession , must be suppress , and duty be become a question of tactic . he deed be react upon he -- be already govern he tyrannously and force he into a course that jar with he habitual feeling . the only aim that seem admissible to he now be to deceive to the utmost : to make think better of he than he deserv . and when he hear the word of honest retractation -- when he hear the sad appeal with which end -- he be oblige to rejoice in the remains of ignorant confidence it imply . he do not answer immediately , for he have to be judicious and not truthful . " say no more about we anger , , " he say , at last , very languidly , for the labour of speech be unwelcome to he ; " I forgive you momentary injustice -- it be quite natural , with the exaggerated notion you have in you mind . we shall be no the worse friend in future , I hope , because we have fight . you have the best of it , and that be as it should be , for I believe I have be most in the wrong of the two . come , let we shake hand . " yoArthu hold out he hand , but sit still . " I do not like to say ' no ' to that , sir , " he say , " but I can not shake hand till it be clear what we mean byot . I be wrong when I speak as if you would do I a injury knowingly , but I be not wrong in what I say
say before , about you behaviour t ' Hetty , and I can not shake hand with you as if I hold you my friend the same as ever till you have clear that up better . " yoArthu swallow he pride and resentment as he draw back he hand . he be silent for some moment , and then say , as indifferently as he could , " I do not know what you mean by clear up , . I have tell you already that you think too seriously of a little flirtation . but if you be right in suppose there be any danger in it -- I be go away on , and there will be a end of it . as for the pain it have give you , I be heartily sorry for it . I can say no more . " say nothing , but rise from he chair and stand with he face towards one of the window , as if look at the blackness of the moonlit fir - tree ; but he be in reality conscious of nothing but the conflict within he . it be of no use now -- he resolution not to speak till to - morrow . he must speak there and then . but it be several minute before he turn round and step nearer to , stand and look down on he as he lay . " it will be better for I to speak plain , " he say , with evident effort , " though it be hard work . you see , sir , this be not a trifle to I , whatever it may be to you . I be none of ' they man as can go make love first to one woman and then t ' another , and do not think it much odd which of them I take . what I feel for 's a different sort of ' love , such as I believe nobody can know much about but they as feel it and as have give it to th'ey . she be more nor everything else to I , all but my conscience and my good name . and if it be true what you have be say all along -- and if it be only be trifl and flirt as you call it , as will be put a end to by you go away -- why , then , I would wait , and hope she heart 'uld turn to I after all . I be loath to think you would speak false to I , and I will believe you word , however thing may look . " " you would be wrong Hetty more than I not to believe it , " say , almost violently , start up from the ottoman and move away . but he throw himself into a chair again directly , say , more feebly , " you seem to forget that , in suspect I , you be cast imputation upon she . " " Nay , sir , " say , in a calmer voice , as if he be half - relieved -- for he be too straightforward to make a distinction between a direct falsehood and a indirect one -- " Nay , sir , thing do not lie level between and you . you be act with you eye open , whatever you may do ; but how do you know what be be in she mind ? she be all but a child -- as any man with a conscience in he ought to feel bound to take care on . and whatever you may think , I know you have disturb she mind . I know she be be fix she heart on you , for there be a many thing clear to I now as I do not understand before . but you seem to make light of ' what she may feel -- you do not think of ' that . " " , , let I alone ! " yoArthu burst out impetuously ; " I feel it enough without you worry I . " he be aware of he indiscretion as soon as the word have escape he . " well , then , if you feel it , " Adam rejoin , eagerly ; " if you feel as you may ha's put false notion into she mind , and make she believe as you love she , when all the while you mean nothing , I 've this demand to make of you -- I be not speak for myself , but for she . I ask you t ' undeceive she before you go away . Y'are not go away for ever , and if you leave she behind with a notion in she head of ' you feel about she the same as she feel about you , she will be hanker after you , and the mischief may get worse . it may be a smart to she now , but it will save she pain I ' th ' end . I ask you to write a letter -- you may trust to my see as she get it . tell she the truth , and take blame to yourself for behaving as you ' no right to do to a young woman as be not you equal . I speak aplain , sir , but I can not speak any other way . there be nobody can take care o' Hetty in this thing but I . " " I can do what I think needful in the matter , " say , more and more irritate by mingled distress and perplexity , " without give promise to you . I shall take what measure I think proper . " " no , " say , in
in a abrupt decide tone , " that will not do . I must know what ground I be tread on . I must be safe as you have put a end to what ought never to 's be begin . I do not forget what be owe to you as a gentleman , but in this thing we be man and man , and I can not give up . " there be no answer for some moment . then yoArthu say , " I will see you to - morrow . I can bear no more now ; I be ill . " he rise as he speak , and reach he cap , as if intend to go . " you will not see she again ! " Adam exclaim , with a flash of recurring anger and suspicion , move towards the door and place he back against it . " either tell I she can never be my wife -- tell I you have be lie -- or else promise I what I have say . " , utter this alternative , stand like a terrible fate before , who have move forward a step or two , and now stop , faint , shaken , sick in mind and body . it seem long to both of they -- that inward struggle of 's -- before he say , feebly , " I promise ; let I go . " move away from the door and open it , but when reach the step , he stop again and lean against the door -post . " you be not well enough to walk alone , sir , " say . " take my arm again . " yoArthu make no answer , and presently walk on , follow . but , after a few step , he stand still again , and say , coldly , " I believe I must trouble you . it be get late now , and there may be a alarm set up about I at home . " give he arm , and they walk on without utter a word , till they come where the basket and the tool lay . " I must pick up the tool , sir , " say . " they be my brother 's . I doubt they will be rust . if you will please to wait a minute . " yoArthu stand still without speak , and no other word pass between they till they be at the side entrance , where he hope to get in without be see by any one . he say then , " thank you ; I need not trouble you any further . " " what time will it be conve 'ent for I to see you to - morrow , sir ? " say . " you may send I word that you be here at five o'clock , " say ; " not before . " " good - night , sir , " say . but he hear no reply ; yoArthu have turn into the house . the next do not pass a sleepless night ; he sleep long and well . for sleep come to the perplex -- if the perplex be only weary enough . but at seven he ring he bell and astonished Pym by declare he be go to get up , and must have breakfast bring to he at eight . " and see that my mare be saddle at half - past eight , and tell my grandfather when he be down that I be better this morning and be go for a ride . " he have be awake a hour , and could rest in bed no longer . in bed we yesterday be too oppressive : if a man can only get up , though it be but to whisle or to smoke , he have a present which offer some resistance to the past -- sensation which assert themselves against tyrannous memory . and if there be such a thing as take average of feeling , it would certainly be find that in the hunting and shoot seasons regret , self - reproach , and mortify pride weigh lighter on country gentleman than in late spring and summer . yoArthu feel that he should be more of a man on horseback . even the presence of , wait on he with the usual deference , be a reassurance to he after the scene of yesterday . for , with 's sensitiveness to opinion , the loss of 's respect be a shock to he self - contentment which suffuse he imagination with the sense that he have sunk in all eye -- as a sudden shock of fear from some real peril make a nervous woman afraid even to step , because all she perceptions be suffuse with a sense of danger . 's , as you know , be a loving nature . Deed of kindness be as easy to him as a bad habit : they be the common issue of he weakness and good quality , of he egoism and he sympathy . he do not like to witness pain , and he like to have grateful eye beam on he as the giver of pleasure . when he be a lad of seven , he one day kick down a old gardener 's pitcher of broth , from no motive but a kicking impulse , not reflec that it be the old man 's dinner ; but on learn that sad fact , he take he favourite pencil - case and a silver - haft knife out of he pocket and offer they as compensation . he have be the same Arthur ever since , try to make all offence forget in benefit . if there be any bitterness in he nature , it could
could only show itself against the man who refuse to be conciliate by he . and perhaps the time be come for some of that bitterness to rise . at the first moment , yoArthu have feel pure distress and self - reproach at discovering that 's happiness be involved in he relation to . if there have be a possibility of make tenfold amend -- if deeds of gift , or any other deed , could have restore 's contentment and regard for he as a benefactor , yoArthu would not only have execute they without hesitation , but would have feel bound all the more closely to , and would never have be weary of make retribution . but could receive no amend ; he suffering could not be cancel ; he respect and affection could not be recover by any prompt deed of atonement . he stand like a immovable obstacle against which no pressure could avail ; a embodiment of what most shrank from believe in -- the irrevocableness of he own wrongdoing . the word of scorn , the refusal to shake hand , the mastery assert over he in they last conversation in the Hermitage -- above all , the sense of have be knock down , to which a man do not very well reconcile himself , even under the most heroic circumstance -- press on he with a galling pain which be stronger than compunction . yoArthu would so gladly have persuade himself that he have do no harm ! and if no one have tell he the contrary , he could have persuade himself so much better . Nemesis can seldom forge a sword for herself out of we conscience -- out of the suffering we feel in the suffering we may have cause : there be rarely metal enough there to make a effective weapon . we moral sense learn the manners of good society and smile when other smile , but when some rude person give rough name to we action , she be apt to take part against we . and so it be with Arthur : 's judgament of he , 's grat words , disturb he self - soothe argument . not that yoArthu have be at ease before 's discovery . Struggles and resolve have transform themselves into compunction and anxiety . he be distress for 's sake , and distress for he own , that he must leave she behind . he have always , both in make and break resolution , look beyond he passion and see that it must speedily end in separation ; but he nature be too ardent and tender for he not to suffer at this parting ; and on 's account he be fill with uneasiness . he have find out the dream in which she be liive -- that she be to be a lady in silk and satin -- and when he have first talk to she about he go away , she have ask he tremblingly to let she go with he and be married . it be he painful knowledge of this which have give the most exasperating sting to 's reproach . he have say no word with the purpose of deceive she -- she vision be all spun by she own childish fancy -- but he be oblige to confess to himself that it be spun half out of he own action . and to increase the mischief , on this last evening he have not da to hint the truth to ; he have be oblige to soothe she with tender , hopeful word , lest he should throw she into violent distress . he feel the situation acutely , feel the sorrow of the dear thing in the present , and think with a darker anxiety of the tenacity which she feeling might have in the future . that be the one sharp point which press against he ; every other he could evade by hopeful self - persuasion . the whole thing have be secret ; the Poyser have not the shadow of a suspicion . no one , except , know anything of what have pass -- no one else be likely to know ; for have impress on Hetty that it would be fatal to betray , by word or look , that there have be the least intimacy between they ; and , who know half they secret , would rather help they to keep it than betray it . it be a unfortunate business altogether , but there be no use in make it worse than it be by imaginary exaggeration and foreboding of evil that might never come . the temporary sadness for be the worst consequence ; he resolutely turn away he eye from any bad consequence that be not demonstrably inevitable . but --but might have have the trouble in some other way if not in this . and perhaps hereafter he might be able to do a great deal for she and make up to she for all the tear she would she about he . she would owe the advantage of he care for she in future year to the sorrow she have incur now . so good come out of evil . be the beautiful arrangement of thing ! be you inclin to ask whether this can be the same Arthur who , two month ago , have that freshness of feeling , that delicate honour which shrink from wounding even a sentiment , and do not contemplate any more positive offence as possible for it ?-- who think that he own self - respect be a higher tribunal than any external opinion ? the same , I assure you , only under different condition . we deed determine we , as much as we determine we deed , and until we know what have be or will be the
the peculiar combination of outward with inward fact , which constitute a man 's critical action , it will be better not to think ourselves wise about he character . there be a terrible coercion in we deed , which may first turn the honest man into a deceiver and then reconcile he to the change , for this reason -- that the second wrong present itself to he in the guise of the only practicable right . the action which before commission have be see with that blend common sense and fresh untarnished feeling which be the healthy eye of the soul , be look at afterwards with the lens of apologetic ingenuity , through which all thing that man call beautiful and ugly be see to be make up of texture very much alike . adjust itself to a _fait accompli , and so do a individual character -- until the placid adjustment be disturb by a convulsive retribution . no man can escape this vitiat effect of a offence against he own sentiment of right , and the effect be the stronger in because of that very need of self - respect which , while he conscience be still at ease , be one of he best safeguard . self -accusation be too painful to he -- he could not face it . he must persuade himself that he have not be very much to blame ; he begin even to pity himself for the necessity he be under of deceive -- it be a course so oppose to the honesty of he own nature . but then , it be the only right thing to do . well , whatever have be amiss in he , he be miserable enough in consequence : miserable about ; miserable about this letter that he have promise to write , and that see at one moment to be a gross barbarity , at another perhaps the greatest kindness he could do to she . and across all this reflection would dart every now and then a sudden impulse of passionate defiance towards all consequence . he would carry away , and all other consideration might go to .... in this state of mind the four walls of he room make a intolerable prison to he ; they seem to hem in and press down upon he all the crowd of contradictory thought and conflict feeling , some of which would fly away in the open air . he have only a hour or two to make up he mind in , and he must get clear and calm . once on 's back , in the fresh air of that fine morning , he should be more master of the situation . the pretty creature arch she bay neck in the sunshine , and paw the gravel , and tremble with pleasure when she master strok she nose , and pat she , and talk to she even in a more caressing tone than usual . he love she the better because she know nothing of he secret . but be quite as well acquaint with she master 's mental state as many other of she sex with the mental condition of the nice young gentleman towards whom they heart be in a state of fluttering expectation . yoArthu canter for five mile beyond the chase , till he be at the foot of a hill where there be no hedge or tree to hem in the road . then he throw the bridle on 's neck and prepare to make up he mind . know that they meeting yesterday must be the last before yoArthu go away -- there be no possibility of they contrive another without exciting suspicion -- and she be like a frightened child , unable to think of anything , only able to cry at the mention of parting , and then put she face up to have the tear kiss away . he could do nothing but comfort she , and lull she into dream on . a letter would be a dreadfully abrupt way of awaken she ! yet there be truth in what say -- that it would save she from a lengthen delusion , which might be worse than a sharp immediate pain . and it be the only way of satisfying , who must be satisfied , for more reason than one . if he could have see she again ! but that be impossible ; there be such a thorny hedge of hindrance between they , and a imprudence would be fatal . and yet , if he could see she again , what good would it do ? only cause he to suffer more from the sight of she distress and the remembrance of it . away from he she be surround by all the motives to self - control . a sudden dread here fall like a shadow across he imagination -- the dread lest she should do something violent in she grief ; and close upon that dread come another , which deepen the shadow . but he shook they off with the force of youth and hope . what be the ground for paint the future in that dark way ? it be just as likely to be the reverse . yoArthu tell himself he do not deserve that thing should turn out badly . he have never mean beforehand to do anything he conscience disapprove ; he have be lead on by circumstance . there be a sort of implicit confidence in he that he be really such a good fellow at bottom , Providence would not treat he harshly . at all event , he could not help what would come now : all he could do be to take what seem the best course at the present moment . and he persuade himself that that course be to make the way open
open between and . she heart might really turn to , as he say , after a while ; and in that case there would have be no great harm do , since it be still 's ardent wish to make she he wife . to be sure , be deceive -- deceive in a way that would have resent as a deep wrong if it have be practise on himself . that be a reflection that mar the consoling prospect . be cheek even burn in mingled shame and irritation at the thought . but what could a man do in such a dilemma ? he be bound in honou to say no word that could injure : he first duty be to guard she . he would never have tell or act a lie on he own account . ! what a miserable fool he be to have bring himself into such a dilemma ; and yet , if ever a man have excuse , he have . ( Pity that consequence be determine not by excuse but by action ! ) well , the letter must be write ; it be the only means that promise a solution of the difficulty . the tear come into 's eye as he think of read it ; but it would be almost as hard for he to write it ; he be not do anything easy to himself ; and this last thought help he to arrive at a conclusion . he could never deliberately have take a step which inflict pain on another and leave himself at ease . even a movement of jealousy at the thought of give up to go to convince he that he be make a sacrifice . when once he have come to this conclusion , he turn round and set off home again in a canter . the letter should be write the first thing , and the rest of the day would be fill up with other business : he should have no time to look behind he . happily , and be come to dinner , and by twelve o'clock the next day he should have leave the chase mile behind he . there be some security in this constant occupation against a uncontrollable impulse seize he to rush to and thrust into she hand some mad proposition that would undue everything . faster and faster go the sensitive , at every slight sign from she rider , till the canter have pass into a swift gallop . " I think they say th's young mester war take ill last night , " say sour old , the groom , at dinner - time in the servants 's hall . " he be be ridin ' fit to split the mare I ' two this forenoon . " " that be happen one of ' the symptim , , " say the facetious coachman . " then I wish he war let blood for 't , that be all , " say , grimly . have be early at the chase to know how yoArthu be , and have be relieve from all anxiety about the effect of he blow by learn that he be go out for a ride . at five o'clock he be punctually there again , and send up word of he arrival . in a few minute come down with a letter in he hand and give it to , say that the captain be too busy to see he , and have write everything he have to say . the letter be direct to , but he go out of door again before open it . it contain a seal enclosure direct to . on the inside of the cover Adam read : " in the enclose letter I have write everything you wish . I leave it to you to decide whether you will be do best to deliver it to or to return it to I . ask yourself once more whether you be not take a measure which may pain she more than mere silence . " there be no need for we see each other again now . we shall meet with better feeling some month hence . " " " perhaps he be I ' th ' right on 't not to see I , " think . " it be no use meeting to say more hard word , and it be no use meeting to shake hand and say we be friend again . we be not friend , an' it be better not to pretend it . I know forgiveness be a man 's duty , but , to my thinking , that can only mean as you be to give up all thought of ' take revenge : it can never mean as you be t ' have you old feeling back again , for that be not possible . he be not the same man to I , and I can not feel the same towards he . God help I ! I do not know whether I feel the same towards anybody : I seem as if I have be measure my work from a false line , and have get it all to measure over again . " but the question about deliver the letter to soon absorb 's thought . yoArthu have procure some relief to himself by throw the decision on Adam with a warning ; and , who be not give to hesitation , hesitat here . he determine to feel he way -- to ascertain as well as he could what be 's state of mind before he decide on deliver the letter . the Delivery of the the next join the Poyser on they way out of church , hope for a invitation to go home with they . he have the letter in he pocket , and
and be anxious to have a opportunity of talk to alone . he could not see she face at church , for she have change she seat , and when he come up to she to shake hand , she manner be doubtful and constrain . he expect this , for it be the first time she have meet he since she have be aware that he have see she with in the . " come , you will go on with we , , " say when they reach the turning ; and as soon as they be in the field venture to offer he arm to . the child soon give they a opportunity of linger behind a little , and then say : " will you contrive for I to walk out in the garden a bit with you this evening , if it keep fine , Hetty ? I have something partic'lar to talk to you about . " say , " very well . " she be really as anxious as be that she should have some private talk with he . she wonder what he think of she and . he must have see they kiss , she know , but she have no conception of the scene that have take place between and . she first feeling have be that would be very angry with she , and perhaps would tell she aunt and uncle , but it never enter she mind that he would dare to say anything to captain . it be a relief to she that he behave so kindly to she to - day , and want to speak to she alone , for she have tremble when she find he be go home with they lest he should mean " to tell . " but , now he want to talk to she by herself , she should learn what he think and what he mean to do . she feel a certain confidence that she could persuade he not to do anything she do not want he to do ; she could perhaps even make he believe that she do not care for ; and as long as think there be any hope of she have he , he would do just what she like , she know . besides , she must go on seem to encourage , lest she uncle and aunt should be angry and suspect she of have some secret lover . 's little brain be busy with this combination as she hang on 's arm and say " yes " or " no " to some slight observation of he about the many hawthorn - berry there would be for the bird this next winter , and the low - hang cloud that would hardly hold up till morning . and when they rejoin she aunt and uncle , she could pursue she thought without interruption , for hold that though a young man might like to have the woman he be court on he arm , he would nevertheless be glad of a little reasonable talk about business the while ; and , for he own part , he be curiious to heal the most recent news about the . so , through the rest of the walk , he claim 's conversation for himself , and lay she small plot and imagine she little scene of cunning blandishment , as she walk along by the hedgerow on honest 's arm , quite as well as if she have be a elegantly clad coquette alone in she boudoir . for if a country beauty in clumsy sho be only shallow - hear enough , it be astonish how closely she mental process may resemble those of a lady in society and crinoline , who apply she refin intellect to the problem of commit indiscretion without compromise herself . perhaps the resemblance be not much the less because feel very unhappy all the while . the parting with be a double pain to her-- mingle with the tumult of passion and vanity there be a dim undefined fear that the future might shape itself in some way quite unlike she dream . she cling to the comforting hopeful word yoArthu have utter in they last meeting -- " I shall come again at , and then we will see what can be do . " she cling to the belief that he be so fond of she , he would never be happy without she ; and she still hug she secret -- that a great gentleman love she -- with gratified pride , as a superiority over all the girl she know . but the uncertainty of the future , the possibility to which she could give no shape , begin to press upon she like the invisible weight of air ; she be alone on she little island of dream , and all around she be the dark unknown water where be gone . she could gather no elation of spirit now by look forward , but only by look backward to build confidence on past word and caress . but occasionally , since evening , she dim anxiety have be almost lose behind the more definite fear that might betray what he know to she uncle and aunt , and he sudden proposition to talk with she alone have set she thought to work in a new way . she be eager not to lose this evening 's opportunity ; and after tea , when the boy be go into the and beg to go with they , Hetty say , with a alacrity that surprise , " I will go with she , . " it do not seem at all surprising that say he would go too , and soon he and be leave alone together on the walk by the filbert - tree , while the boy
boy be busy elsewhere gather the large unripe nut to play at " cob - nut " with , and be watch they with a puppylike air of contemplation . it be but a short time -- hardly two month -- since have have he mind fill with delicious hope as he stand by 's side un this garden . the remembrance of that scene have often be with he since evening : the sunlight through the apple - tree bough , the red bunch , 's sweet blush . it come importunately now , on this sad evening , with the low - hang cloud , but he try to suppress it , lest some emotion should impel he to say more than be needful for 's sake . " after what I see on night , , " he begin , " you will not think I make too free in what I be go to say . if you be be court by any man as 'uld make you he wife , and I would know you be fond of he and mean to have he , I should have no right to speak a word to you about it ; but when I see you be be make love to by a gentleman as can never marry you , and do to think of ' marry you , I feel bound t ' interfere for you . I can not speak about it to they as be I ' the place of ' you parent , for that might bring worse trouble than 's needful . " 's word relieve one of 's fear , but they also carry a meaning which sicken she with a strengthen foreboding . she be pale and trembl , and yet she would have angrily contradict , if she have da to betray she feeling . but she be silent . " you be so young , you know , , " he go on , almost tenderly , " and yg have not see much of ' what go on in the world . it be right for I to do what I can to save you from get into trouble for want of ' you know where you be be lead to . if anybody beside I know what I know about you meeting a gentleman and have fine present from he , they would speak light on you , and you would lose you character . and besides that , you will have to suffer in you feeling , wi' give you love to a man as can never marry you , so as he might take care of you all you life . " Adam pause and look at , who be pluck the leave from the filbert - tree and tear they up in she hand . she little plan and preconcert speech have all forsaken she , like a ill - learnt lesson , under the terrible agitation produce by 's word . there be a cruel force in they calm certainty which threaten to grapple and crush she flimsy hope and fancie . she want to resist they -- she want to throw they off with angry contradiction -- but the determination to conceal what she feel still govern she . it be nothing more than a blind prompting now , for she be unable to calculate the effect of she word . " you have no right to say as I love he , " she say , faintly , but impetuously , pluck another rough leaf and tear it up . she be very beautiful in she paleness and agitation , with she dark childish eye dilate and she breath shorter than usual . 's heart year over she as he look at she . ah , if he could but comfort she , and soothe she , and save she from this pain ; if he have but some sort of strength that would enable he to rescue she poor trouble mind , as he would have rescue she body in the face of all danger ! " I doubt it must be so , , " he say , tenderly ; " for I can to believe you would let any man kiss you by yourselves , and give you a gold box with he hair , and go a - walk I ' the to meet he , if you do to love he . I be not blame you , for I know it 'uld begin by little and little , till at last you would not be able to throw it off . it be he I blame for steal you love I ' that way , when he know he could never make you the right amend . he be be trifl with you , and make a plaything of you , and car nothing about you as a man ought to care . " " yes , he do care for I ; I know better nor you , " Hetty burst out . everything be forget but the pain and anger she feel at 's word . " , , " say , " if he would care for you rightly , he would never ha ' behave so . he tell I himself he mean nothing by he kissing and present , and he want to make I believe as you think light of th'ey too . but I know better nor that . I can not help think as you have be trust to he love you well enough to marry you , for all he be a gentleman . and that be why I must speak to you about it , Hetty , for fear you should be deceive yourself . it be never enter he head the thought of ' marry you . " " how do you know ?
? how durst you say so ? " say , pause in she walk and trembling . the terrible decision of 's tone shook she with fear . she have no presence of mind leave for the reflection that yoArthu would have he reason for not tell the truth to . she word and look be enough to determine : he must give she the letter . " perhaps you can not believe I , Hetty , because you think too well of he -- because you think he love you better than he do . but I have get a letter I ' my pocket , as he write himself for I to give you . I have not read the letter , but he say he be tell you the truth in it . but before I give you the letter , consider , , and do not let it take too much hold on you . it would na ha ' be good for you if he would want to do such a mad thing as marry you : it 'uld ha ' lead to no happiness I ' th ' end . " say nothing ; she feel a revival of hope at the mention of a letter which have not read . there would be something quite different in it from what he think . take out the letter , but he hold it in he hand still , while he say , in a tone of tender entreaty , " do not you bear I ill will , , because I be the means of ' bring you this pain . know I would ha ' borne a good deal worse for the sake of ' spare it you . and think -- there be nobody but I know about this , and I will take care of you as if I be you brother . you be the same as ever to I , for I do not believe you have do any wrong knowingly . " Hetty have lay she hand on the letter , but do not loose it till he have do speak . she take no notice of what he say -- she have not listen ; but when he loose the letter , she put it into she pocket , without open it , and then begin to walk more quickly , as if she want to go in . " you be in the right not to read it just yet , " say . " read it when you be by yourself . but stay out a little bit longer , and let we call the child : you look so white and ill , you aunt may take notice of it . " hear the warning . it recall to she the necessity of rally she native power of concealment , which have half give way under the shock of 's word . and she have the letter in she pocket : she be sure there be comfort in that letter in spite of . she run to find , and soon reappear with recover colour , lead , who be make a sour face because she have be oblige to throw away a unripe apple that she have set she small tooth in . " Hegh , , " say , " come and ride on my shoulder -- ever so high -- you will touch the top of ' the tree . " what little child ever refuse to be comfort by that glorious sense of be seize strongly and swing upward ? I do not believe cry when the eagle carry he away , and perhaps deposit he on 's shoulder at the end . smile down complacently from she secure height , and pleasant be the sight to the mother 's eye , as she stand at the house door and see come with he small burden . " bless you sweet face , my pet , " she say , the mother 's strong love fill she keen eye with mildness , as lean forward and put out she arm . she have no eye for at that moment , and only say , without look at she , " you go and draw some ale , Hetty ; the gell be both at the cheese . " after the ale have be draw and she uncle 's pipe lighted , there be to be take to bed , and bring down again in she night - gow because she would cry instead of go to sleep . then there be supper to be get ready , and must be continually in the way to give help . stay till he know expect he to go , engage she and she husband in talk as constantly as he could , for the sake of leave Hetty more at ease . he linger , because he want to see she safely through that evening , and he be delighted to find how much self - command she show . he know she have not have time to read the letter , but he do not know she be buoy up by a secret hope that the letter would contradict everything he have say . it be hard work for he to leave she -- hard to think that he should not know for day how she be bear she trouble . but he must go at last , and all he could do be to press she hand gently as he say " good - bye , " and hope she would take that as a sign that if he love could ever be a refuge for she , it be there the same as ever . how busy he thought be , as he walk home , in devising pitying excuse for she folly , in refer all she weakness to
to the sweet lovingness of she nature , in blame , with less and less inclination to admit that he conduct might be extenuate too ! he exasperation at 's suffering -- and also at the sense that she be possibly thrust for ever out of he own reach -- deafen he to any plea for the miscalled friend who have wrotch this misery . be a clear- sighted , fair - minded man -- a fine fellow , indeed , morally as well as physically . but if the be ever in love and jealous , he be at that moment not perfectly magnanimous . and I can not pretend that , in these painful day , feel nothing but righteous indignation and loving pity . he be bitterly jealous , and in proportion as he love make he indulgent in he judgment of , the bitterness find a vent in he feeling towards . " she head be allays likely to be turn , " he think , " when a gentleman , with he fine manners , and fine clothes , and he white hand , and that way of ' talking gentlefolk have , come about she , make up to she in a bold way , as a man could not do that be only she equal ; and it be much if she will ever like a common man now . " he could not help draw he own hand out of he pocket and look at they -- at the hard palm and the broken finger - nail . " I be a roughish fellow , altogether ; I do not know , now I come to think o not , what there be much for a woman to like about I ; and yet I might ha ' get another wife easy enough , if I have not set my heart on she . but it be little matter what other woman think about I , if she can not love I . she might ha's love I , perhaps , as likely as any other man -- there be nobody hereabout as I be afraid of , if he have not come between we ; but now I shall belike be hateful to she because I be so different to he . and yet there be no telling -- she may turn round the other way , when she find he be make light of she all the while . she may come to feel the vally of a man as 'uld be thankful to be bound to she all he life . but I must put up with it whichever way it be -- I have only to be thankful it be be no worse . I be not th ' only man that have get to do without much happiness I ' this life . there be many a good bit of ' work do with a bad heart . it be 's , and that be enough for we : we should not know better how thing ought to be than he do , I reckon , if we be to spend we life I ' puzzling . but it 'uld ha ' go near to spoil my work for I , if I would see she bring to sorrow and shame , and through the man as I have always be proud to think on . I have be spa that , I 've no right to grumble . when a man 's get he limb whole , he can bear a smart cut or two . " as be get over a stile at this point in he reflection , he perceive a man walk along the field before he . he know it be , return from a evening preach , and make haste to overtake he . " I think thee ' dst be at home before I , " he say , as turn round to wait for he , " for I be later than usual to - night . " " well , I be later too , for I get into talk , after meeting , with , who have lately profess himself in a state of perfection , and I ' a question to ask he about he experience . it be one of ' they subject that lead you further than y's expect -- they do not lie along the straight road . " they walk along together in silence two or three minute . be not inclin to enter into the subtlety of religious experience , but he be inclin to interchange a word or two of brotherly affection and confidence with . that be a rare impulse in he , much as the brother love each other . they hardly ever speak of personal matter , or utter more than a allusion to they family trouble . be by nature reserve in all matters of feeling , and feel a certain timidity towards he more practical brother . " Seth , lad , " say , put he arm on he brother 's shoulder , " hast hear anything from since she go away ? " " yes , " say . " she tell I I might write she word after a while , how we go on , and how mother bear up under she trouble . so I write to she a fortnight ago , and tell she about thee have a new employment , and how mother be more contente ; and last , when I call at the post at , I find a letter from she . I think thee ' dst perhaps like to read it , but I do to say anything about it because thee 'st see so full of other thing . it be quite easy t ' read -- she write wonderful for a woman .
. " have draw the letter from he pocket and hold it out to , who say , as he take it , " aye , lad , I have get a tough load to carry just now -- thee must to take it ill if I be a bit silenter and crustier nor usual . trouble do to make I care the less for thee . I know we shall stick together to the last . " " I take nuy ill of ' thee , . I know well enough what it mean if the e't a bit short wi' I now and then . " " there be mother open the door to look out for we , " say , as they mount the slope . " she be be sit I ' the dark as usual . well , , well , be glad to see I ? " go in again quickly and light a candle , for she have hear the welcome rustling of footstep on the grass , before Gyp's joyful bark . " Eh , my lad ! ' hour war ne 'er so long sin' I war bear as they and be this bless night . what can ye both ha ' be doin ' till this time ? " " Thee shouldstna sit I ' the dark , mother , " say ; " that make the time seem longer . " " Eh , what be I to do wi' burnin ' candle of a , when there be on 'y I a ' it be sin to do a bit of ' knittin ' ? the daylight 's long enough for I to stare I ' the booke as I can to read . it 'uld be a fine way of ' shortenin ' the time , to make it waste the good candle . but which on you be for ha'in 's supper ? ye mun ayther be clemmed or full , I should think , seein ' what time of ' night it be . " " I be hungry , mother , " say , seat himself at the little table , which have be spread ever since it be light . " I have have my supper , " say . " here , , " he add , take some cold potato from the table and rub the rough grey head that look up towards he . " Thee needstto be gi'in ' th ' dog , " say ; " I and feed he well a'ready . I be not like to forget he , I reckon , when he be all of ' thee I can get sight on . " " come , then , , " say , " we will go to bed . good - night , mother ; I be very tired . " " what ail he , dost know ? " say to , when be go upstairs . " he be like as if he be strike for death this day or two -- he be so cast down . I find he I ' the shop this forenoon , arter thee wast go , a -sittin ' a ' doin' nothin ' -- not so much as a booke afore he . " " he be a deal of ' work upon he just now , mother , " say , " and I think he be a bit trouble in he mind . do not you take notice of it , because it hurt he when you do . be as kind to he as you can , mother , and do not say anything to vex he . " " Eh , what dost talk of ' my vexin ' he ? a ' what be I like to be but kind ? I will ma ' he a kettle - cake for breakfast I ' the mornin '. " , meanwhile , be read 's letter by the light of he dip candle . -- you letter lay three day beyond my knowing of it at the post , for I have not money enough by I to pay the carriage , this be a time of great need and sickness here , with the rains that have fall , as if the window of heaven be open again ; and to lay by money , from day to day , in such a time , when there be so many in present need of all thing , would be a want of trust like the lay up of the manna . I speak of this , because I would not have you think I slow to answer , or that I have small joy in you rejoicing at the worldly good that have befall you brother . the honour and love you bear he be nothing but meet , for have give he great gift , and he use they as the patriarch do , who , when he be exalt to a place of power and trust , yet year with tenderness towards he parent and he younger brother . " my heart be knit to you aged mother since it be grant I to be near she in the day of trouble . speak to she of I , and tell she I often bear she in my thought at evening time , when I be sit in the dim light as I do with she , and we hold one another 's hand , and I speak the word of comfort that be give to I . ah , that be a blessed time , be not it , , when the outward light be fade , and the body be a little weary with its work and its labour . then the inward light shine the brighter , and we have a deeper sense
sense of resting on the divine strength . I sit on my chair in the dark room and close my eye , and it be as if I be out of the body and could feel no want for evermore . for then , the very hardship , and the sorrow , and the blindness , and the sin I have beheld and be ready to weep over --yea , all the anguish of the child of man , which sometimes wrap I round like sudden darkness -- I can bear with a willing pain , as if I be share the Redeemer 's cross . for I feel it , I feel it -- infinite love be suffer too -- yea , in the fulness of knowledge it suffer , it yearn , it mourn ; and that be a blind self - seek which want to be free from the sorrow wherewith the whole creation groaneth and travaileth . surely it be not true blessedness to be free from sorrow , while there be sorrow and sin in the world : sorrow be then a part of love , and love do not seek to throw it off . it be not the spirit only that tell I this -- I see it in the whole work and word of the . be there not plead in heaven ? be not the man of there in that crucify body wherewith he ascend ? and be he not one with the infinite love itself -- as we love be one with we sorrow ? " these thought have be much borne in on I of late , and I have see with new clearness the meaning of those word , ' if any man love I , let he take up my cross . ' I have hear this enlarge on as if it mean the trouble and persecution we bring on ourselves by confess . but surely that be a narrow thought . the true cross of the Redeemer be the sin and sorrow of this world -- that be what lay heavy on he heart -- and that be the cross we shall share with he , that be the cup we must drink of with he , if we would have any part in that divine love which be one with he sorrow . " in my outward lot , which you ask about , I have all thing and abound . I have have constant work in the mill , though some of the other hand have be turn off for a time , and my body be greatly strengthen , so that I feel little weariness after long walking and speak . what you say about stay in you own country with you mother and brother show I that you have a true guidance ; you lot be appoint there by a clear show , and to seek a greater blessing elsewhere would be like lay a false offering on the altar and expect the fire from heaven to kindle it . my work and my joy be here among the hill , and I sometimes think I cling too much to my life among the people here , and should be rebellious if I be call away . " I be thankful for you tiding about the dear friend at the , for though I send they a letter , by my aunt 's desire , after I come back from my sojourn among they , I have have no word from they . my aunt have not the pen of a ready writer , and the work of the house be sufficient for the day , for she be weak in body . my heart cleave to she and she child as the nearest of all to I in the flesh -- yea , and to all in that house . I be carry away to they continually in my sleep , and often in the midst of work , and even of speech , the thought of they be borne in on I as if they be in need and trouble , which yet be dark to I . there may be some lead here ; but I wait to be teach . you say they be all well . " we shall see each other again in the body , I trust , though , it may be , not for a long while ; for the breth and sister at Leeds be desirous to have I for a short space among they , when I have a door open I again to leave . " farewell , dear brother -- and yet not farewell . for those child of whom it have be grant to see each other face to face , and to hold communion together , and to feel the same spirit work in both can never more be sunder though the hill may lie between . for they soul be enlarge for evermore by that union , and they bear one another about in they thought continually as it be a new strength .-- you faithful sister and fellow - worker in , " . " " I have not skill to write the word so small as you do and my pen move slow . and so I be straiten , and say but little of what be in my mind . greet you mother for I with a kiss . she ask I to kiss she twice when we part . " have refold the letter , and be sit meditatively with he head rest on he arm at the head of the bed , when come upstairs . " read the letter ? " say . " yes , " say . " I do not know what I should ha ' think of she and she letter if I would never see she
she : I daresay I should ha ' think a preach woman hateful . but she be one as make everything seem right she say and do , and I seem to see she and hear she speak when I read the letter . it be wonderful how I remember she look and she voice . she would make thee rare and happy , Seth ; she be just the woman for thee . " " it be no use think of ' that , " say , despondingly . " she speak so firm , and she be not the woman to say one thing and mean another . " " , but she feeling may grow different . a woman may get to love by degree -- the best fire dosto flare up the soonest . I would have thee go and see she by and by : I would make it convenient for thee to be away three or four day , and it 'uld be no walk for thee -- only between twenty and thirty mile . " " I should like to see she again , whether or no , if she would to be displease with I for go , " say . " she will be none displease , " say emphatically , get up and throw off he coat . " it might be a great happiness to we all if she would have thee , for mother took to she so wonderful and seem so contente to be with she . " " aye , " say , rather timidly , " and 's fond of ' Hetty too ; she think a deal about she . " Adam make no reply to that , and no other word but " good - night " pass between they . in 's bed- it be no longer light enough to go to be without a candle , even in 's early household , and carry one with she as she go up at last to she bedroom soon after be gone , and bolt the door behind she . now she would read she letter . it must -- it must have comfort in it . how be to know the truth ? it be always likely he should say what he do say . she set down the candle and take out the letter . it have a faint scent of rose , which make she feel as if yoArthu be close to she . she put it to she lip , and a rush of remember sensation for a moment or two swept away all fear . but she heart begin to flutter strangely , and she hand to tremble as she break the seal . she read slowly ; it be not easy for she to read a gentleman 's handwriting , though yoArthu have take pain to write plainly . " Dearest HETTy -- I have speak truly when I have say that I love you , and I shall never forget we love . I shall be you true friend as long as life last , and I hope to prove this to you in many way . if I say anything to pain you in this letter , do not believe it be for want of love and tenderness towards you , for there be nothing I would not do for you , if I know it to be really for you happiness . I can not bear to think of my little Hetty shed tear when I be not there to kiss they away ; and if I follow only my own inclination , I should be with she at this moment instead of writing . it be very hard for I to part from she -- harder still for I to write word which may seem unkind , though they spre from the truest kindness . " dear , dear , sweet as we love have be to I , sweet as it would be to I for you to love I always , I feel that it would have be better for we both if we have never have that happiness , and that it be my duty to ask you to love I and care for I as little as you can . the fault have all be mine , for though I have be unable to resist the long to be near you , I have feel all the while that you affection for I might cause you grief . I ought to have resist my feeling . I should have do so , if I have be a better fellow than I be ; but now , since the past can not be alte , I be bound to save you from any evil that I have power to prevent . and I feel it would be a great evil for you if you affections continue so fix on I that you could think of no other man who might be able to make you happier by he love than I ever can , and if you continue to look towards something in the future which can not possibly happen . for , dear , if I be to do what you one day spoke of , and make you my wife , I should do what you yourself would come to feel be for you misery instead of you welfare . I know you can never be happy except by marry a man in you own station ; and if I be to marry you now , I should only be add to any wrong I have do , besides offending against my duty in the other relation of life . you know nothing , dear , of the world in which I must always live , and you would soon begin to dislike I , because there would be
be so little in which we should be alike . " and since I can not marry you , we must part -- we must try not to feel like lover any more . I be miserable while I say this , but nothing else can be . be angry with I , my sweet one , I deserve it ; but do not believe that I shall not always care for you -- always be grateful to you -- always remember my Hetty ; and if any trouble should come that we do not now foresee , trust in I to do everything that lie in my power . " I have tell you where you be to direct a letter to , if you want to write , but I put it down below lest you should have forget . do not write unless there be something I can really do for you ; for , dear Hetty , we must try to think of each other as little as we can . forgive I , and try to forget everything about I , except that I shall be , as long as I live , you affectionate friend , " . " have read this letter ; and when she look up from it there be the reflection of a blanch face in the old dim glass -- a white marble face with rounded childish form , but with something sadder than a child 's pain in it . Hetty do not see the face -- she see nothing -- she only feel that she be cold and sick and trembl . the letter shook and rust in she hand . she lay it down . it be a horrible sensation -- this cold and trembl . it sweep away the very idea that produce it , and get up to reach a warm cloak from she clothes - press , wrap it round she , and sit as if she be think of nothing but get warm . presently she take up the letter with a firmer hand , and begin to read it through again . the tear come this time -- great rushing tear that blind she and blotch the paper . she feel nothing but that be cruel -- cruel to write so , cruel not to marry she . reason why he could not marry she have no existence for she mind ; how could she believe in any misery that could come to she from the fulfilment of all she have be longe for and dream of ? she have not the idea that could make up the notion of that misery . as she throw down the letter again , she catch sight of she face in the glass ; it be redden now , and wet with tear ; it be almost like a companion that she might complain to -- that would pity she . she lean forward on she elbow , and look into those dark overflooding eye and at the quivering mouth , and see how the tear come thicker and thicker , and how the mouth become convulse with sob . the shattering of all she little dream - world , the crush blow on she new - born passion , afflict she pleasure - crave nature with a overpowering pain that annihilate all impulse to resistance , and suspend she anger . she sit sobbing till the candle go out , and then , weary , ach , stupefy with crying , throw herself on the bed without undressing and go to sleep . there be a feeble dawn in the room when Hetty awoke , a little after four o'clock , with a sense of dull misery , the cause of which break upon she gradually as she begin to discern the object round she in the dim light . and then come the frightening think that she have to conceal she misery as well as to bear it , in this dreary daylight that be come . she could lie no longer . she get up and go towards the table : there lay the letter . she open she treasure - drawer : there lay the ear - ring and the locket -- the sign of all she short happiness -- the sign of the lifelong dreariness that be to follow it . look at the little trinket which she have once eye and finger so fondly as the earnest of she future paradise of finery , she liv back in the moment when they have be give to she with such tender caress , such strangely pretty word , such glowing look , which fill she with a bewilder delicious surprise -- they be so much sweeter than she have think anything could be . and the who have speak to she and look at she in this way , who be present with she now -- whose arm she feel round she , he cheek against hers , he very breath upon she -- be the cruel , cruel who have write that letter , that letter which she snatch and crush and then open again , that she might read it once more . the half - benumb mental condition which be the effect of the last night 's violent crying make it necessary to she to look again and see if she wretch thought be actually true -- if the letter be really so cruel . she have to hold it close to the window , else she could not have read it by the faint light . yes ! it be worse -- it be more cruel . she crush it up again in anger . she hate the writer of that letter -- hate he for the very reason that she hang upon he with all she love -- all the girlish passion and vanity that
that make up she love . she have no tear this morning . she have wept they all away last night , and now she feel that dry - eyed morning misery , which be worse than the first shock because it have the future in it as well as the present . every morning to come , as far as she imagination could stretch , she would have to get up and feel that the day would have no joy for she . for there be no despair so absolute as that which come with the first moment of we first great sorrow , when we have not yet know what it be to have suffer and be heale , to have despaired and to have recover hope . as begin languidly to take off the clothes she have wear all the night , that she might wash herself and brush she hair , she have a sickening sense that she life would go on in this way . she should always be do thing she have no pleasure in , get up to the old task of work , see people she care nothing about , go to church , and to , and to tea with , and carry no happy thought with she . for she short poisonous delights have spoil for ever all the little joy that have once make the sweetness of she life -- the new frock ready for , the party at 's at wake , the beaux that she would say " no " to for a long while , and the prospect of the wedding that be to come at last when she would have a silk gown and a great many clothes all at once . these thing be all flat and dreary to she now ; everything would be a weariness , and she would carry about for ever a hopeless thirst and long . she pause in the midst of she languid undressing and lean against the dark old clothes - press . she neck and arm be bear , she hair hang down in delicate ring -- and they be just as beautiful as they be that night two month ago , when she walk up and down this bed - chamber glow with vanity and hope . she be not think of she neck and arm now ; even she own beauty be indifferent to she . she eye wander sadly over the dull old chamber , and then look out vacantly towards the grow dawn . do a remembrance of come across she mind ? of she forebod words , which have make she angry ? of 's affectionate entreaty to think of she as a friend in trouble ? no , the impression have be too slight to recur . any affection or comfort could have give she would have be as indifferent to Hetty this morning as everything else be except she bruised passion . she be only think she could never stay here and go on with the old life -- she could better bear something quite new than sink back into the old every day round . she would like to run away that very morning , and never see any of the old face again . but 's be not a nature to face difficulty -- to dare to loose she hold on the familiar and rush blindly on some unknown condition . hers be a luxurious and vain nature -- not a passionate one -- and if she be ever to take any violent measure , she must be urge to it by the desperation of terror . there be not much room for she thought to travel in the narrow circle of she imagination , and she soon fix on the one thing she would do to get away from she old life : she would ask she uncle to let she go to be a lady 's maid . 's maid would help she to get a situation , if she krow have she uncle 's leave . when she have think of this , she fasten up she hair and begin to wash : it see more possible to she to go downstairs and try to behave as usual . she would ask she uncle this very day . on 's blooming health it would take a great deal of such mental suffering as hers to leave any deep impress ; and when she be dress as neatly as usual in she work - dress , with she hair tuck up under she little cap , a indifferent observer would have be more strike with the young roundness of she cheek and neck and the darkness of she eye and eyelash than with any sign of sadness about she . but when she take up the crush letter and put it in she drawer , that she might lock it out of sight , hard smarting tear , have no relief in they as the great drop have that fell last night , force they way into she eye . she wip they away quickly : she must not cry in the day - time . nobody should find out how miserable she be , nobody should know she be disappointed about anything ; and the thought that the eye of she aunt and uncle would be upon she give she the self - command which often accompany a great dread . for look out from she secret misery towards the possibility of they ever know what have happen , as the sick and weary prisoner might think of the possible pillory . they would think she conduct shameful , and shame be torture . that be poor little 's conscience . so she lock up she drawer and go away to she early work . in the evening , when be smoke he pipe ,
, and he good - nature be therefore at its superlative moment , seize the opportunity of she aunt 's absence to say , " uncle , I wish you would let I go for a lady 's maid . " take the pipe from he mouth and look at in mild surprise for some moment . she be sew , and go on with she work industriously . " why , what be put that into you head , my wench ? " he say at last , after he have give one conservative puff . " I should like it -- I should like it better than farm - work . " " Nay , nay ; you fancy so because you don to know it , my wench . it would not be half so good for you health , nor for you luck i ' life . I would like you to stay wi' we till you have get a good husband : you be my own niece , and I would not have you go to service , though it be a gentleman 's house , as long as I have get a home for you . " pause , and puff away at he pipe . " I like the needlework , " say , " and I should get good wage . " " have you aunt be a bit sharp wi' you ? " say , not notice 's further argument . " you mustna mind that , my wench -- she do it for you good . she wish you well ; an' there be not many aunt as be no kin to you 'uld ha ' do by you as she have . " " no , it be not my aunt , " say , " but I should like the work better . " " it be all very well for you to learn the work a bit -- an' I hageve my consent to that fast enough , sin' be willing to teach you . for if anything be t ' happen , it be well to know how to turn you hand to different sort of ' thing . but I niver mean you to go to service , my wench ; my family 's eat they own bread and cheese as fur back as anybody know , han na they , ? you would to like you grand - child to take wage ? " " - a - y , " say old , with a elongation of the word , mean to make it bitter as well as negative , while he lean forward and look down on the floor . " but the wench take arter she mother . I would hard work t ' hould she in , a ' she marry I ' spite of ' I -- a feller wig on 'y two head of ' stock when there should ha ' be ten on 's farm -- she might well die of ' th ' inflammation afore she war thirty . " it be seldom the old man make so long a speech , but he son 's question have fall like a bit of dry fuel on the ember of a long unextinguished resentment , which have always make the grandfather more indifferent to than to he son 's child . she mother 's fortune have be spend by that good - for - nuy , and have 's blood in she vein . " poor thing , poor thing ! " say the younger , who be sorry to have provoke this retrospective harshness . " she would but bad luck . but have get as good a chance o' get a solid , sober husband as any gell I ' this country . " after throw out this pregnant hint , recur to he pipe and he silence , look at to see if she do not give some sign of have renounce she ill - advise wish . but instead of that , Hetty , in spite of herself , begin to cry , half out of ill temper at the denial , half out of the day 's repress sadness . " Hegh , hegh ! " say , mean to check she playfully , " do not let 's have any crying . Cry 's for they as ha ' get no home , not for they as want to get rid of ' one . what dost think ? " he continue to he wife , who now come back into the house - place , knitt with fierce rapidity , as if that movement be a necessary function , like the twittering of a crab 's antenna . " think ? why , I think we shall have the fowl stole before we be much older , wi' that gell forget to lock the pens up og night . what be the matter now , ? what be you cry at ? " " why , she be be want to go for a lady 's maid , " say . " I tell she we can do better for she nor that . " " I think she would get some maggot in she head , she be gone about wi' she mouth button up so all day . it be all wig go so among they servants at the chase , as we war fools for let she . she think it 'uld be a finer life than be wi' they as be akin to she and ha ' bring she up sin ' she war no bigger nor . she think there be nothing belong to be a lady 's maid but wear finer clothes nor she be bear to , I will be bound . it be what rag she can get to stick on she as
as she be think on from morning till night , as I often ask she if she would not like to be the mawkin I ' the field , for then she would be make of ' rag inside and out . I will never gi' my consent to she go for a lady 's maid , while she be get good friend to take care on she till she be marry to somebody better nor one of ' they valets , as be neither a common man nor a gentleman , a ' must live on the fat of ' the land , a like enough to stick he hand under he coat - tail and expect he wife to work for he . " " aye , aye , " say , " we must have a better husband for she nor that , and there be better at hand . come , my wench , give over cry and get to bed . I will do better for you nor let you go for a lady 's maid . let 's hear no more o not . " when be go upstairs he say , " I can to make it out as she should want to go away , for I think she would get a mind t ' . she be look like it of ' late . " " Eh , there be no knowing what she be get a liking to , for thing take no more hold on she than if she be a dried pea . I believe that gell , -- as be aggravatin ' enough , for the matter of ' that -- but I believe she would care more about leave we and the child , for all she be be here but a year come , nor would . but she be get this notion of ' be a lady 's maid wig go among they servants -- we might ha's know what it 'uld lead to when we let she go to learn the fine work . but I will put a stop to it pretty quick . " " Thee ' dst be sorry to part wi' she , if it be not for she good , " say . " she be useful to thee I ' the work . " " sorry ? yes , I be fonder on she nor she deserve -- a little hard - hear hussy , want to leave we I ' that way . I can not ha ' have she about I these seven year , I reckon , and do for she , and teach she everything wi'out care about she . a ' here I be have linen spun , a ' think all the while it will make sheeting and table - clothing for she when she be marry , a ' she will live I ' the parish wi' we , and never go out of we sight -- like a fool as I be for think atch about she , as be no better nor a cherry wi' a hard stone inside it . " " Nay , nay , thee must to make much of a trifle , " say , soothingly . " she be fond on we , I will be bound ; but she be young , a ' get thing in she head as she can not rightly give account on . they young filly ' ull run away often wi' - yoou ; know why . " she uncle 's answer , however , have have another effect on Hetty besides that of disappoint she and make she cry . she know quite well whom he have in he mind in he allusion to marriage , and to a sober , solid husband ; and when she be in she bedroom again , the possibility of she marry present itself to she in a new light . in a mind where no strong sympathy be at work , where there be no supreme sense of right to which the agitated nature can cling and steady itself to quiet endurance , one of the first result of sorrow be a desperate vague clutch after any deed that will change the actual condition . 's vision of consequence , at no time more than a narrow fantastic calculation of she own probable pleasur and pain , be now quite shut out by reckless irritation under present suffering , and she be ready for one of those convulsive , motiveless action by which wretched man and woman leap from a temporary sorrow into a lifelong misery . why should she not marry ? she do not care what she do , so that it make some change in she life . she feel confident that he would still want to marry she , and any further thought about 's happiness in the matter have never yet visit she . " ! " perhaps you will say , " this rush of impulse to - ward a course that might have see the most repugnant to she present state of mind , and in only the second night of she sadness ! " yes , the action of a little trivial soul like 's , strugg amidst the serious sad destiny of a human being , be strange . so be the motion of a little vessel without ballast toss about on a stormy sea . how pretty it look with its parti-coloured sail in the sunlight , moo in the quiet bay ! " let that man bear the loss who loose it from its mooring . " but that will not save the vessel -- the pretty thing that might have be a last joy . " have she " the next evening there be much excited discussion at the Arms concern a incident which have occur that
that very day -- no less than a second appearance of the smart man in top - boot say by some to be a mere farmer in treaty for the , by other to be the future steward , but by himself , the personal witness to the stranger 's visit , pronounce contemptuously to be nothing better than a bailiff , such as have be before he . no one have think of denie 's testimony to the fact that he have see the stranger ; nevertheless , he proffer various corroborating circumstance . " I see he myself , " he say ; " I see he come along by the crab -tree Meadow on a bald - face hoss . I would just be t ' haheve a pint -- it be half after ten I ' the fore - noon , when I haheve my pint as reg'lar as the clock -- and I say to , as hadruve up with he waggon , ' you will get a bit of ' barley to - day , Knowles ,' I say , ' if you look about you ' ; and then I go round by the rick - yard , and towart the Treddle 'on road , and just as I come up by the big ash - tree , I see the man I ' top - boot come along on a bald - face hoss -- I wish I may never stir if I do not . and I stand still till he come up , and I say , ' good morning , sir ,' I say , for I want to hear the turn of he tongue , as I might know whether he be a this - country man ; so I say , ' good morning , sir : it will ' old hup for the barley this morning , I think . there will be a bit get hin , if we have good luck . ' and he say , 'Eh , ye may be raight , there be no tallin ' , ' he say , and I know by that " -- here give a wink -- " as he do not come from a hundred mile off . I daresay he would think I a hodd talker , as you Loamshire folk allay do hany one as talk the right language . " " the right language ! " say , contemptuously . " you be about as near the right language as a pig 's squeaking be like a tune play on a key - bugle . " " well , I do not know , " answer , with a angry smile . " I should think a man as have live among the gentry from a by , be likely to know what be the right language pretty nigh as well as a schoolmaster . " " aye , aye , man , " say , with a tone of sarcastic consolation , " you talk the right language for you . when 's goat say ba - a - a , it be all right -- it 'uld be unnatural for it to make any other noise . " the rest of the party be man , have the laugh strongly against he , and wisely fall back on the previous question , which , far from be exhaust in a single evening , be renew in the churchyard , before service , the next day , with the fresh interest confer on all news when there be a fresh person to hear it ; and that fresh hearer be , who , as he wife say , " never go boozin ' with that set at 's , a -sittin ' soakin ' in drink , and look as wise as a lot of ' cod - fish wi's red face . " it be probably owe to the conversation she have have with she husband on they way from church concern this problematic stranger that 's thought immediately revert to he when , a day or two afterwards , as she be stand at the house - door with she knitt , in that eager leisure which come to she when the afternoon cleaning be done , she see the old squire enter the yard on he black pony , follow by the groom . she always cite it afterwards as a case of prevision , which really have something more in it than she own remarkable penetration , that the moment she set eye on the squire she say to herself , " I should to wonder if he be come about that man as be a - go to take the chase farm , want to do something for he without pay . but be a fool if he do . " something unwonted must clearly be in the wind , for the old squire 's visit to he tenantry be rare ; and though Mrs . have during the last twelvemonth recit many imaginary speech , mean even more than meet the ear , which she be quite determined to make to he the next time he appear within the gate of the , the speech have always remain imaginary . " good - day , , " say the old squire , pee at she with he short - sight eye -- a mode of look at she which , as Poyser observ , " allays aggravate I : it be as if you be a insect , and he be go to dab he finger - nail on you . " however , she say , " you servant , sir , " and curtsy with a air of perfect deference as she advanc towards he : she be not the woman to misbehave towards she betters , and fly in the face of
of the catechism , without severe provocation . " be you husband at home , ? " " yes , sir ; he be only i ' the rick - yard . I will send for he in a minute , if you will please to get down and step in . " " thank you ; I will do so . I want to consult he about a little matter ; but you be quite as much concerned in it , if not more . I must have you opinion too . " " Hetty , run and tell you uncle to come in , " say , as they enter the house , and the old gentleman bow low in answer to 's curtsy ; while Totty , conscious of a pinafore stain with gooseberry jam , stand hide she face against the clock and pee round furtively . " what a fine old kitchen this be ! " say , look round admiringly . he always speak in the same deliberate , well - chisell , polite way , whether he word be sugary or venomous . " and you keep it so exquisitely clean , . I like these premise , do you know , beyond any on the estate . " " well , sir , since you be fond of 'em , I should be glad if you would let a bit of ' repairs be do to th'ey , for the boarding 's I ' that state as we be like to be eat up wig rat and mouse ; and the cellar , you may stan ' up to you knee I ' water I not , if you like to go down ; but perhaps you would rather believe my word . will not you please to sit down , sir ? " " not yet ; I must see you dairy . I have not see it for year , and I hear on all hand about you fine cheese and butter , " say the squire , look politely unconscious that there could be any question on which he and might happen to disagree . " I think I see the door open , there . you must not be surprised if I cast a covetous eye on you cream and butter . I do not expect that Mr . 's cream and butter will bear comparison with yours . " " I can not say , sir , I be sure . it be seldom I see other folk 's butter , though there be some on it as one be no need to see -- the smell 's enough . " " ah , now this I like , " say , look round at the damp temple of cleanliness , but keep near the door . " I be sure I should like my breakfast better if I know the butter and crebe come from this dairy . thank you , that really be a pleasant sight . unfortunately , my slight tendency to rheumatism make I afraid of damp : I will sit down in you comfortable kitchen . ah , , how do you do ? in the midst of business , I see , as usual . I have be look at you wife 's beautiful dairy -- the best manager in the parish , be she not ? " have just enter in shirt -sleeve and open waistcoat , with a face a shade redder than usual , from the exertion of " pitching . " as he stand , red , rotund , and radiant , before the small , wiry , cool old gentleman , he look like a prize apple by the side of a withered crab . " will you please to take this chair , sir ? " he say , lift he father 's arm -chair forward a little : " you will find it easy . " " no , thank you , I never sit in easy - chair , " say the old gentleman , seat himself on a small chair near the door . " do you know , . Poyser --sit down , pray , both of you -- I have be far from contente , for some time , with 's dairy management . I think she have not a good method , as you have . " " indeed , sir , I can not speak to that , " say . Poyser in a hard voice , roll and unroll she knitt and look icily out of the window , as she continue to stand opposite the squire . Poyser might sit down if he like , she think ; she be not go to sit down , as if she would give in to any such smooth - tongue palaver . , who look and feel the reverse of icy , do sit down in he three - corner chair . " and now , , as be laid up , I be intend to let the to a respectable tenant . I be tired of have a farm on my own hand -- nothing be make the best of in such case , as you know . a satisfactory bailiff be hard to find ; and I think you and I , , and you excellent wife here , can enter into a little arrangement in consequence , which will be to we mutual advantage . " " oh , " say , with a good - natured blankness of imagination as to the nature of the arrangement . " if I be call upon to speak , sir , " say , after glance at she husband with pity at he softness , " you know better than I ; but I do not see what the be t ' we -- we have cumber enough
enough wi' we own farm . not but what I be glad to hear of ' anybody respectable come into the parish ; there be some as ha ' be bring in as have not be look on I ' that character . " " you be likely to find a excellent neighbour , I assure you -- such a one as you will feel glad to have accommodate by the little plan I be go to mention , especially as I hope you will find it as much to you own advantage as he . " " indeed , sir , if it be anything t ' we advantage , it will be the first offer of ' the sort I have hear on . it be they as take advantage that get advantage I ' this world , I think . folk have to wait long enough afore it be bring to th'ey . " " the fact be , , " say the squire , ignore 's theory of worldly prosperity , " there be too much dairy land , and too little plough land , on the to suit 's purpose -- indeed , he will only take the farm on condition of some change in it : he wife , it appear , be not a clever dairy - woman , like yours . now , the plan I be think of be to effect a little exchange . if you be to have the Hollow pasture , you might increase you dairy , which must be so profitable under you wife 's management ; and I should request you , , to supply my house with milk , cream , and butter at the market price . on the other hand , Poyser , you might let have the and , which really , with we wet season , would be a good riddance for you . there be much less risk in dairy land than corn land . " be lean forward , with he elbow on he knee , he head on one side , and he mouth screw up -- apparently absorb in make the tip of he finger meet so as to represent with perfect accuracy the rib of a ship . he be much to acute a man not to see through the whole business , and to foresee perfectly what would be he wife 's view of the subject ; but he dislike give unpleasant answer . unless it be on a point of farming practice , he would rather give up than have a quarrel , any day ; and , after all , it matter more to he wife than to he . so , after a few moment ' silence , he look up at she and say mildly , " what dost say ? " have have she eye fix on she husband with cold severity during he silence , but now she turn away she head with a toss , look icily at the opposite roof of the cow- shed , and spear she knitt together with the loose pin , hold it firmly between she clasped hand . " ? why , I say you may do as you like about give up any of ' you corn -land afore you lease be up , which it will not be for a year come next , but I will not consent to take more dairy work into my hand , either for love or money ; and there be nayther love nor money here , as I can see , on 'y other folk 's love o' theirselves , and the money as be to go into other folk 's pocket . I know there be they as be bear t ' own the land , and they as be bear to sweat o not " -- here pause to gasp a little -- " and I know it be christen folk 's duty to submit to they better as fur as flesh and blood ' ull bear it ; but I will not make a martyr of ' myself , and wear myself to skin and bone , and worret myself as if I be a churn wi's butter a - come I not , for no landlord in , not if he be himself . " " no , no , my dear , certainly not , " say the squire , still confident in he own power of persuasion , " you must not overwork yourself ; but do not you think you work will rather be lessened than increase in this way ? there be so much milk require at the Abbey that you will have little increase of cheese and butter make from the addition to you dairy ; and I believe sell the milk be the most profitable way of disposing of dairy produce , be it not ? " " aye , that be true , " say , unable to repress a opinion on a question of farming profit , and forgett that it be not in this case a purely abstract question . " I daresay , " say bitterly , turn she head half - way towards she husband and look at the vacant arm -chair -- " I daresay it be true for man as sit I ' th ' chimney - corner and make believe as everything be cut wi's in a ' out to fit int ' everything else . if you could make a pudding wi's think of ' the batter , it 'uld be easy get dinner . how do I know whether the milk 's ull be want constant ? what be to make I sure as the house will not be put of ' board wage afore we be many month older , and then I may have to lie awake of ' night wi' twenty
twenty gallon of ' milk on my mind -- and Dingall ' ull take no more butter , let alone pay for it ; and we must fat pig till we be oblige to beg the butcher on we knee to buy th'ey , and lose half of th'ey wi' the measle . and there be the fetching and carry , as 'uld be welly half a day 's work for a man a ' hoss -- that be to be take out of ' the profit , I reckon ? but there be folk 'uld hold a sieve under the pump and expect to carry away the water . " " that difficulty -- about the fetching and carry -- you will not have , , " say the squire , who think that this entrance into particular indicate a distant inclination to compromise on 's part . " will do that regularly with the cart and pony . " " oh , sir , begge you pardon , I have never be use t ' have gentlefolk 's servants come about my back place , a - make love to both the gell at once and keep th'ey with they hand on they hip listen to all manner of ' gossip when they should be down on they knee a -scouring . if we be to go to ruin , it shan to be wi's have we back kitchen turn into a public . " " well , , " say the squire , shift he tactic and look as if he think . Poyser have suddenly withdrawn from the proceedings and leave the room , " you can turn the Hollows into feeding - land . I can easily make another arrangement about supplye my house . and I shall not forget you readiness to accommodate you landlord as well as a neighbour . I know you will be glad to have you lease renew for three year , when the present one expire ; otherwise , I daresay , who be a man of some capital , would be glad to take both the farms , as they could be work so well together . but I do not want to part with a old tenant like you . " to be thrust out of the discussion in this way would have be enough to complete 's exasperation , even without the final threat . she husband , really alarm at the possibility of they leave the old place where he have be breed and bear -- for he believe the old squire have small spite enough for anything -- be begin a mild remonstrance explanatory of the inconvenience he should find in have to buy and sell more stock , with , " well , sir , I think as it be rether hard ... " when . Poyser burst in with the desperate determination to have she say out this once , though it be to rain notice to quit and the only shelter be the work - house . " then , sir , if I may speak -- as , for all I be a woman , and there be folk as think a woman 's fool enough to stan ' by an' look on while the man sign she soul away , I have a right to speak , for I make one quarter of ' the rent , and save another quarter -- I say , if 's so ready to take farm under you , it be a pity but what he should take this , and see if he like to live in a house wi' all the plague o' I not -- wi' the cellar full of ' water , and frog and toad hoppin ' up the step by dozen -- and the floor rote , and the rat and mouse gnaw every bit o' cheese , and runnin ' over we head as we lie I ' bed till we expect th'ey to eat we up alive -- as it be a mercy they han to eat the child long ago . I should like to see if there be another tenant besides Poyser as 'uld put up wi' never have a bit of ' repair do till a place tumble down -- and not then , on 'y wi's begge and pray and have to pay half -- and be string up wi' the rent as it be much if he get enough out of ' the land to pay , for all he be put he own money into the ground beforehand . see if you will get a stranger to lead such a life here as that : a maggot must be bear I ' the rotten cheese to like it , I reckon . you may run away from my word , sir , " continue , follow the old squire beyond the door -- for after the first moment of stun surprise he have get up , and , wave he hand towards she with a smile , have walk out towards he pony . but it be impossible for he to get away immediately , for be walk the pony up and down the yard , and be some distance from the causeway when he master beckon . " you may run away from my word , sir , and you may go spinnin ' underhand way of ' do we a mischief , for you have get to you friend , though nobody else be , but I tell you for once as we be not dumb creature to be abuse and make money on by they as ha ' get the lash I ' they hand , for want o ' know how t ' undue the tackle . a ' if I be th ' only one as speak my mind , there be plenty of '
' the same way o ' think I ' this parish and the next to 't , for you name 's no better than a brimstone match in everybody 's nose -- if it isna two - three old folk as you think of ' save you soul by give th'ey a bit of ' flannel and a drop of ' porridge . a ' you may be right I ' think it will take but little to save you soul , for it will be the smallest savin' y ' iver make , wi' all you scrapin ' . " there be occasion on which two servant - girl and a waggoner may be a formidable audience , and as the squire ride away on he black pony , even the gift of short-sightedness do not prevent he from be aware that and and be grinn not far from he . perhaps he suspect that sour old be grinn behind he -- which be also the fact . meanwhile the bull - dog , the black - and - tan terrier , 's sheep - dog , and the gander hiss at a safe distance from the pony 's heel carry out the idea of 's solo in a impressive quartet . , however , have no sooner see the pony move off than she turn round , give the two hilarious damsel a look which drive they into the back kitchen , and unspear she knitt , begin to knit again with she usual rapidity as she re-enter the house . " Thee 'st do it now , " say , a little alarmed and uneasy , but not without some triumphant amusement at he wife 's outbreak . " yes , I know I have do it , " say ; " but I have have my say out , and I shall be th ' easier of r't all my life . there be no pleasure I ' living if you be to be corke up for ever , and only dribble you mind out by the sly , like a leaky barrel . I sha not repent say what I think , if I live to be as old as th' old squire ; and there be little likelihood -- for it seem as if they as be not want here be th ' only folk as be not want I ' th ' other world . " " but thee wut to like move from ' old place , this twelvemonth , " say , " and go into a strange parish , where thee know 'st nobody . it will be hard upon we both , and upo ' Father too . " " Eh , it be no use worreting ; there be plenty of ' thing may happen between this and twelvemonth . the captain may be master afore they , for what we know , " say , inclin to take a unusually hopeful view of a embarrassment which have be bring about by she own merit and not by other people 's fault . " I be none for worreting , " say , rise from he three - corner chair and walk slowly towards the door ; " but I should be loath to leave th ' old place , and the parish where I be breed and bear , and afore I . we should leave we root behind we , I doubt , and niver thrive again . " link the barley be all carry at last , and the harvest supper go by without wait for the dismal black crop of bean . the apple and nut be gather and store ; the scent of whey depart from the farm - house , and the scent of brewing come in its stead . the woods behind the chase , and all the hedgerow tree , take on a solemn splendour under the dark low - hang sky . be come , with its fragrant basketful of purple damson , and its paler purple daisie , and its lad and lass leave or seek service and win along between the yellow hedge , with they bundle under they arm . but though be come , , that desirable tenant , do not come to the chase farm , and the old squire , after all , have be oblige to put in a new bailiff . it be know throughout the two parish that the squire 's plan have be frustrate because the Poyser have refuse to be " put upon , " and 's outbreak be discuss in all the farm - house with a zest which be only heighten by frequent repetition . the news that " " be come back from be comparatively insipid , and the repulse of the in be nothing to 's repulse of the old squire . have hear a version of it in every parishioner 's house , with the one exception of the chase . but since he have always , with marvellous skill , avoid any quarrel with , he could not allow himself the pleasure of laugh at the old gentleman 's discomfiture with any one besides he mother , who declare that if she be rich she should like to allow a pension for life , and want to invite she to the parsonage that she might hear a account of the scene from 's own lip . " no , no , mother , " say ; " it be a little bit of irregular justice on 's part , but a magistrate like I must not countenance irregular justice . there must be no report spread that I have take notice of the quarrel , else I shall lose the little good influence I have over the old man . " " well , I like that woman even better than she cream
cream - cheese , " say . " she have the spirit of three man , with that pale face of hers . and she say such sharp thing too . " " ! yes , she tongue be like a new - set razor . she be quite original in she talk too ; one of those untatch wit that help to stock a country with proverb . I tell you that capital thing I hear she say about -- that he be like a cock , who think the sun have risen to hear he crow . now that be a 's fable in a sentence . " " but it will be a bad business if the old gentleman turn they out of the farm next , eh ? " say . " oh , that must not be ; and be such a good tenant that be likely to think twice , and digest he spleen rather than turn they out . but if he should give they notice at , and I must move heaven and earth to mollify he . such old parishioners as they be must not go . " " ah , there be no knowing what may happen before day , " say . " it strike I on 's birthday that the old man be a little shaken : he be eighty - three , you know . it be really a unconscionable age . it be only woman who have a right to live as long as that . " " when they have get old - bachelor son who would be forlorn without they , " say , laugh , and kiss he mother 's hand . , too , meet she husband 's occasional foreboding of a notice to quit with " there be no knowing what may happen before Lady day " -- one of those undeniable general propositions which be usually intend to convey a particular meaning very far from undeniable . but it be really too hard upon human nature that it should be hold a criminal offence to imagine the death even of the king when he be turn eighty - three . it be not to be believe that any but the dullest Briton can be good subject under that hard condition . apart from this foreboding , thing go on much as usual in the household . think she notice a surprising improvement in . to be sure , the girl get " closer tempered , and sometimes she seem as if there would be no draw a word from she with cart -rope , " but she think much less about she dress , and go after the work quite eagerly , without any telling . and it be wonderful how she never want to go out now -- indeed , could hardly be persuade to go ; and she bear she aunt 's put a stop to she weekly lesson in fine - work at the chase without the least grumbling or pouting . it must be , after all , that she have set she heart on Adam at last , and she sudden freak of want to be a lady 's maid must have be cause by some little pique or misunderstanding between they , which have pass by . for whenever come to the , seem to be in better spirit and to talk more than at other time , though she be almost sull when or any other admirer happen to pay a visit there . himself watch she at first with trembling anxiety , which give way to surprise and delicious hope . five day after deliver 's letter , he have venture to go to the again -- not without dread lest the sight of he might be painful to she . she be not in the house - place when he enter , and he sit talk to and Poyser for a few minute with a heavy fear on he heart that they might presently tell he be ill . but by and by there come a light step that he know , and when Poyser say , " come , Hetty , where have you be ? " be oblige to turn round , though he be afraid to see the change look there must be in she face . he almost start when he see she smiling as if she be pleased to see he -- look the same as ever at a first glance , only that she have she cap on , which he have never see she in before when he come of a evening . still , when he look at she again and again as she move about or sit at she work , there be a change : the cheek be as pink as ever , and she smile as much as she have ever do of late , but there be something different in she eye , in the expression of she face , in all she movement , think -- something harder , older , less child - like . " poor thing ! " he say to himself , " that be allays likely . it be because she be have she first heartache . but she be get a spirit to bear up under it . thank for that . " as the week go by , and he see she always look pleased to see he -- turn up she lovely face towards he as if she mean he to understand that she be glad for he to come -- and go about she work in the same equable way , make no sign of sorrow , he begin to believe that she feel towards must have be much slighter than he have imagine in he first indignation and alarm , and that she have be able to think of
of she girlish fancy that be in love with she and would marry she as a folly of which she be timely cure . and it perhaps be , as he have sometimes in he more cheerful moment hope it would be -- she heart be really turn with all the more warmth towards the man she know to have a serious love for she . possibly you think that be not at all sagacious in he interpretation , and that it be altogether extremely unbecoming in a sensible man to behave as he do -- fall in love with a girl who really have nothing more than she beauty to recommend she , attribute imaginary virtue to she , and even condescende to cleave to she after she have fall in love with another man , wait for she kind look as a patient trembling dog wait for he master 's eye to be turn upon he . but in so complex a thing as human nature , we must consider , it be hard to find rule without exception . of course , I know that , as a rule , sensible man fall in love with the most sensible woman of they acquaintance , see through all the pretty deceit of coquettish beauty , never imagine themselves love when they be not love , cease love on all proper occasion , and marry the woman most fitte for they in every respect -- indeed , so as to compel the approbation of all the maiden lady in they neighbourhood . but even to this rule a exception will occur now and then in the lapse of centurie , and my friend be one . for my own part , however , I respect he no the less -- nay , I think the deep love he have for that sweet , rounded , blossom - like , dark - eyed Hetty , of whose inward self he be really very ignorant , come out of the very strength of he nature and not out of any inconsistent weakness . be it any weakness , pray , to be wrotch on by exquisite music ? to feel its wondrous harmoney search the subtlest windings of you soul , the delicate fibre of life where no memory can penetrate , and bind together you whole be past and present in one unspeakable vibration , melte you in one moment with all the tenderness , all the love that have be scatter through the toilsome year , concentrate in one emotion of heroic courage or resignation all the hard - learnt lesson of self - renounce sympathy , blend you present joy with past sorrow and you present sorrow with all you past joy ? if not , then neither be it a weakness to be so wrotch upon by the exquisite curve of a woman 's cheek and neck and arm , by the liquid depth of she beseech eye , or the sweet childish pout of she lip . for the beauty of a lovely woman be like music : what can one say more ? have a expression beyond and far above the one woman 's soul that it clothes , as the word of genius have a wider meaning than the thought that prompt they . it be more than a woman 's love that move we in a woman 's eye -- it seem to be a far - off mighty love that have come near to we , and make speech for itself there ; the rounded neck , the dimpled arm , move we by something more than they prettiness -- by they close kinship with all we have know of tenderness and peace . the noblest nature see the most of this impersonal expression in beauty ( it be needless to say that there be gentleman with whisker dye and undy who see none of it whatever ) , and for this reason , the noblest nature be often the most blinded to the character of the one woman 's soul that the beauty clothes . Whence , I fear , the tragedy of human life be likely to continue for a long time to come , in spite of mental philosopher who be ready with the best receipt for avoid all mistakes of the kind . we good Adam have no fine word into which he could put he feeling for : he could not disguise mystery in this way with the appearance of knowledge ; he call he love frankly a mystery , as you have hear he . he only know that the sight and memory of she move he deeply , touch the spring of all love and tenderness , all faith and courage within he . how could he imagine narrowness , selfishness , hardness in she ? he create the mind he believe in out of he own , which be large , unselfish , tender . the hope he feel about soften a little he feel towards . surely he attention to must have be of a slight kind ; they be altogether wrong , and such as no man in 's position ought to have allow himself , but they must have have a air of playfulness about they , which have probably blind he to they danger and have prevent they from lay any strong hold on 's heart . as the new promise of happiness rise for , he indignation and jealousy begin to die out . be not make unhappy ; he almost believe that she like he best ; and the thought sometimes cross he mind that the friendship which have once seem dead for ever might revive in the day to come , and he would not have to say " good - bye " to the grand old wood , but would like they better because they be 's
's . for this new promise of happiness follow so quickly on the shock of pain have a intoxicating effect on the sober , who have all he life be use to much hardship and moderate hope . be he really go to have a easy lot after all ? it seem so , for at the beginning of , , finde it impossible to replace , have at last make up he mind to offer he a share in the business , without further condition than that he should continue to give he energie to it and renounce all thought of have a separate business of he own . Son- in - law or no son - in - law , have make himself too necessary to be part with , and he headwork be so much more important to than he skill in handicraft that he have the management of the wood make little difference in the value of he service ; and as to the bargain about the squire 's timber , it would be easy to call in a third person . see here a opening into a broadening path of prosperous work such as he have think of with ambitious long ever since he be a lad : he might come to build a bridge , or a town hall , or a factory , for he have always say to himself that 's building business be like a acorn , which might be the mother of a great tree . so he give he hand to on that bargain , and go home with he mind full of happy vision , in which ( my refin reader will perhaps be shocked when I say it ) the image of hover , and smile over plan for seasoning timber at a trifling expense , calculation as to the cheapening of brick per thousand by water - carriage , and a favourite scheme for the strengthening of roof and wall with a peculiar form of iron girder . what then ? 's enthusiasm lay in these thing ; and we love be inwrotch in we enthusiasm as electricity be inwrotch in the air , exalt it be power by a subtle presence . would be able to take a separate house now , and provide for he mother in the old one ; he prospect would justify he marry very soon , and if consent to have , they mother would perhaps be more contented to live apart from . but he tell himself that he would not be hasty -- he would not try 's feeling for he until it have have time to grow strong and firm . however , tomorrow , after church , he would go to the and tell they the news . , he know , would like it better than a five - pound note , and he should see if 's eye brighten at it . the months would be short with all he have to fill he mind , and this foolish eagerness which have come over he of late must not hurry he into any premature word . yet when he get home and tell he mother the good news , and eat he supper , while she sit by almost cry for joy and want he to eat twice as much as usual because of this good - luck , he could not help prepare she gently for the come change by talking of the old house be too small for they all to go on living in it always . the Betrothal it be a dry , and really a pleasant day for the 2d of . there be no sunshine , but the cloud be high , and the wind be so still that the yellow leave which flutter down from the hedgerow elm must have fall from pure decay . nevertheless , do not go to church , for she have take a cold too serious to be neglect ; only two winter ago she have be lay up for week with a cold ; and since he wife do not go to church , consider that on the whole it would be as well for he to stay away too and " keep she company . " he could perhaps have give no precise form to the reason that determine this conclusion , but it be well kny to all experience mind that we firmest conviction be often dependent on subtle impressions for which word be quite too coarse a medium . however it be , no one from the family go to church that afternoon except and the boy ; yet be bold enough to join they after church , and say that he would walk home with they , though all the way through the village he appear to be chiefly occupy with and , tell they about the squirrel in , and promise to take they there some day . but when they come to the field he say to the boy , " now , then , which be the stoutest walker ? have get to 's home - gate first shall be the first to go with I to on the donkey . but must have the start up to the next stile , because he be the smallest . " Adam have never behave so much like a determined lover before . as soon as the boy have both set off , he look down at and say , " will not you hang on my arm , ? " in a pleading tone , as if he have already ask she and she have refuse . look up at he smilingly and put she round arm through he in a moment . it be nothing to she , put she arm through 's , but she know he car a great deal about have she
she arm through he , and she wish he to care . she heart beat no faster , and she look at the half - bare hedgerow and the ploughed field with the same sense of oppressive dulness as before . but scarcely feel that he be walk . he think must know that he be press she arm a little -- a very little . word rush to he lip that he da not utter -- that he have make up he mind not to utter yet -- and so he be silent for the length of that field . the calm patience with which he have once wait for 's love , content only with she presence and the thought of the future , have forsake he since that terrible shock nearly three month ago . the agitation of jealousy have give a new restlessness to he passion -- have make fear and uncertainty too hard almost to bear . but though he might not speak to of he love , he would tell she about he new prospect and see if she would be pleased . so when he be enough master of himself to talk , he say , " I be go to tell you uncle some news that will surprise he , ; and I think he will be glad to hear it too . " " what be that ? " say indifferently . " why , have offer I a share in he business , and I be go to take it . " there be a change in 's face , certainly not produce by any agreeable impression from this news . in fact she feel a momentary annoyance and alarm , for she have so often hear it hint by she uncle that might have and a share in the business any day , if he like , that she associate the two objects now , and the thought immediately occur that perhaps have give she up because of what have happen lately , and have turn towards . with that think , and before she have time to remember any reason why it could not be true , come a new sense of forsakenness and disappointment . the one thing -- the one person -- she mind have rest on in it be dull weariness , have slipp away from she , and peevish misery fill she eye with tear . she be look on the ground , but see she face , see the tear , and before he have finish say , " Hetty , dear , what be you cry for ? " he eager rapid thought have flow through all the cause conceivable to he , and have at last alighted on half the true one . think he be go to marry -- she do not like he to marry -- perhaps she do not like he to marry any one but herself ? all caution be sweep away -- all reason for it be gone , and could feel nothing but trembl joy . he lean towards she and take she hand , as he say : " I could afford to be marry now , Hetty -- I could make a wife comfortable ; but I shall never want to be marry if you will not have I . " look up at he and smile through she tear , as she have do to Arthur that first evening in the wood , when she have think he be not come , and yet he come . it be a feebler relief , a feebler triumph she feel now , but the great dark eye and the sweet lip be as beautiful as ever , perhaps more beautiful , for there be a more luxuriant womanliness about of late . Adam could hardly believe in the happiness of that moment . he right hand hold she leave , and he press she arm close against he heart as he lean down towards she . " do you really love I , Hetty ? will you be my own wife , to love and take care of as long as I live ? " Hetty do not speak , but 's face be very close to hers , and she put up she round cheek against he , like a kitten . she want to be caress -- she want to feel as if yoArthu be with she again . care for no word after that , and they hardly speak through the rest of the walk . he only say , " I may tell you uncle and aunt , may not I , ? " and she say , " yes . " the red fire - light on the hearth at the shone on joyful face that even , when be go upstairs and take the opportunity of tell and and the grandfather that he see he way to maintain a wife now , and that have consent to have he . " I hope you have no objection against I for she husband , " say ; " I be a poor man as yet , but she shall want nothing as I can work for . " " objection ? " say , while the grandfather lean forward and bring out he long " Nay , nay . " " what objection can we ha ' to you , lad ? never mind you be poorish as yet ; there be money in you head - piece as there be money I ' the sown field , but it must ha ' time . you and get enough to begin on , and we can do a deal tow 'rt the bit of ' furniture you will want . 'st get feather and linen to spare -- plenty , eh ? " this question be of course address to
to , who be wrap up in a warm shawl and be too hoarse to speak with she usual facility . at first she only nod emphatically , but she be presently unable to resist the temptation to be more explicit . " it uld be a poor tale if I have to feather and linen , " she say , hoarsely , " when I never sell a fowl but what be pluck , and the wheel 's a - go every day of ' the week . " " come , my wench , " say , when come down , " come and kiss we , and let we wish you luck . " go very quietly and kiss the big good - natured man . " there ! " he say , pat she on the back , " go and kiss you aunt and you grandfather . I be as wishful t ' have you settle well as if you be my own daughter ; and so be you aunt , I will be bound , for she be do by you this seven 'ear , , as if you have be she own . come , come , now , " he go on , become jocose , as soon as have kiss she aunt and the old man , " want 's a kiss too , I will warrant , and he be a right to one now . " turn away , smile , towards she empty chair . " come , , then , take one , " persist , " else y ' arena half a man . " get up , blush like a small maiden -- great strong fellow as he be -- and , put he arm round stoop down and gently kiss she lip . it be a pretty scene in the re fire - light ; for there be no candle -- why should there be , when the fire be so bright and be reflecte from all the pewter and the polished oak ? no one want to work on a evening . even feel something like contentment in the midst of all this love . 's attachment to she , 's caress , stir no passion in she , be no longer enough to satisfy she vanity , but they be the best she life offer she now -- they promise she some change . there be a great deal of discussion before go away , about the possibility of he find a house that would do for he to settle in . no house be empty except the one next to 's in the village , and that be too small for now . insist that the best plan would be for and he mother to move and leave in the old home , which might be enlarge after a while , for there be plenty of space in the woodyard and garden ; but object to turn he mother out . " well , well , " say at last , " we need to fix everything to - night . we must take time to consider . you can to think of ' get marry afore . I be not for long courtship , but there must be a bit of ' time to make thing comfortable . " " aye , to be sure , " say , in a hoarse whisper ; " Christian folk can not be marry like cuckoo , I reckon . " " I be a bit daunted , though , " say , " when I think as we may have notice to quit , and belike be force to take a farm twenty mile off . " " Eh , " say the old man , stare at the floor and lifte he hand up and down , while he arm rest on the elbow of he chair , " it be a poor tale if I mun leave th ' would spot a be bury in a strange parish . a ' you will happen ha ' double rate to pay , " he add , look up at he son . " well , thee mustna fret beforehand , father , " say the younger . " happen the captain 's ull come home and make we peace wig th ' old squire . I build upo ' that , for I know the captain will see folk righte if he can . " the it be a busy time for -- the time between the beginning of and the beginning of , and he could see little of , except on . but a happy time , nevertheless , for it be take he nearer and nearer to , when they be to be marry , and all the little preparation for they new housekeeping mark the progress towards the longed - for day . two new room have be " run up " to the old house , for he mother and Seth be to live with they after all . have cry so piteously at the thought of leave that he have go to and ask she if , for the love of he , she would put up with he mother 's way and consent to live with she . to he great delight , say , " yes ; I ' as soon she live with we as not . " 's mind be oppress at that moment with a worse difficulty than poor 's way ; she could not care about they . so be consol for the disappointment he have felt when have come back from he visit to Snowfield and say " it be no use -- 's heart be to turn towards marrying . " for when he tell he mother that be willing they should all live together and there be
be no more need of they to think of parting , she say , in a more contented tone than he have hear she speak in since it have be settle that he be to be marry , " Eh , my lad , I will be as still as th ' would tabby , a ' ne 'er want to do atch but th ' offal work , as she win na like t 's do . a ' then we need to part the platter a ' thing , as ha ' stand on the shelf together sin ' afore thee wast bear . " there be only one cloud that now and then come across 's sunshine : seem unhappy sometimes . but to all he anxious , tender question , she reply with a assurance that she be quite contente and wish nothing different ; and the next time he see she she be more lively than usual . it might be that she be a little overdone with work and anxiety now , for soon after Poyser have take another cold , which have bring on inflammation , and this illness have confine she to she room all through . have to manage everything downstairs , and half - supply 's place too , while that good damsel wait on she mistress , and she seem to throw herself so entirely into she new function , work with a grave steadiness which be new in she , that often tell she be want to show he what a good housekeeper he would have ; but he " doubt the lass be o'erdo it -- she must have a bit of ' rest when she aunt could come downstairs . " this desirable event of 's come downstairs happen in the early part of , when some mild weather thaw the last patch of snow on the . on one of these day , soon after she aunt come down , go to to buy some of the wedding thing which be want , and which Mr . Poyser have scold she for neglecting , observe that she suppose " it be because they be not for th 's outside , else she would ha ' buy th'ey fast enough . " it be about ten o'clock when Hetty set off , and the slight hoar - frost that have whiten the hedge in the early morning have disappear as the sun mount the cloudless sky . day have a stronger charm of hope about they than any other day in the year . one like to pause in the mild ray of the sun , and look over the gate at the patient plough - horse turn at the end of the furrow , and think that the beautiful year be all before one . the bird seem to feel just the same : they note be as clear as the clear air . there be no leaf on the tree and hedgerow , but how green all the grassy field be ! and the dark purplish brown of the plough earth and of the bare branch be beautiful too . what a glad world this look like , as one drive or ride along the valley and over the hill ! I have often think so when , in foreign country , where the field and wood have look to I like we -- the rich land till with just as much care , the wood roll down the gentle slope to the green meadow -- I have come on something by the roadside which have remind I that I be not in : a image of a great agony -- the agony of the . it have stand perhaps by the clustering apple - blossom , or in the broad sunshine by the cornfield , or at a turn by the wood where a clear brook be gurgl below ; and surly , if there come a traveller to this world who know nothing of the story of man 's life upon it , this image of agony would seem to he strangely out of place in the midst of this joyous nature . he would not know that hide behind the apple - blossom , or among the golden corn , or under the shrouding bough of the wood , there might be a human heart beat heavily with anguish -- perhaps a young blooming girl , not know where to turn for refuge from swift - advancing shame , understanding no more of this life of ours than a foolish lose lamb wander farther and farther in the nightfall on the lonely heath , yet taste the bitterest of life 's bitterness . such thing be sometimes hide among the sunny field and behind the blossoming orchard ; and the sound of the gurgling brook , if you come close to one spot behind a small bush , would be mingl for you ear with a despairing human sob . no wonder man 's religion have much sorrow in it : no wonder he need a suffer . Hetty , in she red cloak and warm bonnet , with she basket in she hand , be turn towards a gate by the side of the road , but not that she may have a more lingering enjoyment of the sunshine and think with hope of the long unfolding year . she hardly know that the sun be shine ; and for week , now , when she have hope at all , it have be for something at which she herself tremble and shudder . she only want to be out of the high - road , that she may walk slowly and not care how she face look , as she dwell on wretch thoughts ; and through this gate she can get into a field - path behind the wide
wide thick hedgerow . she great dark eye wander blankly over the field like the eyes of one who be desolate , homeless , unloved , not the promise bride of a brave tender man . but there be no tear in they : she tear be all weep away in the weary night , before she go to sleep . at the next stile the pathway branch off : there be two roads before she -- one along by the hedgerow , which will by and by lead she into the road again , the other across the field , which will take she much farther out of the way into the , low shroude pasture where she will see nobody . she choose this and begin to walk a little faster , as if she have suddenly think of a object towards which it be worth while to hasten . she be in the , where the grassy land slope gradually downward , and she leave the level ground to follow the slope . Farther on there be a clump of tree on the low ground , and she be make she way towards it . no , it be not a clump of tree , but a dark shrouded pool , so full with the wintry rain that the under bough of the elder - bushes lie low beneath the water . she sit down on the grassy bank , against the stooping stem of the great oak that hang over the dark pool . she have think of this pool often in the night of the month that have just go by , and now at last she be come to see it . she clasp she hand round she knee , and lean forward , and look earnestly at it , as if try to guess what sort of bed it would make for she young round limb . no , she have not courage to jump into that cold watery bed , and if she have , they might find she -- they might find out why she have drown herself . there be but one thing leave to she : she must go away , go where they can not find she . after the first on - come of she great dread , some week after she betrothal to , she have wait and wait , in the blind vague hope that something would happen to set she free from she terror ; but she could wait no longer . all the force of she nature have be concentrate on the one effort of concealment , and she have shrunk with irresistible dread from every course that could tend towards a betrayal of she miserable secret . whenever the thought of write to have occur to she , she have reject it . he could do nothing for she that would shelter she from discovery and scorn among the relative and neighbour who once more make all she world , now she airy dream have vanish . she imagination no longer see happiness with , for he could do nothing that would satisfy or soothe she pride . no , something else would happen -- something must happen -- to set she free from this dread . in young , childish , ignorant soul there be constantly this blind trust in some unshapen chance : it be as hard to a boy or girl to believe that a great wretchedness will actually befall they as to believe that they will die . but now necessity be press hard upon she -- now the time of she marriage be close at hand -- she could no longer rest in this blind trust . she must run away ; she must hide herself where no familiar eye could detect she ; and then the terror of wander out into the world , of which she know nothing , make the possibility of go to Arthur a thought which bring some comfort with it . she feel so helpless now , so unable to fashion the future for herself , that the prospect of throw herself on he have a relief in it which be stronger than she pride . as she sit by the pool and shudder at the dark cold water , the hope that he would receive she tenderly -- that he would care for she and think for she -- be like a sense of lulling warmth , that make she for the moment indifferent to everything else ; and she begin now to think of nothing but the scheme by which she should get away . she have have a letter from lately , full of kind word about the coming marriage , which she have hear of from ; and when have read this letter aloud to she uncle , he have say , " I wish 'uld come again now , for she would be a comfort to you aunt when you be go . what do you think , my wench , of ' go to see she as soon as you can be spare and persuade she to come back wi' you ? you might happen persuade she wi's tell she as she aunt want she , for all she write of ' not be able to come . " Hetty have not like the thought of go to , and feel no longing to see , so she only say , " it be so far off , uncle . " but now she think this propose visit would serve as a pretext for go away . she would tell she aunt when she get home again that she should like the change of go to Snowfield for a week or ten day . and then , when she get to , where nobody know she , she would ask for the coach that would take
take she on the way to . be at , and she would go to he . as soon as have determine on this scheme , she rise from the grassy bank of the pool , take up she basket , and go on she way to , for she must buy the wedding thing she have come out for , though she would never want they . she must be careful not to raise any suspicion that she be go to run away . be quite agreeably surprise that wish to go and see and try to bring she back to stay over the wedding . the sooner she go the better , since the weather be pleasant now ; and , when he come in the evening , say , if could set off to - morrow , he would make time to go with she to and see she safe into the coach . " I wish I could go with you and take care of you , Hetty , " he say , the next morning , lean in at the coach door ; " but you will not stay much beyond a week -- the time 's ull seem long . " he be look at she fondly , and he strong hand hold hers in its grasp . feel a sense of protection in he presence -- she be use to it now : if she could have have the past undone and know no other love than she quiet like for ! the tear rise as she give he the last look . " bless she for love I , " say , as he go on he way to work again , with at he heel . but 's tear be not for -- not for the anguish that would come upon he when he find she be go from he for ever . they be for the misery of she own lot , which take she away from this brave tender man who offer up he whole life to she , and throw she , a poor helpless suppliant , on the man who would think it a misfortune that she be oblige to cling to he . at three o'clock that day , when be on the coach that be to take she , they say , to Leicester -- part of the long , long way to -- she feel dimly that she might be travel all this weary journey towards the beginning of new misery . yet be at ; he would surely not be angry with she . if he do not mind about she as he use to do , he have promise to be good to she . five the of , lonely journey , with sadness in the heart ; away from the familiar to the strange : that be a hard and dreary thing even to the rich , the strong , the instruct ; a hard thing , even when we be call by duty , not urge by dread . what be it then to Hetty ? with she poor narrow thought , no longer melt into vague hope , but press upon by the chill of definite fear , repeat again and again the same small round of memory -- shape again and again the same childish , doubtful image of what be to come -- see nothing in this wide world but the little history of she own pleasur and pain ; with so little money in she pocket , and the way so long and difficult . unless she could afford always to go in the coach -- and she feel sure she could not , for the journey to be more expensive than she have expect -- it be plain that she must trust to carrier 's cart or slow waggon ; and what a time it would be before she could get to the end of she journey ! the burly old coachman from , see such a pretty young woman among the outside passenger , have invite she to come and sit beside he ; and feel that it become he as a man and a coachman to open the dialogue with a joke , he apply himself as soon as they be off the stone to the elaboration of one suitable in all respects . after many cut with he whip and glance at out of the corner of he eye , he lift he lip above the edge of he wrapper and say , " he be pretty nigh six foot , I will be bound , isna he , now ? " " who ? " say , rather start . " why , the sweetheart as you have leave behind , or else he as you be goin ' arter -- which be it ? " feel she face flush and then turn pale . she think this coachman must know something about she . he must know , and might tell he where she be go , for it be difficult to country people to believe that those who make a figure in they own parish be not know everywhere else , and it be equally difficult to to understand that chance word could happen to apply closely to she circumstance . she be too frightened to speak . " Hegh , hegh ! " say the coachman , see that he joke be not so gratify as he have expect , " you mun to take it too ser'ous ; if he be behave ill , get another . such a pretty lass as you can get a sweetheart any day . " 's fear be allay by and by , when she find that the coachman make no further allusion to she personal concern ; but it still have the effect of prevent she from ask he what be
be the place on the road to . she tell he she be only go a little way out of , and when she get down at the inn where the coach stop , she hasten away with she basket to another part of the town . when she have form she plan of go to , she have not foresee any difficulty except that of get away , and after she have overcome this by propose the visit to , she thought fly to the meeting with and the question how he would behave to she -- not rest on any probable incidents of the journey . she be too entirely ignorant of travel to imagine any of its detail , and with all she store of money -- she three guinea -- in she pocket , she think herself amply provide . it be not until she find how much it cost she to get to that she begin to be alarme about the journey , and then , for the first time , she feel she ignorance as to the place that must be pass on she way . oppress with this new alarm , she walk along the grim street , and at last turn into a shabby little inn , where she hope to get a cheap lodging for the night . here she ask the landlord if he could tell she what place she must go to , to get to . " well , I can not rightly say . must be pretty nigh , for it be where the king life , " be the answer . " anyhow , you would best go t ' Ashby next -- that be south'ard . but there be as many place from here to as there be house in , by what I can make out . I have never be no traveller myself . but how come a lone young woman like you to be think of ' take such a journey as that ? " " I be go to my brother -- he be a soldier at , " say , frightene at the landlord 's questioning look . " I can not afford to go by the coach ; do you think there be a cart go toward in the morning ? " " yes , there may be cart if anybody know where they start from ; but you might run over the town before you find out . you would best set off and walk , and trust to summat overtak you . " every word sank like lead on 's spirit ; she see the journey stretch bit by bit before she now . even to get to see a hard thing : it might take the day , for what she know , and that be nothing to the rest of the journey . but it must be do -- she must get to . oh , how she year to be again with somebody who would care for she ! she who have never get up in the morning without the certainty of see familiar face , people on whom she have a acknowledged claim ; whose farthest journey have be to on the pillion with she uncle ; whose thought have always be take holiday in dream of pleasure , because all the business of she life be manage for she -- this kittenlike , who till a few month ago have never feel any other grief than that of envy a new ribbon , or be gird at by she aunt for neglect , must now make she toilsome way in loneliness , she peaceful home leave behind for ever , and nothing but a tremulous hope of distant refuge before she . now for the first time , as she lay down to - night in the strange hard bed , she feel that she home have be a happy one , that she uncle have be very good to she , that she quiet lot at among the thing and people she know , with she little pride in she one best gown and bonnet , and nothing to hide from any one , be what she would like to wake up to as a reality , and find that all the feverish life she have know besides be a short nightmare . she think of all she have leave behind with yearning regret for she own sake . she own misery fill she heart -- there be no room in it for other people 's sorrow . and yet , before the cruel letter , have be so tender and loving . the memory of that have still a charm for she , though it be no more than a soothing dratch that just make pain bearable . for could conceive no other existence for herself in future than a hidden one , and a hidden life , even with love , would have have no delights for she ; still less a life mingl with shame . she know no romance , and have only a feeble share in the feeling which be the source of romance , so that well - read lady may find it difficult to understand she state of mind . she be too ignorant of everything beyond the simple notions and habits in which she have be bring up to have any more definite idea of she probable future than that yoArthu would take care of she somehow , and shelter she from anger and scorn . he would not marry she and make she a lady ; and apart from that she could think of nothing he could give towards which she look with longing and ambition . the next morning she rise early , and take only some milk and bread for she breakfast , set out to walk on the road towards
towards , under a leaden - colou sky , with a narrowing streak of yellow , like a depart hope , on the edge of the horizon . now in she faintness of heart at the length and difficulty of she journey , she be most of all afraid of spend she money , and become so destitute that she would have to ask people 's charity ; for have the pride not only of a proud nature but of a proud class -- the class that pay the most poor-rate , and most shudder at the idea of profit by a poor-rate . it have not yet occur to she that she might get money for she locket and earring which she carry with she , and she apply all she small arithmetic and knowledge of price to calculate how many meal and how many ride be contain in she two guinea , and the odd shilling , which have a melancholy look , as if they be the pale ash of the other bright - flaming coin . for the first few miles out of , she walk on bravely , always fix on some tree or gate or project bush at the most distant visible point in the road as a goal , and feel a faint joy when she have reach it . but when she come to the fourth milestone , the first she have happen to notice among the long grass by the roadside , and read that she be still only four mile beyond , she courage sank . she have come only this little way , and yet feel tired , and almost hungry again in the keen morning air ; for though be accustom to much movement and exertion indoors , she be not use to long walk which produce quite a different sort of fatigue from that of household activity . as she be look at the milestone she feel some drop fal on she face -- it be begin to rain . here be a new trouble which have not enter into she sad thought before , and quite weigh down by this sudden addition to she burden , she sit down on the step of a stile and begin to sob hysterically . the beginning of hardship be like the first taste of bitter food -- it seem for a moment unbearable ; yet , if there be nothing else to satisfy we hunger , we take another bite and find it possible to go on . when recover from she burst of weeping , she rally she faint courage : it be rain , and she must try to get on to a village where she might find rest and shelter . presently , as she walk on wearily , she hear the rumbling of heavy wheel behind she ; a covered waggon be come , creep slowly along with a slouching driver crack he whip beside the horse . she wait for it , think that if the waggoner be not a very sour -look man , she would ask he to take she up . as the waggon approach she , the driver have fall behind , but there be something in the front of the big vehicle which encourage she . at any previous moment in she life she would not have notice it , but now , the new susceptibility that suffer have awaken in she cause this object to impress she strongly . it be only a small white - and - liver - colou spaniel which sit on the front ledge of the waggon , with large timid eye , and a incessant trembling in the body , such as you may have see in some of these small creature . care little for animal , as you know , but at this moment she feel as if the helpless timid creature have some fellowship with she , and without be quite aware of the reason , she be less doubtful about speak to the driver , who now come forward -- a large ruddy man , with a sack over he shoulders , by way of scarf or mantle . " could you take I up in you waggon , if you be go towards ? " say . " I will pay you for it . " " Aw , " say the big fellow , with that slowly dawn smile which belong to heavy face , " I can take y ' up fawst enough wi'out bein ' pay of r't if you dooant mind lyin ' a bit closish a - top of ' the wool - pack . where do you coom from ? and what do you want at ? " " I come from . I be go a long way -- to . " " what ! Arter some service , or what ? " " go to my brother -- he be a soldier there . " " well , I be go no furder nor -- and yofu enough too -- but I will take you , if you dooant mind be a bit long on the road . Th's hoss wooant feel you weight no more nor they feel the little doog there , as I pick up on the road a fortn iot agoo . he war lose , I b'lieve , a be be all of a tremble iver sin ' . come , gi' we you basket a ' come behind and let I put y ' in . " to lie on the wool - pack , with a cranny leave between the curtain of the awning to let in the air , be luxury to Hetty now , and she half - sleep away the hour till the driver come to ask she if she want to get down and have " some victual " ;
; he himself be go to eat he dinner at this " public . " late at night they reach , and so this second day of 's journey be past . she have spend no money except what she have pay for she food , but she feel that this slow journeying would be intolerable for she another day , and in the morning she find she way to a coach - office to ask about the road to , and see if it would cost she too much to go part of the distance by coach again . yes ! the distance be too great -- the coach be too dear -- she must give they up ; but the elderly clerk at the office , touch by she pretty anxious face , write down for she the name of the chief place she must pass through . this be the only comfort she get in , for the man stare at she as she go along the street , and for the first time in she life wish no one would look at she . she set out walk again ; but this day she be fortunate , for she be soon overtake by a carrier 's cart which carry she to , and by the help of a return chaise , with a drunken postilion -- who frightene she by drive like the son of , and shout hilarious remark at she , twiste himself backwards on he saddle -- she be before night in the heart of woody : but still almost a hundred mile from , they tell she . oh what a large world it be , and what hard work for she to find she way in it ! she go by mistake to - on - , find set down in she list of place , and then she be tell she have come a long way out of the right road . it be not till the fifth day that she get to . that seem but a slight journey as you look at the map , or remember you own pleasant travel to and from the meadowy bank of the . but how wearily long it be to Hetty ! it seem to she as if this country of flat field , and hedgerow , and dot house , and villag , and market - town -- all so much alike to she indifferent eye -- must have no end , and she must go on wander among they for ever , wait tired at toll - gate for some cart to come , and then find the cart go only a little way -- a very little way -- to the miller 's a mile off perhaps ; and she hate go into the public house , where she must go to get food and ask question , because there be always man lounge there , who star at she and joke she rudely . she body be very weary too with these day of new fatigue and anxiety ; they have make she look more pale and worn than all the time of hidden dread she have go through at home . when at last she reach , she impatience and weariness have become too strong for she economical caution ; she determine to take the coach for the rest of the way , though it should cost she all she remain money . she would need nothing at but to find . when she have pay the fare for the last coach , she have only a shilling ; and as she get down at the sign of the Green man in at twelve o'clock in the middle of the seventh day , hungry and faint , the coachman come up , and beg she to " remember he . " she put she hand in she pocket and take out the shilling , but the tear come with the sense of exhaustion and the thought that she be give away she last means of get food , which she really require before she could go in search of . as she hold out the shilling , she lift up she dark tear - fill eye to the coachman 's face and say , " can you give I back sixpence ? " " no , no , " he say , grufinitely , " never mind -- put the shilling up again . " the landlord of the have stand near enough to witness this scene , and he be a man whose abundant feed serve to keep he good nature , as well as he person , in high condition . and that lovely tearful face of 's would have find out the sensitive fibre in most man . " come , young woman , come in , " he say , " and have adrop of ' something ; you be pretty well knock up , I can see that . " he take she into the bar and say to he wife , " here , missis , take this young woman into the parlour ; she be a little overcome " -- for 's tear be fall fast . they be merely hysterical tear : she think she have no reason for weepe now , and be vex that she be too weak and tired to help it . she be at at last , not far from . she look with eager , hungry eye at the bread and meat and beer that the landlady bring she , and for some minute she forget everything else in the delicious sensation of satisfying hunger and recovere from exhaustion . the landlady sit opposite to she as she eat , and look at she earnestly . no wonder : Hetty have throw off she bonnet , and she curl have fall down .
. she face be all the more touching in its youth and beauty because of its weary look , and the good woman 's eyes presently wandere to she figure , which in she hurrie dressing on she journey she have take no pain to conceal ; moreover , the stranger 's eye detect what the familiar unsuspecting eye leave unnoticed . " why , you be not very fit for travelling , " she say , glance while she speak at 's ringless hand . " have you come far ? " " yes , " say , rouse by this question to exert more self - command , and feel the better for the food she have take . " I have come a good long way , and it be very tiring . but I be better now . could you tell I which way to go to this place ? " here take from she pocket a bit of paper : it be the end of 's letter on which he have write he address . while she be speak , the landlord have come in and have begin to look at she as earnestly as he wife have do . he take up the piece of paper which hand across the table , and read the address . " why , what do you want at this house ? " he say . it be in the nature of innkeeper and all man who have no pressing business of they own to ask as many question as possible before give any information . " I want to see a gentleman as be there , " say . " but there be no gentleman there , " return the landlord . " it be shut up -- be shut up this fortnight . what gentleman be it you want ? perhaps I can let you know where to find he . " " it be , " say tremulously , she heart begin to beat painfully at this disappointment of she hope that she should find at once . " ? stop a bit , " say the landlord , slowly . " be he in the ? a tall young officer with a fairish skin and reddish whisker -- and have a servant by the name o' Pym ? " " oh yes , " say ; " you know he -- where be he ? " " a fine sight of ' mile away from here . the 's go to ; it be be go this fortnight . " " look there ! she be faint , " say the landlady , hasten to support , who have lose she miserable consciousness and look like a beautiful corpse . they carry she to the sofa and loose she dress . " here be a bad business , I suspect , " say the landlord , as he bring in some water . " ah , it be plain enough what sort of business it be , " say the wife . " she be not a common flaunting dratchell , I can see that . she look like a respectable country girl , and she come from a good way off , to judge by she tongue . she talk something like that ostler we have that come from the north . he be as honest a fellow as we ever have about the house -- they be all honest folk in the north . " " I never see a prettier young woman in my life , " say the husband . " she be like a pictur in a shop - winder . it go to one 's ' eart to look at she . " " it 'uld have be a good deal better for she if she have be uglier and have more conduct , " say the landlady , who on any charitable construction must have be suppose to have more " conduct " than beauty . " but she be come to again . fetch a drop more water . " the in HETTy be too ill through the rest of that day for any question to be address to she -- too ill even to think with any distinctness of the evils that be to come . she only feel that all she hope be crush , and that instead of have find a refuge she have only reach the border of a new wilderness where no goal lay before she . the sensation of bodily sickness , in a comfortable bed , and with the tendance of the good - natured landlady , make a sort of respite for she ; such a respite as there be in the faint weariness which oblige a man to throw himself on the sand instead of toiling onward under the scorching sun . but when sleep and rest have bring back the strength necessary for the keenness of mental suffering -- when she lay the next morning look at the grow light which be like a cruel task - master return to urge from she a fresh round of hate hopeless labour -- she begin to think what course she must take , to remember that all she money be gone , to look at the prospect of further wander among strangers with the new clearness she on it by the experience of she journey to . but which way could she turn ? it be impossible for she to enter into any service , even if she could obtain it . there be nothing but immediate beggary before she . she think of a young woman who have be find against the church wall at one , nearly dead with cold and hunger -- a tiny infant in she arm . the woman be rescue and take to the parish . " the parish ! " you can
can perhaps hardly understand the effect of that word on a mind like 's , bring up among people who be somewhat hard in they feeling even towards poverty , who live among the field , and have little pity for want and rag as a cruel inevitable fate such as they sometimes seem in city , but hold they a mark of idleness and vice -- and it be idleness and vice that bring burdens on the parish . to the " parish " be next to the prison in obloquy , and to ask anything of stranger -- to beg -- lay in the same far - off hideous region of intolerable shame that have all she life think it impossible she could ever come near . but now the remembrance of that wretch woman whom she have see herself , on she way from church , be carry into 's , come back upon she with the new terrible sense that there be very little now to divide she from the same lot . and the dread of bodily hardship mingle with the dread of shame ; for have the luxurious nature of a round soft - coate pet animal . how she year to be back in she safe home again , cherish and car for as she have always be ! she aunt 's scolding about trifle would have be music to she ears now ; she longe for it ; she use to hear it in a time when she have only trifle to hide . could she be the same Hetty that use to make up the butter in the dairy with the Guelder ros pee in at the window -- she , a runaway whom she friend would not open they door to again , lie in this strange bed , with the knowledge that she have no money to pay for what she receive , and must offer those strangers some of the clothes in she basket ? it be then she think of she locket and ear - ring , and see she pocket lie near , she reach it and spread the contents on the bed before she . there be the locket and ear - ring in the little velvet - line box , and with they there be a beautiful silver thimble which have buy she , the word " remember I " make the ornament of the border ; a steel purse , with she one shilling in it ; and a small red - leather case , fasten with a strap . those beautiful little ear - ring , with they delicate pearl and garnet , that she have try in she ear with such longe in the bright sunshine on the 30th of ! she have no longing to put they in she ear now : she head with it be dark ring of hair lay back languidly on the pillow , and the sadness that rest about she brow and eye be something too hard for regretful memory . yet she put she hand up to she ear : it be because there be some thin gold ring in they , which be also worth a little money . yes , she could surely get some money for she ornament : those yoArthu have give she must have cost a great deal of money . the landlord and landlady have be good to she ; perhaps they would help she to get the money for these thing . but this money would not keep she long . what should she do when it be gone ? where should she go ? the horrible thought of want and beggary drive she once to think she would go back to she uncle and aunt and ask they to forgive she and have pity on she . but she shrank from that idea again , as she might have shrunk from scorching metal . she could never endure that shame before she uncle and aunt , before , and the servants at the chase , and the people at , and everybody who know she . they should never know what have happene to she . what could she do ? she would go away from -- travel again as she have do the last week , and get among the flat green fields with the high hedge round they , where nobody could see she or know she ; and there , perhaps , when there be nothing else she could do , she should get courage to dry herself in some pond like that in the Scantland . yes , she would get away from as soon as possible : she do not like these people at the inn to know about she , to know that she have come to look for . she must think of some reason to tell they why she have ask for he . with this thought she begin to put the thing back into she pocket , mean to get up and dress before the landlady come to she . she have she hand on the red - leather case , when it occur to she that there might be something in this case which she have forgote -- something worth sell ; for without know what she should do with she life , she crave the means of live as long as possible ; and when we desire eagerly to find something , we be apt to search for it in hopeless place . no , there be nothing but common needle and pins , and dry tulip - petal between the paper leave where she have write down she little money - account . but on one of these leave there be a name , which , often as she have see it before , now flash on 's mind like a newly discover message .
. the name be -- , . there be a text above it , write , as well as the name , by 's own hand with a little pencil , one evening that they be sit together and happen to have the red case lie open before she . Hetty do not read the text now : she be only arrest by the name . now , for the first time , she remember without indifference the affectionate kindness have show she , and those word of in the bed - chamber -- that must think of she as a friend in trouble . suppose she be to go to , and ask she to help she ? do not think about thing as other people do . she be a mystery to , but know she be always kind . she could not imagine 's face turn away from she in dark reproof or scorn , 's voice willingly speak ill of she , or rejoice in she misery as a punishment . do not seem to belong to that world of 's , whose glance she dread like scorch fire . but even to she Hetty shrank from beseeching and confession . she could not prevail on herself to say , " I will go to " : she only think of that as a possible alternative , if she have not courage for death . the good landlady be amaze when she see come downstairs soon after herself , neatly dress , and look resolutely self - possess . tell she she be quite well this morning . she have only be very tired and overcome with she journey , for she have come a long way to ask about she brother , who have run away , and they think he be go for a soldier , and might know , for he have be very kind to she brother once . it be a lame story , and the landlady look doubtfully at as she tell it ; but there be a resolute air of self - reliance about she this morning , so different from the helpless prostration of yesterday , that the landlady hardly know how to make a remark that might seem like pry into other people 's affair . she only invite she to sit down to breakfast with they , and in the course of it bring out she ear - ring and locket , and ask the landlord if he could help she to get money for they . she journey , she say , have cost she much more than she expect , and now she have no money to get back to she friend , which she want to do at once . it be not the first time the landlady have see the ornament , for she have examine the contents of 's pocket yesterday , and she and she husband have discuss the fact of a country girl have these beautiful thing , with a stronger conviction than ever that have be miserably delude by the fine young officer . " well , " say the landlord , when have spread the precious trifle before he , " we might take th'ey to the jeweller 's shop , for there be one not far off ; but bless you , they would not give you a quarter of ' what the thing be worth . and you would not like to part with th'ey ? " he add , look at she inquiringly . " oh , I do not mind , " say , hastily , " so as I can get money to go back . " " and they might think the thing be steal , as you want to sell 'em , " he go on , " for it be not usual for a young woman like you to have fine jew'llery like that . " the blood rush to 's face with anger . " I belong to respectable folk , " she say ; " I be not a thief . " " no , that you be not , I will be bound , " say the landlady ; " and you ' no call to say that , " look indignantly at she husband . " the thing be gev to she : that be plain enough to be see . " " I do not mean as I think so , " say the husband , apologetically , " but I say it be what the jeweller might think , and so he would not be offer much money for th'ey . " " well , " say the wife , " suppose you be to advance some money on the thing yourself , and then if she like to redeem th'ey when she get home , she could . but if we hear nothing from she after two month , we might do as we like with th'ey . " I will not say that in this accommodating proposition the landlady have no regard whatever to the possible reward of she good nature in the ultimate possession of the locket and ear - ring : indeed , the effect they would have in that case on the mind of the grocer 's wife have present itself with remarkable vividness to she rapid imagination . the landlord take up the ornament and push out he lip in a meditative manner . he wish Hetty well , doubtless ; but pray , how many of you well - wisher would decline to make a little gain out of you ? you landlady be sincerely affect at parting with you , respect you highly , and will really rejoice if any one else be generous to you ; but at the same time she hand you a bill by which she gain as high a percentage as
as possible . " how much money do you want to get home with , young woman ? " say the well - wisher , at length . " three guinea , " answer , fix on the sum she set out with , for want of any other standard , and afraid of ask too much . " well , I have no objection to advance you three guinea , " say the landlord ; " and if you like to send it I back and get the jewellery again , you can , you know . the Green man be not go to run away . " " oh yes , I will be very glad if you will give I that , " say , relieve at the thought that she would not have to go to the jeweller 's and be star at and question . " but if you want the thing again , you will write before long , " say the landlady , " because when two month be up , we shall make up we minds as you do not want th'ey . " " yes , " say indifferently . the husband and wife be equally content with this arrangement . the husband think , if the ornament be not redeem , he could make a good thing of it by take they to and sell they . the wife think she would coax the good man into letting she keep they . and they be accommodate Hetty , poor thing -- a pretty , respectable - look young woman , apparently in a sad case . they decline to take anything for she food and bed : she be quite welcome . and at eleven o'clock say " good - bye " to they with the same quiet , resolute air she have wear all the morning , mount the coach that be to take she twenty mile back along the way she have come . there be a strength of self - possession which be the sign that the last hope have depart . despair no more lean on other than perfect contentment , and in despair pride cease to be counteract by the sense of dependence . feel that no one could deliver she from the evils that would make life hateful to she ; and no one , she say to herself , should ever know she misery and humiliation . no ; she would not confess even to . she would wander out of sight , and dry herself where she body would never be find , and no one should know what have become of she . when she get off this coach , she begin to walk again , and take cheap ride in cart , and get cheap meal , go on and on without distinct purpose , yet strangely , by some fascination , take the way she have come , though she be determine not to go back to she own country . perhaps it be because she have fix she mind on the grassy Warwickshire fields , with the bushy tree - stud hedgerow that make a hiding - place even in this leafless season . she go more slowly than she come , often get over the stile and sit for hour under the hedgerow , look before she with blank , beautiful eye ; fancie herself at the edge of a hidden pool , low down , like that in the Scantland ; wonder if it be very painful to be drown , and if there would be anything worse after death than what she dread in life . religious doctrine have take no hold on 's mind . she be one of those numerous people who have have godfather and godmother , learn they catechism , be confirm , and go to church every , and yet , for any practical result of strength in life , or trust in death , have never appropriate a single idea or feel . you would misunderstand she thought during these wretched day , if you imagine that they be influence either by religious fear or religious hope . she choose to go to - on - again , where she have go before by mistake , for she remember some grassy field on she former way towards it -- field among which she think she might find just the sort of pool she have in she mind . yet she take care of she money still ; she carry she basket ; death seem still a long way off , and life be so strong in she . she crave food and rest -- she hasten towards they at the very moment she be picture to herself the bank from which she would leap towards death . it be already five day since she have leave , for she have wander about , always avoid speech or questioning look , and recover she air of proud self - dependence whenever she be under observation , choose she decent lodging at night , and dress herself neatly in the morning , and set off on she way steadily , or remain under shelter if it rain , as if she have a happy life to cherish . and yet , even in she most self - conscious moment , the face be sadly different from that which have smile at itself in the old specked glass , or smile at other when they glance at it admiringly . a hard and even fierce look have come in the eyes , though they lash be as long as ever , and they have all they dark brightness . and the cheek be never dimple with smile now . it be the same round , pout , childish prettiness , but with all love and belief in love depart from it -- the
the sadder for its beauty , like that wondrous - face , with the passionate , passionless lip . at last she be among the field she have be dream of , on a long narrow pathway lead towards a wood . if there should be a pool in that wood ! it would be better hidden than one in the field . no , it be not a wood , only a wild brake , where there have once be gravel - pit , leave mounds and hollow stud with brushwood and small tree . she roam up and down , think there be perhaps a pool in every hollow before she come to it , till she limb be weary , and she sit down to rest . the afternoon be far advanced , and the leaden sky be darken , as if the sun be set behind it . after a little while start up again , feel that darkness would soon come on ; and she must put off find the pool till to - morrow , and make she way to some shelter for the night . she have quite lose she way in the field , and might as well go in one direction as another , for atch she know . she walk through field after field , and no village , no house be in sight ; but there , at the corner of this pasture , there be a break in the hedge ; the land seem to dip down a little , and two tree lean towards each other across the opening . 's heart give a great heat as she think there must be a pool there . she walk towards it heavily over the tuft grass , with pale lip and a sense of trembling . it be as if the thing be come in spite of herself , instead of be the object of she search . there it be , black under the darkening sky : no motion , no sound near . she set down she basket , and then sank down herself on the grass , trembl . the pool have its wintry depth now : by the time it get shallow , as she remember the pool do at , in the summer , no one could find out that it be she body . but then there be she basket -- she must hide that too . she must throw it into the water -- make it heavy with stone first , and then throw it in . she get up to look about for stone , and soon bring five or six , which she lay down beside she basket , and then sit down again . there be no need to hurry -- there be all the night to dry herself in . she sit lean she elbow on the basket . she be weary , hungry . there be some bun in she basket -- three , which she have supply herself with at the place where she eat she dinner . she take they out now and eat they eagerly , and then sit still again , look at the pool . the soothe sensation that come over she from the satisfaction of she hunger , and this fix dreamy attitude , bring on drowsiness , and presently she head sank down on she knee . she be fast asleep . when she awoke it be deep night , and she feel chill . she be frightene at this darkness -- frightene at the long night before she . if she could but throw herself into the water ! no , not yet . she begin to walk about that she might get warm again , as if she would have more resolution then . oh how long the time be in that darkness ! the bright hearth and the warmth and the voice of home , the secure uprising and lie down , the familiar field , the familiar people , the Sunday and holiday with they simple joy of dress and feasting -- all the sweet of she young life rush before she now , and she seem to be stretch she arm towards they across a great gulf . she set she tooth when she think of . she curse he , without know what she cursing would do . she wish he too might know desolation , and cold , and a life of shame that he da not end by death . the horror of this cold , and darkness , and solitude -- out of all human reach -- become greater every long minute . it be almost as if she be dead already , and know that she be dead , and long to get back to life again . but no : she be alive still ; she have not take the dreadful leap . she feel a strange contradictory wretchedness and exultation : wretchedness , that she do not dare to face death ; exultation , that she be still in life -- that she might yet know light and warmth again . she walk backwards and forward to warm herself , begin to discern something of the object around she , as she eye become accustom to the night -- the darker line of the hedge , the rapid motion of some liive creature -- perhaps a field - mouse -- rush across the grass . she no longer feel as if the darkness hedge she in . she think she could walk back across the field , and get over the stile ; and then , in the very next field , she think she remember there be a hovel of furze near a sheepfold . if she could get into that hovel , she would be warmer . she could pass the night there , for that
that be what do at in lambing - time . the thought of this hovel bring the energy of a new hope . she take up she basket and walk across the field , but it be some time before she get in the right direction for the stile . the exercise and the occupation of find the stile be a stimulus to she , however , and lighten the horror of the darkness and solitude . there be sheep in the next field , and she start a group as she set down she basket and get over the stile ; and the sound of they movement comforte she , for it assure she that she impression be right -- this be the field where she have see the hovel , for it be the field where the sheep be . right on along the path , and she would get to it . she reach the opposite gate , and feel she way along its rail and the rail of the sheep - fold , till she hand encounter the pricking of the gorsy wall . delicious sensation ! she have find the shelter . she grope she way , touch the prickly gorse , to the door , and push it open . it be a ill - smell close place , but warm , and there be straw on the ground . Hetty sank down on the straw with a sense of escape . Tears come -- she have never she tear before since she leave -- tear and sob of hysterical joy that she have still hold of life , that she be still on the familiar earth , with the sheep near she . the very consciousness of she own limb be a delight to she : she turn up she sleeve , and kiss she arm with the passionate love of life . warmth and weariness lull she in the midst of she sob , and she fall continually into dozing , fancie herself at the brink of the pool again -- fancie that she have jump into the water , and then awak with a start , and wonder where she be . but at last deep dreamless sleep come ; she head , guard by she bonnet , find a pillow against the gorsy wall , and the poor soul , drive to and fro between two equal terror , find the one relief that be possible to it -- the relief of unconsciousness . ! that relief seem to end the moment it have begin . it seem to as if those dozen dream have only pass into another dream -- that she be in the hovel , and she aunt be stand over she with a candle in she hand . she tremble under she aunt 's glance , and open she eye . there be no candle , but there be light in the hovel -- the light of early morn through the open door . and there be a face look down on she ; but it be a unknown face , belong to a elderly man in a smock - frock . " why , what do you do here , young woman ? " the man say roughly . tremble still worse under this real fear and shame than she have do in she momentary dream under she aunt 's glance . she feel that she be like a beggar already -- find sleeping in that place . but in spite of she trembl , she be so eager to account to the man for she presence here , that she find word at once . " I lose my way , " she say . " I be travel -- north 'ard , and I get away from the road into the field , and be overtake by the dark . will you tell I the way to the nearest village ? " she get up as she be speak , and put she hand to she bonnet to adjust it , and then laid hold of she basket . the man look at she with a slow bovine gaze , without give she any answer , for some seconds . then he turn away and walk towards the door of the hovel , but it be not till he get there that he stand still , and , turn he shoulder half - round towards she , say , " Aw , I can show you the way to , if you like . but what do you do gettin ' out of ' the highroad ? " he add , with a tone of gruff reproof . " y 'ull be gettin ' into mischief , if you dooant mind . " " yes , " say , " I will not do it again . I will keep in the road , if you will be so good as show I how to get to it . " " why dooant you keep where there be a finger - poass ang folk to ax the way on ? " the man say , still more grufinitely . " anybody 'uld think you be a wild woman , a ' look at yer . " be frightene at this gruff old man , and still more at this last suggestion that she look like a wild woman . as she follow he out of the hovel she think she would give he a sixpence for tell she the way , and then he would not suppose she be wild . as he stop to point out the road to she , she put she hand in she pocket to get the six - pence ready , and when he be turn away , without say good - morning , she hold it out to he and say , " thank you ; will
will you please to take something for you trouble ? " he look slowly at the sixpence , and then say , " I want none of ' you money . you would better take care o not , else you will get it stool from yer , if you go trapesin ' about the field like a mad woman a - thatway . " the man leave she without further speech , and hold on she way . another day have risen , and she must wander on . it be no use to think of drown herself -- she could not do it , at least while she have money leave to buy food and strength to journey on . but the incident on she wake this morning heighten she dread of that time when she money would be all gone ; she would have to sell she basket and clothes then , and she would really look like a beggar or a wild woman , as the man have say . the passionate joy in life she have felt in the night , after escape from the brink of the black cold death in the pool , be go now . Life now , by the morning light , with the impression of that man 's hard wonder look at she , be as full of dread as death -- it be worse ; it be a dread to which she feel chain , from which she shrank and shrank as she do from the black pool , and yet could find no refuge from it . she take out she money from she purse , and look at it . she have still two - and - twenty shilling ; it would serve she for many day more , or it would help she to get on faster to , within reach of . the thought of urge itself more strongly now , since the experience of the night have drive she shudder imagination away from the pool . if it have be only go to -- if nobody besides would ever know -- could have make up she mind to go to she . the soft voice , the pitying eyes , would have draw she . but afterwards the other people must know , and she could no more rush on that shame than she could rush on death . she must wander on and on , and wait for a lower depth of despair to give she courage . perhaps death would come to she , for she be get less and less able to bear the day 's weariness . and yet -- such be the strange action of we soul , draw we by a lurking desire towards the very end we dread -- Hetty , when she set out again from , ask the straightest road northward towards , and keep it all that day . poor wander , with the rounded childish face and the hard , unloving , despaire soul look out of it -- with the narrow heart and narrow thought , no room in they for any sorrow but she own , and taste that sorrow with the more intense bitterness ! my heart bleed for she as I see she toiling along on she weary foot , or seat in a cart , with she eye fix vacantly on the road before she , never think or car whither it tend , till hunger come and make she desire that a village may be near . what will be the end , the end of she objectless wander , apart from all love , care for human being only through she pride , cling to life only as the hunt wounded brute cling to it ? preserve you and I from be the beginner of such misery ! the the first ten day after 's departure pass as quietly as any other day with the family at the , and with Adam at he daily work . they have expect to stay away a week or ten day at least , perhaps a little longer if come back with she , because there might then be something to detain they at . but when a fortnight have pass they begin to feel a little surprise that do not return ; she must surely have find it pleasanter to be with than any one could have suppose . , for he part , be get very impatient to see she , and he resolve that , if she do not appear the next day ( ) , he would set out on morning to fetch she . there be no coach on a , but by set out before it be light , and perhaps get a lift in a cart by the way , he would arrive pretty early at , and bring back Hetty the next day -- too , if she be come . it be quite time come home , and he would afford to lose he for the sake of bring she . he project be quite approve at the farm when he go there on evening . desire he emphatically not to come back without , for she have be quite too long away , consider the thing she have to get ready by the middle of , and a week be surely enough for any one to go out for they health . as for , . have small hope of they bring she , unless they could make she believe the folk at be twice as miserable as the folk at . " though , " say , by way of conclusion , " you might tell she she be get but one aunt left , and she be waste pretty nigh to a shadder ; and we shall p'rhaps all be go twenty mile farther off she next
next , and shall die of ' broken heart among strange folk , and leave the child fatherless and motherless . " " Nay , nay , " say , who certainly have the air of a man perfectly heart - whole , " it isna so bad as that . the e't look rarely now , and get flesh every day . but I would be glad for t ' come , for she would help thee wi' the little un : they take t ' she wonderful . " so at daybreak , on , set off . go with he the first mile or two , for the thought of and the possibility that might come again make he restless , and the walk with in the cold morning air , both in they best clothes , help to give he a sense of . it be the last morning in , with a low grey sky , and a slight hoar - frost on the green border of the road and on the black hedge . they hear the gurgling of the full brooklet hurrie down the hill , and the faint twittering of the early bird . for they walk in silence , though with a pleased sense of companionship . " good - bye , lad , " say , lay he hand on 's shoulder and look at he affectionately as they be about to part . " I wish thee wast go all the way wi' I , and as happy as I be . " " I be content , Addy , I be content , " say cheerfully . " I will be a old bachelor , belike , and make a fuss wi' thy child . " the 'y turn away from each other , and walk leisurely homeward , mentally repeat one of he favourite hymn -- he be very fond of hymn : and be the morn Unaccompany by thee : joyless be the day 's return till thy mercy 's beam I see : till thou inward light impart , my eye and warm my heart . visit , then , this soul of mine , Pierce the gloom of sin and grief -- fill I , , all my unbelief . more and more thyself display , Shin to the perfect day . walk much faster , and any one come along the road at sunrise that morning must have have a pleasant sight in this tall broad - chested man , strid along with a carriage as upright and firm as any soldier 's , glance with keen glad eye at the dark - blue hill as they begin to show themselves on he way . in 's life have he face be so free from any cloud of anxiety as it be this morning ; and this freedom from care , as be usual with constructive practical mind like he , make he all the more observant of the object round he and all the more ready to gather suggestion from they towards he own favourite plan and ingenious contrivance . he happy love -- the knowledge that he step be carry he nearer and nearer to , who be so soon to be he -- be to he thought what the sweet morning air be to he sensation : it give he a consciousness of well - be that make activity delightful . every now and then there be a rush of more intense feel towards she , which chase away other image than ; and along with that would come a wonder thankfulness that all this happiness be give to he -- that this life of ours have such sweetness in it . for have a devout mind , though he be perhaps rather impatient of devout word , and he tenderness lay very close to he reverence , so that the one could hardly be stir without the other . but after feeling have well up and pour itself out in this way , busy thought would come back with the greater vigour ; and this morning it be intent on scheme by which the roads might be improve that be so imperfect all through the country , and on picture all the benefit that might come from the exertion of a single country gentleman , if he would set himself to get the roads make good in he own district . it seem a very short walk , the ten mile to , that pretty town within sight of the blue hill , where he break - fast . after this , the country grow barer and barer : no more rolling woods , no more wide - branching tree near frequent homestead , no more bushy hedgerow , but greystone walls intersect the meagre pasture , and dismal wide - scatter greystone house on broken lands where mines have be and be no longer . " a hungry land , " say to himself . " I would rather go south 'ard , where they say it be as flat as a table , than come to live here ; though if like to live in a country where she can be the most comfort to folk , she be I ' the right to live of ' this side ; for she must look as if she would come straight from heaven , like th 's angel in the desert , to strengthen they as ha ' get nothing t ' eat . " and when at last he come in sight of , he think it look like a town that be " fellow to the country , " though the stream through the valley where the great mill stood give a pleasant greenness to the lower field . the town lay , grim , stony , and unshelter , up the side of a steep hill
hill , and do not go forward to it at present , for have tell he where to find . it be at a thatched cottage outside the town , a little way from the mill -- a old cottage , stand sideway towards the road , with a little bit of potato - ground before it . here lod with a elderly couple ; and if she and happen to be out , could learn where they be go , or when they would be at home again . might be out on some preach errand , and perhaps she would have leave at home . Adam could not help hope this , and as he recognize the cottage by the roadside before he , there shine out in he face that involuntary smile which belong to the expectation of a near joy . he hurry he step along the narrow causeway , and rap at the door . it be open by a very clean old woman , with a slow palsied shake of the head . " be at home ? " say . " Eh ?... no , " say the old woman , look up at this tall stranger with a wonder that make she slower of speech than usual . " will you please to come in ? " she add , retire from the door , as if recollect herself . " why , ye're brother to the young man as come afore , arena ye ? " " yes , " say , enter . " that be . I be he brother . he tell I to give he respects to you and you good master . " " aye , the same t ' he . he be a gracious young man . a ' ye feature he , of and 'y ye be darker . sit ye down I ' th ' arm -chair . my man be to come home from meeting . " sit down patiently , not like to hurry the shaking old woman with question , but look eagerly towards the narrow twisting stair in one corner , for he think it be possible might have hear he voice and would come down they . " so you be come to see ? " say the old woman , stand opposite to he . " a ' you didn ' know she be away from home , then ? " " no , " say , " but I think it likely she might be away , see as it be . but the other young woman -- be she at home , or go along with ? " the old woman look at with a bewildered air . " go along wi' she ? " she say . " Eh , have go to , a big town ye may ha's hear on , where there be a many of ' the 's people . she be be gone sin' be a fortnight : they send she the money for she journey . you may see she room here , " she go on , open a door and not notice the effect of she word on . he rise and follow she , and dart a eager glance into the little room with its narrow bed , the portrait of on the wall , and the few book lie on the large . he have have a irrational hope that might be there . he could not speak in the first moment after see that the room be empty ; a undefined fear have seize he -- something have happene to on the journey . still the old woman be so slow of ; speech and apprehension , that might be at after all . " it be a pity ye do to know , " she say . " have ye come from you own country of ' purpose to see she ? " " but -- , " say , abruptly ; " where be she ? " " I know nobody by that name , " say the old woman , wonderingly . " be it anybody ye have hear on at ? " " do there come no young woman here -- very young and pretty -- be a fortnight , to see ? " " Nay ; I and see no young woman . " " think ; be you quite sure ? a girl , eighteen year old , with dark eye and dark curly hair , and a red cloak on , and a basket on she arm ? you could not forget she if you see she . " " Nay ; be a fortnight -- it be the day as go away -- there come nobody . there be ne 'er be nobody ask for she till you come , for the folk about know as she be gone . Eh dear , eh dear , be there summat the matter ? " the old woman have see the ghastly look of fear in 's face . but he be not stun or confound : he be think eagerly where he could inquire about . " yes ; a young woman start from we country to see , be a fortnight . I come to fetch she back . I be afraid something have happen to she . I can not stop . good - bye . " he hasten out of the cottage , and the old woman follow he to the gate , watch he sadly with she shaking head as he almost run towards the town . he be go to inquire at the place where the coach stop . no ! no young woman like have be see there . have any accident happen to the coach a fortnight ago ? no . and there be no coach to take he
he back to Oakbourne that day . well , he would walk : he could not stay here , in wretched inaction . but the innkeeper , see that be in great anxiety , and enter into this new incident with the eagerness of a man who pass a great deal of time with he hand in he pocket look into a obstinately monotonous street , offer to take he back to in he own " tax cart " this very evening . it be not five o'clock ; there be plenty of time for to take a meal and yet to get to before ten o'clock . the innkeeper declare that he really want to go to , and might as well go to - night ; he should have all before he then . , after make a ineffectual attempt to eat , put the food in he pocket , and , drink a dratch of ale , declare himself ready to set off . as they approach the cottage , it occur to he that he would do well to learn from the old woman where be to be find in Leeds : if there be trouble at the farm -- he only half - admit the foreboding that there would be -- the Poyser might like to send for . but have not leave any address , and the old woman , whose memory for name be infirm , could not recall the name of the " bless woman " who be 's chief friend in the at . during that long , long journey in the tax cart , there be time for all the conjecture of importunate fear and struggle hope . in the very first shock of discovering that have not be to , the thought of have dart through like a sharp pang , but he try for some time to ward off its return by busy himself with modes of accounting for the alarming fact , quite apart from that intolerable thought . some accident have happen . have , by some strange chance , get into a wrong vehicle from : she have be take ill , and do not want to frighten they by let they know . but this frail fence of vague improbability be soon hurl down by a rush of distinct agonizing fear . Hetty have be deceive herself in think that she could love and marry he : she have be love yoArthu all the while ; and now , in she desperation at the nearness of they marriage , she have run away . and she be go to he . the old indignation and jealousy rise again , and prompt the suspicion that yoArthu have be deal falsely -- have write to -- have temp she to come to he -- be unwilling , after all , that she should belong to another man besides himself . perhaps the whole thing have be contrive by he , and he have give she direction how to follow he to -- for know that have be go thither three week ago , have recently learn it at the chase . every sad look of 's , since she have be engage to , return upon he now with all the exaggeration of painful retrospect . he have be foolishly sanguine and confident . the poor thing have not perhaps know she own mind for a long while ; have think that she could forget ; have be momentarily draw towards the man who offer she a protecting , faithful love . he could not bear to blame she : she never mean to cause he this dreadful pain . the blame lay with that man who have selfishly play with she heart -- have perhaps even deliberately lure she away . at , the ostler at the remembe such a young woman as describe get out of the coach more than a fortnight ago --be not likely to forget such a pretty lass as that in a hurry -- be sure she have not go on by the coach that go through , but have lose sight of she while he go away with the horse and have never set eye on she again . then go straight to the house from which the coach start : be the most obvious place for to go to first , whatever might be she destination , for she would hardly venture on any but the chief coach - road . she have be notice here too , and be remember to have sit on the box by the coachman ; but the coachman could not be see , for another man have be drive on that road in he stead the last three or four day . he could probably be see at , through inquiry at the inn where the coach put up . so the anxious heart - stricken Adam must of necessity wait and try to rest till morning -- nay , till eleven o'clock , when the coach start . at another delay occur , for the old coachman who have drive Hetty would not be in the town again till night . when he do come he remember Hetty well , and remember he own joke address to she , quote it many time to , and observe with equal frequency that he think there be something more than common , because have not laugh when he joke she . but he declare , as the people have do at the inn , that he have lose sight of directly she get down . part of the next morning be consume in inquirie at every house in the town from which a coach start --( all in vain , for you know do not start from Stonition by coach , but on foot in the grey morning ) -- and then in walk
walk out to the first toll - gate on the different line of road , in the forlorn hope of find some recollection of she there . no , she be not to be trace any farther ; and the next hard task for be to go home and carry the wretched tiding to the . as to what he should do beyond that , he have come to two distinct resolution amidst the tumult of think and feel which be go on within he while he go to and fro . he would not mention what he know of 's behaviour to till there be a clear necessity for it : it be still possible Hetty might come back , and the disclosure might be a injury or a offence to she . and as soon as he have be home and do what be necessary there to prepare for he further absence , he would start off to : if he find no trace of on the road , he would go straight to and make himself certain how far he be acquaint with she movement . several time the thought occur to he that he would consult , but that would be useless unless he tell he all , and so betraye the secret about . it seem strange that , in the incessant occupation of he mind about , should never have alight on the probability that she have go to , ignorant that be no longer there . perhaps the reason be that he could not conceive 's throw herself on yoArthu uncalled ; he imagine no cause that could have drive she to such a step , after that letter write in . there be but two alternative in he mind : either yoArthu have write to she again and entice she away , or she have simply fle from she approach marriage with himself because she find , after all , she could not love he well enough , and yet be afraid of she friend 's anger if she retract . with this last determination on he mind , of go straight to , the thought that he have spend two day in inquiry which have prove to be almost useless , be torture to ; and yet , since he would not tell the Poyser he conviction as to where be gone , or he intention to follow she thither , he must be able to say to they that he have trace she as far as possible . it be after twelve o'clock on night when reach ; and , unwilling to disturb he mother and Seth , and also to encounter they question at that hour , he throw himself without undresse on a bed at the " , " and sleep hard from pure weariness . not more than four hour , however , for before five o'clock he set out on he way home in the faint morning twilight . he always keep a key of the workshop door in he pocket , so that he could let himself in ; and he wish to enter without awak he mother , for he be anxious to avoid tell she the new trouble himself by see Seth first , and ask he to tell she when it should be necessary . he walk gently along the yard , and turn the key gently in the door ; but , as he expect , , who lay in the workshop , give a sharp bark . it subside when he see , hold up he finger at he to impose silence , and in he dumb , tailless joy he must content himself with rub he body against he master 's leg . be too heart - sick to take notice of 's fondling . he throw himself on the bench and stare dully at the wood and the sign of work around he , wonder if he should ever come to feel pleasure in they again , while Gyp , dimly aware that there be something wrong with he master , laid he rough grey head on 's knee and wrinkle he brows to look up at he . , since afternoon , have be constantly among strange people and in strange place , have no associations with the detail of he daily life , and now that by the light of this new morning he be come back to he home and surround by the familiar object that seem for ever rob of they charm , the reality -- the hard , inevitable reality of he trouble presse upon he with a new weight . right before he be a unfinished chest of drawer , which he have be make in spare moment for 's use , when he home should be hers . Seth have not hear 's entrance , but he have be rouse by bark , and hear he move about in the room above , dress himself . 's first thought be about he brother : he would come home to - day , surely , for the business would be want he sadly by to - morrow , but it be pleasant to think he have have a longer holiday than he have expect . and would come too ? feel that that be the greatest happiness he could look forward to for himself , though he have no hope leave that she would ever love he well enough to marry he ; but he have often say to himself , it be better to be 's friend and brother than any other woman 's husband . if he could but be always near she , instead of live so far off ! he come downstairs and open the inner door lead from the kitchen into the workshop , intend to let out ; but he stand still in the doorway , smite
smite with a sudden shock at the sight of seate listlessly on the bench , pale , unwashed , with sunken blank eye , almost like a drunkard in the morning . but feel in a instant what the mark mean -- not drunkenness , but some great calamity . look up at he without speaking , and move forward towards the bench , himself trembl so that speech do not come readily . " have mercy on we , , " he say , in a low voice , sit down on the bench beside , " what be it ? " be unable to speak . the strong man , accustom to suppress the sign of sorrow , have feel he heart swell like a child 's at this first approach of sympathy . he fall on 's neck and sob . be prepare for the worst now , for , even in he recollection of they boyhood , have never sob before . " be it death , ? be she dead ? " he ask , in a low tone , when raise he head and be recover himself . " no , lad ; but she be go -- go away from we . she be never be to . be be go to ever since last be a fortnight , the very day Hetty set out . I can not find out where she go after she get to . " be silent from utter astonishment : he know nothing that could suggest to he a reason for 's go away . " Hast any notion what she be do it for ? " he say , at last . " she can not ha ' love I . she do not like we marriage when it come nigh -- that must be it , " say . he have determine to mention no further reason . " I hear mother stirring , " say . " must we tell she ? " " no , not yet , " say , rise from the bench and push the hair from he face , as if he want to rouse himself . " I can not have she tell yet ; and I must set out on another journey directly , after I have be to the village and th' . I can not tell thee where I be go , and thee must say to she I be go on business as nobody be to know anything about . I will go and wash myself now . " move towards the door of the workshop , but after a step or two he turn round , and , meet 's eye with a calm sad glance , he say , " I must take all the money out of ' the tin box , lad ; but if anything happen to I , all the rest will be thine , to take care o' mother with . " be pale and trembl : he feel there be some terrible secret under all this . " brother , " he say , faintly -- he never call " " except in solemn moment --" I do not believe you will do anything as you can not ask 's bless on . " " Nay , lad , " say , " do not be afraid . I be for do nuy but what be a man 's duty . " the think that if he betraye he trouble to he mother , she would only distress he by word , half of blundering affection , half of irrepressible triumph that prove as unfit to be he wife as she have always foreseen , bring back some of he habitual firmness and self - command . he have feel ill on he journey home -- he tell she when she come down -- have stay all night at for that reason ; and a bad headache , that still hang about he this morning , account for he paleness and heavy eye . he determine to go to the village , in the first place , attend to he business for a hour , and give notice to of he be oblige to go on a journey , which he must beg he not to mention to any one ; for he wish to avoid go to the near breakfast - time , when the child and servants would be in the house - place , and there must be exclamation in they hear about he have return without . he wait until the clock struck nine before he leave the work - yard at the village , and set off , through the field , towards the farm . it be a immense relief to he , as he come near the , to see advanc towards he , for this would spare he the pain of go to the house . be walk briskly this morning , with a sense of spring business on he mind : he be go to cast the master 's eye on the shoeing of a new cart - horse , carry he spud as a useful companion by the way . he surprise be great when he catch sight of , but he be not a man give to presentiment of evil . " why , , lad , I s't you ? have ye be all this time away and not bring the lass back , after all ? where be they ? " " no , I have not bring th'ey , " say , turn round , to indicate that he wish to walk back with . " why , " say , look with sharper attention at , " ye look bad . be there anything happen ? " " yes , " say , heavily . " a sad thing 's happen .
. I didto find at . " 's good - natured face show sign of troubled astonishment . " not find she ? what be happen to she ? " he say , he thought fly at once to bodily accident . " that I can not tell , whether anything be happene to she . she never go to -- she take the coach to , but I can not learn nothing of she after she get down from the coach . " " why , you donna mean she be run away ? " say , stand still , so puzzl and bewilder that the fact do not yet make itself feel as a trouble by he . " she must ha ' do , " say . " she do not like we marriage when it come to the point -- that must be it . she would mistake she feeling . " be silent for a minute or two , look on the ground and root up the grass with he spud , without know what he be do . he usual slowness be always treble when the subject of speech be painful . at last he look up , right in 's face , say , " then she do to deserve t ' ha ' ye , my lad . An' I feel I ' fault myself , for she be my niece , and I be allays hot for she marr' ye . there be no amend I can make ye , lad -- the more be the pity : it be a sad cut - up for ye , I doubt . " Adam could say nothing ; and , after pursue he walk for a little while , go on , " I will be bound she be gone after try to get a lady 's maid 's place , for she would get that in she head half a year ago , and want I to gi' my consent . but I would think better on she " -- he add , shak he head slowly and sadly -- " I would think better on she , nor to look for this , after she would gi'en y ' she word , a ' everything be get ready . " have the strongest motive for encourage this supposition in , and he even try to believe that it might possibly be true . he have no warrant for the certainty that she be go to . " it be better it should be so , " he say , as quietly as he could , " if she feel she could not like I for a husband . better run away before than repent after . I hope you will not look harshly on she if she come back , as she may do if she find it hard to get on away from home . " " I can to look on she as I have do before , " say decisively . " she have act bad by you , and by all of we . but I will not turn my back on she : she be but a young un , and it be the first harm I have know on she . it will be a hard job for I to tell she aunt . why didna come back wi' ye ? she have ha's help to pacify she aunt a bit . " " Dinah be not at . she be be go to Leed this fortnight , and I could not learn from th ' old woman any direction where she be at Leeds , else I should ha ' bring it you . " " she would a deal better be stay wi' she own kin , " say , indignantly , " than go preach among strange folk a - that'n . " " I must leave you now , , " say , " for I have a deal to see to . " " aye , you would best be after you business , and I must tell the missis when I go home . it be a hard job . " " but , " say , " I beg particular , you will keep what be happen quiet for a week or two . I have not tell my mother yet , and there be no know how thing may turn out . " " aye , aye ; least say , soonest mende . we 'n no need to say why the match be break off , a ' we may hear of she after a bit . shake hand wi' I , lad : I wish I could make thee amend . " there be something in 's throat at that moment which cause he to bring out those scanty word in rather a broken fashion . yet know what they mean all the better , and the two honest man grasp each other 's hard hand in mutual understanding . there be nothing now to hinder from set off . he have tell to go to the chase and leave a message for the squire , say that have be oblige to start off suddenly on a journey -- and to say as much , and no more , to any one else who make inquirie about he . if the Poyser learn that he be go away again , kknow they would infer that he be go in search of . he have intend to go right on he way from the , but now the impulse which have frequently visit he before -- to go to , and make a confident of he -- recur with the new force which belong to a last opportunity . he be about to start on a long journey -- a difficult one -- by sea --
-- and no soul would know where he be gone . if anything happen to he ? or , if he absolutely need help in any matter concern ? be to be trust ; and the feeling which make shrink from tell anything which be she secret must give way before the need there be that she should have some one else besides himself who would be prepared to defend she in the worst extremity . towards , even though he might have incur no new guilt , feel that he be not bound to keep silence when 's interest call on he to speak . " I must do it , " say , when these thought , which have spread themselves through hour of he sad journeying , now rush upon he in a instant , like a wave that have be slowly gather ; " it be the right thing . I can not stand alone in this way any longer . " the turn he face towards and walk with he swiftest stride , look at he watch with the fear that might be go out -- hunt , perhaps . the fear and haste together produce a state of strong excitement before he reach the rectory gate , and outside it he see the deep mark of a recent hoof on the gravel . but the hoof be turn towards the gate , not away from it , and though there be a horse against the stable door , it be not 's : it have evidently have a journey this morning , and must belong to some one who have come on business . be at home , then ; but could hardly find breath and calmness to tell Carroll that he want to speak to the rector . the double suffering of certain and uncertain sorrow have begin to shake the strong man . the butler look at he wonderingly , as he throw himself on a bench in the passage and stare absently at the clock on the opposite wall . the master have somebody with he , he say , but he hear the study door open -- the stranger seem to be come out , and as be in a hurry , he would let the master know at once . sit look at the clock : the minute - hand be hurry along the last five minute to ten with a loud , hard , indifferent tick , and watch the movement and listen to the sound as if he have have some reason for do so . in we time of bitter suffer there be almost always these pause , when we consciousness be benumb to everything but some trivial perception or sensation . it be as if semi -idiocy come to give we rest from the memory and the dread which refuse to leave we in we sleep . Carroll , come back , recal to the sense of he burden . he be to go into the study immediately . " I can not think what that strange person 's come about , " the butler add , from mere incontinence of remark , as he proceed to the door , " he be go I ' the dining - room . and master look unaccountable -- as if he be frightened . " take no notice of the word : he could not care about other people 's business . but when he enter the study and look in 's face , he feel in a instant that there be a new expression in it , strangely different from the warm friendliness it have always worn for he before . a letter lay open on the table , and 's hand be on it , but the change glance he cast on could not be owe entirely to preoccupation with some disagreeable business , for he be look eagerly towards the door , as if 's entrance be a matter of poignant anxiety to he . " you want to speak to I , , " he say , in that low constrainedly quiet tone which a man use when he be determined to suppress agitation . " sit down here . " he point to a chair just opposite to he , at no more than a yard 's distance from he own , and sit down with a sense that this cold manner of 's give a additional unexpected difficulty to he disclosure . but when have make up he mind to a measure , he be not the man to renounce it for any but imperative reason . " I come to you , sir , " he say , " as the gentleman I look up to most of anybody . I have something very painful to tell you -- something as it will pain you to hear as well as I to tell . but if I speak of ' the wrong other people have do , you will see I do not speak till I ' good reason . " nod slowly , and go on rather tremulously , " you be t ' ha ' marry I and , you know , sir , of ' the fifteenth of ' this month . I think she love I , and I be th's happiest man I ' the parish . but a dreadful blow 's come upon I . " start up from he chair , as if involuntarily , but then , determined to control himself , walk to the window and look out . " she have go away , sir , and we do not know where . she say she be go to o's be a fortnight , and I go last to fetch she back ; but she would never be there , and she take the coach to , and beyond that I
I can not trace she . but now I be go a long journey to look for she , and I can not trust t ' anybody but you where I be go . " come back from the window and sit down . " have you no idea of the reason why she go away ? " he say . " it be plain enough she do not want to marry I , sir , " say . " she do not like it when it come so near . but that be not all , I doubt . there be something else I must tell you , sir . there be somebody else concerned besides I . " a gleam of something -- it be almost like relief or joy -- come across the eager anxiety of 's face at that moment . be look on the ground , and pause a little : the next word be hard to speak . but when he go on , he lift up he head and look straight at . he would do the thing he have resolve to do , without flinch . " you know who be the man I have reckon my greatest friend , " he say , " and use to be proud to think as I should pass my life I ' work for he , and have felt so ever since we be lad .... " , as if all self - control have forsake he , grasp 's arm , which lay on the table , and , clutch it tightly like a man in pain , say , with pale lip and a low hurried voice , " no , , no -- do not say it , for 's sake ! " , surprise at the violence of 's feeling , repent of the word that have pass he lip and sit in distressed silence . the grasp on he arm gradually relaxed , and throw himself back in he chair , say , " go on -- I must know it . " " that man play with 's feeling , and behave to she as he ' no right to do to a girl in she station of ' life -- make she present and use to go and meet she out a - walking . I find it out only two day before he go away -- find he a - kiss she as they be part in the Grove . there have be nothing say between I and then , though I would love she for a long while , and she know it . but I reproach he with he wrong action , and word and blow pass between we ; and he say solemnly to I , after that , as it have be all nonsense and no more than a bit of ' flirting . but I make he write a letter to tell Hetty he would mean nothing , for I see clear enough , sir , by several thing as I have not understand at the time , as he would get hold of she heart , and I think she would belike go on thinking of he and never come to love another man as want to marry she . and I give she the letter , and she seem to bear it all after a while better than I would expect ... and she behave kinder and kinder to I ... I daresay she do not know she own feeling then , poor thing , and they come back upon she when it be too late ... I do not want to blame she ... I can not think as she mean to deceive I . but I be encourage to think she love I , and -- you know the rest , sir . but it be on my mind as he be be false to I , and ' tice she away , and she be go to he -- and I be go now to see , for I can never go to work again till I know what be become of she . " during 's narrative , have have time to recover he self - mastery in spite of the painful thought that crowd upon he . it be a bitter remembrance to he now -- that mor when breakfast with he and see as if he be on the verge of a confession . it be plain enough now what he have want to confess . and if they word have take another turn ... if he himself have be less fastidious about intrud on another man 's secret ... it be cruel to think how thin a film have shut out rescue from all this guilt and misery . he see the whole history now by that terrible illumination which the present shed back upon the past . but every other feel as it rush upon he be throw into abeyance by pity , deep respectful pity , for the man who sit before he -- already so bruise , go forth with sad blind resignedness to a unreal sorrow , while a real one be close upon he , too far beyond the range of common trial for he ever to have fear it . he own agitation be quell by a certain awe that come over we in the presence of a great anguish , for the anguish he must inflict on be already present to he . again he put he hand on the arm that lay on the table , but very gently this time , as he say solemnly : " , my dear friend , you have have some hard trials in you life . you can bear sorrow manfully , as well as act manfully . require both tasnks at we hand . and there be
be a heavier sorrow come upon you than any you have yet know . but you be not guilty -- you have not the worst of all sorrow . God help he who have ! " the two pale face look at each other ; in 's there be trembling suspense , in 's hesitating , shrink pity . but he go on . " I have have news of this morning . she be not go to he . she be in -- at . " Adam start up from he chair , as if he think he could have leape to she that moment . but laid hold of he arm again and say , persuasively , " wait , , wait . " so he sit down . " she be in a very unhappy position -- one which will make it worse for you to find she , my poor friend , than to have lose she for ever . " 's lip move tremulously , but no sound come . they move again , and he whisper , " tell I . " " she have be arrest ... she be in prison . " it be as if a insulting blow have bring back the spirit of resistance into . the blood rush to he face , and he say , loudly and sharply , " for what ? " " for a great crime -- the murder of she child . " " it can not be ! " Adam almost shoute , start up from he chair and make a stride towards the door ; but he turn round again , set he back against the bookcase , and look fiercely at . " it be not possible . she never have a child . she can not be guilty . who say it ? " " grant she may be innocent , . we can still hope she be . " " but who say she be guilty ? " say violently . " tell I everything . " " here be a letter from the magistrate before whom she be take , and the constable who arrest she be in the dining - room . she will not confess she name or where she come from ; but I fear , I fear , there can be no doubt it be Hetty . the description of she person corresponds , only that she be say to look very pale and ill . she have a small red - leather pocket - book in she pocket with two name write in it -- one at the beginning , ' , , ' and the other near the end , ' , . ' she will not say which be she own name -- she deny everything , and will answer no question , and application have be make to I , as a magistrate , that I may take measure for identify she , for it be think probable that the name which stand first be she own name . " " but what prohave have they get against she , if it be ? " say , still violently , with a effort that seem to shake he whole frame . " I will not believe it . it could not ha ' be , and none of we know it . " " terrible proof that she be under the temptation to commit the crime ; but we have room to hope that she do not really commit it . try and read that letter , . " take the letter between he shaking hand and try to fix he eye steadily on it . meanwhile go out to give some order . when he come back , 's eye be still on the first page -- he could not read -- he could not put the word together and make out what they mean . he throw it down at last and clench he fist . " it be he do , " he say ; " if there be be any crime , it be at he door , not at hers . he teach she to deceive -- he deceive I first . let them put he on he trial -- let he stand in court beside she , and I will tell them how he get hold of she heart , and ' tice she t ' evil , and then lie to I . be he to go free , while they lay all the punishment on she ... so weak and young ? " the image call up by these last word give a new direction to poor 's madden feeling . he be silent , look at the corner of the room as if he see something there . then he burst out again , in a tone of appeal anguish , " I can not bear it ... of , it be too hard to lay upon I -- it be too hard to think she be wick . " have sit down again in silence . he be too wise to utter soothing word at present , and indeed , the sight of before he , with that look of sudden age which sometimes come over a young face in moment of terrible emotion -- the hard bloodless look of the skin , the deep line about the quivering mouth , the furrow in the brow -- the sight of this strong firm man shatte by the invisible stroke of sorrow , move he so deeply that speech be not easy . stand motionless , with he eye vacantly fix in this way for a minute or two ; in that short space he be live through all he love again . " she can not ha ' do it , " he say , still without move he eye ,
, as if he be only talk to himself : " it be fear make she hide it ... I forgive she for deceive I ... I forgive thee , Hetty ... thee wast deceive too ... it be go hard wig thee , my poor Hetty ... but they will never make I believe it . " he be silent again for a few moment , and then he say , with fierce abruptness , " I will go to he -- I will bring he back -- I will make he go and look at she in she misery -- he shall look at she till he can not forget it -- it shall follow he night and day -- as long as he live it shall follow he -- he sha not escape wi's lie this time -- I will fetch he , I will drag he myself . " in the act of go towards the door , pause automatically and look about for he hat , quite unconscious where he be or who be present with he . have follow he , and now take he by the arm , say , in a quiet but decide tone , " no , , no ; I be sure you will wish to stay and see what good can be do for she , instead of go on a useless errand of vengeance . the punishment will surely fall without you aid . besides , he be no longer in . he must be on he way home -- or would be , long before you arrive , for he grandfather , I know , write for he to come at least ten day ago . I want you now to go with I to . I have order a horse for you to ride with we , as soon as you can compose yourself . " while be speak , recover he consciousness of the actual scene . he rub he hair off he forehead and listen . " remember , " go on , " there be other to think of , and act for , besides yourself , : there be 's friend , the good Poyser , on whom this stroke will fall more heavily than I can bear to think . I expect it from you strength of mind , -- from you sense of duty to and man -- that you will try to act as long as action can be of any use . " in reality , propose this journey to for 's own sake . Movement , with some object before he , be the best means of counteract the violence of suffering in these first hour . " you will go with I to , ? " he say again , after a moment 's pause . " we have to see if it be really Hetty who be there , you know . " " yes , sir , " say , " I will do what you think right . but the folk at ? " " I wish they not to know till I return to tell they myself . I shall have ascertain thing than which I be uncertain about now , and I shall return as soon as possible . come now , the horse be ready . " the Irwine return from in a post -chaise that night , and the first word say to he , as he enter the house , were , that be dead -- find dead in he bed at ten o'clock that morning -- and that Mrs . Irwine desire he to say she should be awake when come home , and she beg he not to go to bed without see she . " well , , " . say , as she son enter she room , " you be come at last . so the old gentleman 's fidgetiness and low spirit , which make he send for in that sudden way , really mean something . I suppose have tell you that be find dead in he be this morning . you will believe my prognostication another time , though I daresay I sha not live to prognosticate anything but my own death . " " what have they do about ? " say . " send a messenger to await he at ? " " yes , be go before the news be bring to we . dear Arthur , I shall live now to see he master at the chase , and make good time on the estate , like a generous - hear fellow as he be . he will be as happy as a king now . " could not help give a slight groan : he be wear with anxiety and exertion , and he mother 's light word be almost intolerable . " what be you so dismal about , ? be there any bad news ? or be you think of the danger for in cross that frightful irish channel at this time of year ? " " no , mother , I be not think of that ; but I be not prepare to rejoice just now . " " you have be worry by this law business that you have be to about . what in the world be it , that you can not tell I ? " " you will know by and by , mother . it would not be right for I to tell you at present . good - night : you will sleep now you have no longer anything to listen for . " give up he intention of send a letter to meet , since it would not now hasten he return : the news of he grandfather 's death would bring he as soon as he could possibly come . he could go to
to bed now and get some needful rest , before the time come for the morning 's heavy duty of carry he sickening news to the and to 's home . himself be not come back from , for though he shrank from see , he could not bear to go to a distance from she again . " it be no use , sir , " he say to the rector , " it be no use for I to go back . I can not go to work again while she be here , and I could not bear the sight of ' the thing and folk round home . I will take a bit of a room here , where I can see the prison wall , and perhaps I shall get , in time , to bear see she . " have not be shake in he belief that be innocent of the crime she be charge with , for , feel that the belief in she guilt would be a crush addition to 's load , have keep from he the fact which leave no hope in he own mind . there be not any reason for thrust the whole burden on at once , and , at parting , only say , " if the evidence should tell too strongly against she , , we may still hope for a pardon . she youth and other circumstance will be a plea for she . " " ah , and it be right people should know how she be temp into the wrong way , " say , with bitter earnestness . " it be right they should know it be a fine gentleman make love to she , and turn she head wi' notion . you will remember , sir , you have promise to tell my mother , and , and the people at the farm , who it be as lead she wrong , else they will think harder of she than she deserve . you will be do she a hurt by spare he , and I hold he the guiltiest before , let she ha ' do what she may . if you spare he , I will expose he ! " " I think you demand be just , , " say , " but when you be calmer , you will judge more mercifully . I say nothing now , only that he punishment be in other hand than ours . " feel it hard upon he that he should have to tell of 's sad part in the story of sin and sorrow -- he who care for with fatherly affection , who have care for he with fatherly pride . but he see clearly that the secret must be know before long , even apart from 's determination , since it be scarcely to be suppose that would persist to the end in she obstinate silence . he make up he mind to withhold nothing from the Poyser , but to tell they the worst at once , for there be no time to rob the tiding of they suddenness . 's trial must come on at the Lent assize , and they be to be hold at the next week . it be scarcely to be hope that could escape the pain of be call as a witness , and it be better he should know everything as long beforehand as possible . before ten o'clock on mor the home at the be a house of mourning for a misfortune feel to be worse than death . the sense of family dishonour be too keen even in the kind - hear Poyser the younger to leave room for any compassion towards . he and he father be simple - minded farmer , proud of they untarnished character , proud that they come of a family which have hold up its head and pay its way as far back as its name be in the parish register ; and have bring disgrace on they all -- disgrace that could never be wip out . that be the all - conquer feeling in the mind both of father and son -- the scorching sense of disgrace , which neutralise all other sensibility -- and be strike with surprise to observe that Poyser be less severe than she husband . we be often start by the severity of mild people on exceptional occasion ; the reason be , that mild people be most liable to be under the yoke of traditional impressions . " I be willing to pay any money as be want towards try to bring she off , " say the younger when be gone , while the old grandfather be cry in the opposite chair , " but I will not go nigh she , nor ever see she again , by my own will . she be make we bread bitter to we for all we life to come , a ' we shall ne 'er hold up we head I ' this parish nor I ' any other . the parson talk of ' folk pity we : it be poor amend pity ' ull make we . " " Pity ? " say the grandfather , sharply . " I ne 'er want folk 's pity i' my life afore ... an' I mun begin to be look down on now , a ' I turn seventy - two last 's , a ' all th' underbearer and pall - bearer as I and pick for my funeral be I ' this parish and the next to 't .... it be o ' no use now ... I mun be to 'en to the grave by strangers . " " do not fret so , father , " say , who have speak very little , be almost overaw by she husband
husband 's unusual hardness and decision . " you will have you child wi' you ; an' there be the lad and the little un ' ull grow up in a new parish as well as I ' th ' old un . " " ah , there be no stay I ' this country for we now , " say , and the hard tear trickle slowly down he round cheek . " we think it 'uld be bad luck if the old squire give we notice this Lady day , but I must gi' notice myself now , a ' see if there can anybody be get to come a ' take to the crop as I and put I ' the ground ; for I wonto stay upo ' that man 's land a day longer nor I be force toot . a ' I , as think he such a good upright young man , as I should be glad when he come to be we landlord . I will ne 'er lift my hat to he again , nor sit I ' the same church wi' he ... a man as have bring shame on respectable folk ... a ' pretend to be such a friend t ' everybody .... poor Adam there ... a fine friend he be be t ' Adam , make speeches a ' talking so fine , a ' all the while poiso the lad 's life , as it be much if he can stay I ' this country any more nor we can . " " a ' you t ' ha ' to go into court , and own you be akin t ' she , " say the old man . " why , they will cast it up to the little un , as be not four ' ear old , some day -- they will cast it up t ' she as she have a cousin try at the ' size for murder . " " it will be they own wickedness , then , " say , with a sob in she voice . " but there be one above ' ull take care of ' the innicent child , else it be but little truth they tell we at church . it will be harder nor ever to die a ' leave the little un , a ' nobody to be a mother to th'ey . " " we would better ha ' send for , if we would know where she be , " say ; " but say she would leave no direction where she would be at Leeds . " " why , she would be wi' that woman as be a friend t ' she , " say , comforte a little by this suggestion of she husband . " I have often hear Dinah talk of she , but I can not remember what name she call she by . but there be ; he be like enough to know , for she be a preaching woman as the think a deal on . " " I will send to , " say . " I will send to tell he to come , or else to send up word of ' the woman 's name , a ' thee canst write a letter ready to send off to Treddles 'on as soon as we can make out a direction . " " it be poor work write letter when you want folk to come to you I ' trouble , " say . " happen it will be ever so long on the road , an' never reach she at last . " before arrive with the message , 's thought too have already fly to , and she have say to , " Eh , there be no comfort for we I ' this world any more , wi'out thee couldst get to come to we , as she do when my old man die . I would like she to come in a ' take I by th 's hand again , a ' talk to I . she would tell I the rights of not , belike -- she would happen know some good I ' all this trouble a ' heart - break comin ' upo ' that poor lad , as ne 'er do a bit of ' wrong in 's life , but war better nor anybody else 's son , pick the country round . Eh , my lad ... , my poor lad ! " " Thee wouldst to like I to leave thee , to go and fetch ? " say , as he mother sob and rock herself to and fro . " fetch she ? " say , look up and pause from she grief , like a cry child who hear some promise of consolation . " why , what place I s't she be at , do they say ? " " it be a good way off , mother -- , a big town . but I could be back in three day , if thee couldst spare I . " " Nay , nay , I can to spare thee . Thee must go a ' see thy brother , a ' bring I word what he be a - doin ' . say he would come an's tell I , but I can to make out so well what it mean when he tell I . Thee must go thysen , sin ' win to let I go to he . write a letter to ? the e't fond enough of ' writin ' when nobody want thee . " " I be not sure where she would be I ' that big town , " say . " if I would go myself , I could ha ' find out
out by ask the member of ' the . but perhaps if I put , preacher , Leeds , of ' th ' outside , it might get to she ; for most like she would be wi's . " come now with the message , and , finde that Poyser be write to , give up the intention of write himself ; but he go to the to tell they all he could suggest about the address of the letter , and warn they that there might be some delay in the delivery , from he not know a exact direction . on leave , have go to , who have also a claim to be acquaint with what be likely to keep away from business for some time ; and before six o'clock that even there be few people in and who have not hear the sad news . have not mention 's name to , and yet the story of he conduct towards , with all the dark shadow cast upon it by its terrible consequence , be presently as well know as that he grandfather be dead , and that he be come into the estate . for feel no motive to keep silence towards the one or two neighbour who venture to come and shake he sorrowfully by the hand on the first day of he trouble ; and , who keep he ear open to all that pass at the rectory , have fram a inferential version of the story , and find early opportunity of communicate it . one of those neighbour who come to and shake he by the hand without speak for some minute be . he have shut up he school , and be on he way to the rectory , where he arrive about half - past seven in the evening , and , send he duty to , beg pardon for trouble he at that hour , but have something particular on he mind . he be show into the study , where soon join he . " well , ? " say , put out he hand . that be not he usual way of salut the schoolmaster , but trouble make we treat all who feel with we very much alike . " sit down . " " you know what i be come about as well as I do , sir , I daresay , " say . " you wish to know the truth about the sad news that have reach you ... about ? " " Nay , sir , what I wish to know be about . I understand you leave he at , and I beg the favour of you to tell I what be the state of the poor lad 's mind , and what he mean to do . for as for that bit of ' pink - and - white they have take the trouble to put in jail , I do not value she a rotten nut -- not a rotten nut -- only for the harm or good that may come out of she to a honest man -- a lad I have set such store by -- trust to , that he would make my bit of ' knowledge go a good way in the world .... why , sir , he be the only scholar I have have in this stupid country that ever have the will or the head - piece for mathematics . if he have not have so much hard work to do , poor fellow , he might have go into the higher branch , and then this might never have happen -- might never have happen . " be heat by the exertion of walk fast in a agitate frame of mind , and be not able to check himself on this first occasion of venting he feeling . but he pause now to rub he moist forehead , and probably he moist eye also . " you will excuse I , sir , " he say , when this pause have give he time to reflect , " for run on in this way about my own feeling , like that foolish dog of mine how in a storm , when there be nobody want to listen to I . I come to hear you speak , not to talk myself -- if you will take the trouble to tell I what the poor lad 's do . " " do not put yourself under any restraint , , " say . " the fact be , I be very much in the same condition as you just now ; I 've a great deal that be painful on my mind , and I find it hard work to be quite silent about my own feeling and only attend to other . I share you concern for , though he be not the only one whose suffering I care for in this affair . he intend to remain at till after the trial : it will come on probably a week to - morrow . he have take a room there , and I encourage he to do so , because I think it better he should be away from he own home at present ; and , poor fellow , he still believe be innocent -- he want to summon up courage to see she if he can ; he be unwilling to leave the spot where she be . " " do you think the creatur 's guilty , then ? " say . " do you think they will hang she ? " " I be afraid it will go hard with she . the evidence be very strong . and one bad symptom be that she deny everything -- deny that she have have a child in the face of the most positive evidence .
. I see she myself , and she be obstinately silent to I ; she shrank up like a frightened animal when she see I . I be never so shocked in my life as at the change in she . but I trust that , in the worst case , we may obtain a pardon for the sake of the innocent who be involved . " " stuff and nonsense ! " say , forget in he irritation to whom he be speak . " I beg you pardon , sir , I mean it be stuff and nonsense for the innocent to care about she be hang . for my own part , I think the sooner such woman be put out of ' the world the better ; and the man that help th'ey to do mischief have better go along with 'em for that matter . what good will you do by keep such vermin alive , eat the victual that 'uld feed rational being ? but if 's fool enough to care about it , I do not want he to suffer more than 's needful .... be he very much cut up , poor fellow ? " add , take out he spectacle and put they on , as if they would assist he imagination . " yes , I be afraid the grief cut very deep , " say . " he look terribly shattered , and a certain violence come over he now and then yesterday , which make I wish I could have remain near he . but I shall go to again to - morrow , and I have confidence enough in the strength of 's principle to trust that he will be able to endure the worst without be drive to anything rash . " , who be involuntarily utter he own thought rather than address in the last sentence , have in he mind the possibility that the spirit of vengeance to -ward , which be the form 's anguish be continually take , might make he seek a encounter that be likely to mend more fatally than the one in the Grove . this possibility heighten the anxiety with which he look forward to 's arrival . but think be refer to suicide , and he face wear a new alarm . " I will tell you what I have in my head , sir , " he say , " and I hope you will approve of it . I be go to shut up my school -- if the scholar come , they must go back again , that be all -- and I shall go to and look after till this business be over . I will pretend I be come to look on at the assize ; he can not object to that . what do you think about it , sir ? " " well , " say , rather hesitatingly , " there would be some real advantage in that ... and I honour you for you friendship towards he , . but ... you must be careful what you say to he , you know . I be afraid you have too little fellow - feel in what you consider he weakness about . " " trust to I , sir -- trust to I . I know what you mean . I have be a fool myself in my time , but that be between you and I . I sha not thrust myself on he only keep my eye on he , and see that he get some good food , and put in a word here and there . " " then , " say , reassure a little as to 's discretion , " I think you will be do a good deed ; and it will be well for you to let 's mother and brother know that you be go . " " yes , sir , yes , " say , rise , and take off he spectacle , " I will do that , I will do that ; though the mother be a whimpering thing -- I do not like to come within earshot of she ; however , she be a straight - back , clean woman , none of you slattern . I wish you good - bye , sir , and thank you for the time you have spare I . you be everybody 's friend in this business -- everybody be friend . it be a heavy weight you have get on you shoulders . " " good - bye , , till we meet at , as I daresay we shall . " hurry away from the rectory , evad 's conversational advance , and say in a exasperated tone to , whose short leg patter beside he on the gravel , " now , I shall be obliged to take you with I , you good - for - nothing woman . you would go frett yourself to death if I leave you -- you know you would , and perhaps get snap up by some tramp . and you will be run into bad company , I expect , put you nose in every hole and corner where you have no business ! but if you do anything disgraceful , I will disow you -- mind that , madam , mind that ! " the of the and upper room in a dull street , with two bed in it -- one laid on the floor . it be ten o'clock on night , and the dark wall opposite the window shut out the moonlight that might have struggle with the light of the one dip candle by which be pretend to read , while he be really look over he spectacle at , seat near the dark window . you would hardly have know
know it be without be tell . he face have get thinner this last week : he have the sunken eye , the neglected beard of a man just risen from a sick - bed . he heavy black hair hang over he forehead , and there be no active impulse in he which incline he to push it off , that he may be more awake to what be around he . he have one arm over the back of the chair , and he seem to be look down at he clasped hand . he be rouse by a knock at the door . " there he be , " say , rise hastily and unfasten the door . it be . rise from he chair with instinctive respect , as approach he and take he hand . " I be late , , " he say , sit down on the chair which place for he , " but I be later in set off from than I intend to be , and I have be incessantly occupy since I arrive . I have do everything now , however --everything that can be do to - night , at least . let we all sit down . " take he chair again mechanically , and , for whom there be no chair remain , sit on the bed in the background . " have you see she , sir ? " say tremulously . " yes , ; I and the chaplain have both be with she this evening . " " do you ask she , sir ... do you say anything about I ? " " yes , " say , with some hesitation , " I speak of you . I say you wish to see she before the trial , if she consent . " as pause , look at he with eager , question eye . " you know she shrink from see any one , . it be not only you -- some fatal influence seem to have shut up she heart against she fellow - creature . she have scarcely say anything more than ' no ' either to I or the chaplain . three or four day ago , before you be mention to she , when I ask she if there be any one of she family whom she would like to see -- to whom she could open she mind -- she say , with a violent shudder , ' tell they not to come near I -- I will not see any of they . ' " 's head be hang down again , and he do not speak . there be silence for a few minute , and then say , " I do not like to advise you against you own feeling , , if they now urge you strongly to go and see she to - morrow morning , even without she consent . it be just possible , notwithstand appearance to the contrary , that the interview might affect she favourably . but I grieve to say I have scarcely any hope of that . she do not seem agitate when I mention you name ; she only say ' no , ' in the same cold , obstinate way as usual . and if the meeting have no good effect on she , it would be pure , useless suffering to you -- severe suffering , I fear . she be very much change ... " Adam start up from he chair and seize he hat , which lay on the table . but he stand still then , and look at , as if he have a question to ask which it be yet difficult to utter . rise quietly , turn the key in the door , and put it in he pocket . " be he come back ? " say at last . " no , he be not , " say , quietly . " Lay down you hat , , unless you like to walk out with I for a little fresh air . I fear you have not be out again to - day . " " you need not deceive I , sir , " say , look hard at and speak in a tone of angry suspicion . " you need not be afraid of I . I only want justice . I want he to feel what she feel . it be he work ... she be a child as it 'uld ha ' go t ' anybody be heart to look at ... I do not care what she be do ... it be he bring she to it . and he shall know it ... he shall feel it ... if there be a just , he shall feel what it be t ' ha ' bring a child like she to sin and misery . " " I be not deceive you , , " say . " be not come back -- be not come back when I leave . I have leave a letter for he : he will know all as soon as he arrive . " " but you do not mind about it , " say indignantly . " you think it do not matter as she lie there in shame and misery , and he know nothing about it -- he suffer nothing . " " Adam , he will know -- he will suffer , long and bitterly . he have a heart and a conscience : I can not be entirely deceive in he character . I be convinced -- I be sure he do not fall under temptation without a struggle . he may be weak , but he be not callous , not coldly selfish . I be persuade that this will be a shock of which he will
will feel the effect all he life . why do you crave vengeance in this way ? no amount of torture that you could inflict on he could benefit she . " " no -- of , no , " groane out , sinke on he chair again ; " but then , that be the deepest curse of all ... that be what make the blackness of it ... it can never be . my poor Hetty ... she can never be my sweet Hetty again ... the prettiest thing have make --smil up at I ... I think she love I ... and be good ... " 's voice have be gradually sinke into a hoarse undertone , as if he be only talk to himself ; but now he say abruptly , look at , " but she be not as guilty as they say ? you do not think she be , sir ? she can not ha ' do it . " " that perhaps can never be know with certainty , , " answer gently . " in these case we sometimes form we judgment on what seem to we strong evidence , and yet , for want of know some small fact , we judgment be wrong . but suppose the worst : you have no right to say that the guilt of she crime lie with he , and that he ought to bear the punishment . it be not for we men to apportion the share of moral guilt and retribution . we find it impossible to avoid mistake even in determining who have commit a single criminal act , and the problem how far a man be to be hold responsible for the unforeseen consequence of he own deed be one that might well make we tremble to look into it . the evil consequence that may lie fold in a single act of selfish indulgence be a thought so awful that it ought surely to awake some feeling less presumptuous than a rash desire to punish . you have a mind that can understand this fully , , when you be calm . do not suppose I can not enter into the anguish that drive you into this state of revengeful hatred . but think of this : if you be to obey you passion -- for it be passion , and you deceive yourself in call it justice -- it might be with you precisely as it have be with ; nay , worse ; you passion might lead you yourself into a horrible crime . " " no -- not worse , " say , bitterly ; " I do not believe it be worse -- I would sooner do it -- I would sooner do a wickedness as I could suffer for by myself than ha ' bring she to do wickedness and then stand by and see th'ey punish she while they let I alone ; and all for a bit of ' pleasure , as , if he would have a man 's heart in he , he would ha's cut he hand off sooner than he would ha ' take it . what if he do not foresee what be happen ? he foresee enough ; he ' no right to expect anything but harm and shame to she . and then he want to smooth it off wig lie . no -- there be plenty of ' thing folk be hang for not half so hateful as that . let a man do what he will , if he know he be to bear the punishment himself , he be not half so bad as a mean selfish coward as make thing easy t ' himself and know all the while the punishment will fall on somebody else . " " there again you partly deceive yourself , . there be no sort of wrong deed of which a man can bear the punishment alone ; you can not isolate yourself and say that the evil which be in you shall not spread . Men' life be as thoroughly blend with each other as the air they breathe : evil spread as necessarily as disease . I know , I feel the terrible extent of suffer this sin of 's have cause to other ; but so do every sin cause suffer to other besides those who commit it . a act of vengeance on you part against would simply be another evil add to those we be suffer under : you could not bear the punishment alone ; you would entail the worst sorrow on every one who love you . you would have commit a act of blind fury that would leave all the present evils just as they be and add worse evils to they . you may tell I that you meditate no fatal act of vengeance , but the feeling in you mind be what give birth to such action , and as long as you indulge it , as long as you do not see that to fix you mind on 's punishment be revenge , and not justice , you be in danger of be lead on to the commission of some great wrong . remember what you tell I about you feeling after you have give that blow to Arthur in the . " be silent : the last word have call up a vivid image of the past , and Irwine leave he to he thought , while he speak to about old 's funeral and other matter of a indifferent kind . but at length turn round and say , in a more subdued tone , " I have not ask about th'ey at , be come ? " " he be come ; he be in to - night . but I could not advise he to see you , . he
he own mind be in a very perturbed state , and it be best he should not see you till you be calmer . " " be come to th'ey , sir ? say they would send for she . " " no . tell I she be not come when he leave . they be afraid the letter have not reach she . it seem they have no exact address . " sit ruminat a little while , and then say , " I wonder if 'uld ha ' go to see she . but perhaps the Poyser would ha ' be sorely against it , since they will not come nigh she themselves . but I think she would , for the be great folk for go into the prison ; and say he think she would . she would a very tender way with she , have ; I wonder if she could ha ' do any good . you never see she , sir , do you ? " " yes , I do . I have a conversation with she -- she pleas I a good deal . and now you mention it , I wish she would come , for it be possible that a gentle mild woman like she might move to open she heart . the jail chaplain be rather harsh in he manner . " " but it be of ' no use if she do not come , " say sadly . " if I would think of it earlier , I would have take some measure for find she out , " say , " but it be too late now , I fear ... well , , I must go now . try to get some rest to - night . bless you . I will see you early to - morrow morning . " the of the at one o'clock the next day , be alone in he dull upper room ; he watch lay before he on the table , as if he be count the long minute . he have no knowledge of what be likely to be say by the witness on the trial , for he have shrunk from all the particular connect with 's arrest and accusation . this brave active man , who would have hasten towards any danger or toil to rescue from a apprehend wrong or misfortune , feel himself powerless to contemplate irremediable evil and suffer . the susceptibility which would have be a impelling force where there be any possibility of action become helpless anguish when he be oblige to be passive , or else seek a active outlet in the thought of inflict justice on . energetic nature , strong for all strenuous deed , will often rush away from a hopeless sufferer , as if they be hard - hear . it be the overmastering sense of pain that drive they . they shrink by a ungovernable instinct , as they would shrink from laceration . have bring himself to think of see , if she would consent to see he , because he think the meeting might possibly be a good to she -- might help to melt away this terrible hardness they tell he of . if she see he bear she no ill will for what she have do to he , she might open she heart to he . but this resolution have be a immense effort -- he tremble at the thought of see she change face , as a timid woman tremble at the thought of the surgeon 's knife , and he choose now to bear the long hour of suspense rather than encounter what seem to he the more intolerable agony of witnesse she trial . deep unspeakable suffering may well be call a baptism , a regeneration , the initiation into a new state . the yearning memory , the bitter regret , the agonized sympathy , the struggle appeal to the -- all the intense emotion which have fill the day and night of the past week , and be compresse themselves again like a eager crowd into the hour of this single morning , make look back on all the previous year as if they have be a dim sleepy existence , and he have only now awaked to full consciousness . it seem to he as if he have always before think it a light thing that man should suffer , as if all that he have himself endure and call sorrow before be only a moment 's stroke that have never leave a bruise . Doubtless a great anguish may do the work of year , and we may come out from that baptism of fire with a soul full of new awe and new pity . " of , " groane , as he lean on the table and look blankly at the face of the watch , " and man have suffer like this before ... and poor helpless young thing have suffer like she .... such a little while ago look so happy and so pretty ... kiss th'ey all , she grandfather and all of th'ey , and they wish she luck .... of my poor , poor Hetty ... dost think on it now ? " start and look round towards the door . Vixen have begin to whimper , and there be a sound of a stick and a lame walk on the stair . it be come back . could it be all over ? enter quietly , and , go up to , grasp he hand and say , " I be just come to look at you , my boy , for the folk be go out of court for a bit . " 's heart beat so violently he be unable to speak -- he could only return the pressure of he friend
friend 's hand -- and , draw up the other chair , come and sit in front of he , take off he hat and he spectacle . " that be a thing never happen to I before , " he observe , " to go out of ' the door with my spectacle on . I clean forget to take them off . " the old man make this trivial remark , think it better not to respond at all to 's agitation : he would gather , in a indirect way , that there be nothing decisive to communicate at present . " and now , " he say , rise again , " I must see to you have a bit of the loaf , and some of that wine send this morning . he will be angry with I if you do not have it . come , now , " he go on , bring forward the bottle and the loaf and pour some wine into a cup , " I must have a bit and a sup myself . drink a drop with I , my lad -- drink with I . " push the cup gently away and say , entreatingly , " tell I about it , -- tell I all about it . be she there ? have they begin ? " " yes , my boy , yes -- it be take all the time since I first go ; but they be slow , they be slow ; and there be the counsel they have get for she put a spoke in the wheel whenever he can , and make a deal to do with cross -examin the witness and quarrell with the other lawyer . that be all he can do for the money they give he ; and it be a big sum -- it be a big sum . but he be a ' cute fellow , with a eye that 'uld pick the needle out of the hay in no time . if a man have get no feeling , it 'uld be as good as a demonstration to listen to what go on in court ; but a tender heart make one stupid . I would have give up figure for ever only to have have some good news to bring to you , my poor lad . " " but do it seem to be go against she ? " say . " tell I what they have say . I must know it now -- I must know what they have to bring against she . " " why , the chief evidence yet have be the doctor ; all but -- poor . everybody in court feel for he -- it be like one sob , the sound they make when he come down again . the worst be when they tell he to look at the prisoner at the bar . it be hard work , poor fellow -- it be hard work . , my boy , the blow fall heavily on he as well as you ; you must help poor ; you must show courage . drink some wine now , and show I you mean to bear it like a man . " have make the right sort of appeal . , with a air of quiet obedience , take up the cup and drank a little . " tell I how she look , " he say presently . " Frighten , very frightened , when they first bring she in ; it be the first sight of the crowd and the judge , poor creatur . and there be a lot of ' foolish woman in fine clothes , with gewgaw all up they arm and feather on they head , sit near the judge : they have dress themselves out in that way , one 'uld think , to be scarecrow and warning against any man ever meddl with a woman again . they put up they glass , and star and whisper . but after that she stand like a white image , stare down at she hand and see neither to hear nor see anything . and she be as white as a sheet . she do not speak when they ask she if she would plead ' guilty ' or ' not guilty , ' and they plead ' not guilty ' for she . but when she hear she uncle 's name , there seem to go a shiver right through she ; and when they tell he to look at she , she hang she head down , and cower , and hide she face in she hand . he would much ado to speak poor man , he voice tremble so . and the counsellor -- who look as hard as nail mostly -- I see , spare he as much as they could . put himself near he and go with he out of ' court . ah , it be a great thing in a man 's life to be able to stand by a neighbour and uphold he in such trouble as that . " " bless he , and you too , , " say , in a low voice , lay he hand on 's arm . " aye , aye , he be good metal ; he give the right ring when you try he , we parson do . a man of ' sense -- say no more than 's needful . he be not one of those that think they can comfort you with chattering , as if folk who stand by and look on know a deal better what the trouble be than those who have to bear it . I have have to do with such folk in my time -- in the south , when I be
be in trouble myself . be to be a witness himself , by and by , on she side , you know , to speak to she character and bring up . " " but the other evidence ... do it go hard against she ! " say . " what do you think , ? tell I the truth . " " yes , my lad , yes . the truth be the best thing to tell . it must come at last . the doctor 's evidence be heavy on she -- be heavy . but she be go on denying she be have a child from first to last . these poor silly woman - thing -- they have not the sense to know it be no use deny what be prove . it will make against she with the jury , I doubt , she be so obstinate : they may be less for recommend she to mercy , if the verdict 's against she . but ' ull leave no stone unturned with the judge -- you may rely upon that , . " " be there nobody to stand by she and seem to care for she in the court ? " say . " there be the chaplain of ' the jail sit near she , but he be a sharp ferrety - face man -- another sort of ' flesh and blood to . they say the jail chaplain be mostly the fag - end of ' the clergy . " " there be one man as ought to be there , " say bitterly . presently he draw himself up and look fixedly out of the window , apparently turn over some new idea in he mind . " , " he say at last , push the hair off he forehead , " I will go back with you . I will go into court . it be cowardly of I to keep away . I will stand by she -- I will own she -- for all she be be deceitful . they ought not to cast she off -- she own flesh and blood . we hand folk over to 's mercy , and show none ourselves . I use to be hard sometimes : I will never be hard again . I will go , -- I will go with you . " there be a decision in 's manner which would have prevent from oppose he , even if he have wish to do so . he only say , " take a bit , then , and another sup , , for the love of I . see , I must stop and eat a morsel . now , you take some . " Nerve by a active resolution , take a morsel of bread and drank some wine . he be haggard and unshaven , as he have be yesterday , but he stand upright again , and look more like the of former day . the verdict the place fitte up that day as a court of justice be a grand old hall , now destroy by fire . the midday light that fall on the close pavement of human head be she through a line of high point window , variegate with the mellow tints of old painted glass . dusty armour hang in high relief in front of the dark oaken gallery at the farther end , and under the broad arch of the great mullion window opposite be spread a curtain of old tapestry , cover with dim melancholy figure , like a do indistinct dream of the past . it be a place that through the rest of the year be haunte with the shadowy memory of old king and queens , unhappy , discrown , imprison ; but to - day all those shadow have fle , and not a soul in the vast hall feel the presence of any but a liive sorrow , which be quiver in warm heart . but that sorrow seem to have make it itself feebly feel hithertoo , now when 's tall figure be suddenly see be usher to the side of the prisoner 's dock . in the broad sunlight of the great hall , among the sleek shaven face of other man , the mark of suffer in he face be start even to , who have last see he in the dim light of he small room ; and the neighbour from who be present , and who tell 's story by they fireside in they old age , never forget to say how it move they when , poor fellow , taller by the head than most of the people round he , come into court and take he place by she side . but do not see he . she be stand in the same position have describe , she hand cross over each other and she eye fix on they . have not da to look at she in the first moment , but at last , when the attention of the court be withdraw by the proceedings he turn he face towards she with a resolution not to shrink . why do they say she be so change ? in the corpse we love , it be the likeness we see -- it be the likeness , which make itself feel the more keenly because something else be and be not . there they be -- the sweet face and neck , with the dark tendril of hair , the long dark lash , the rounded cheek and the pouting lip -- pale and thing , yes , but like , and only . other think she look as if some demon have cast a blighting glance upon she , wither up the woman 's soul in she , and leave only a hard despairing
despairing obstinacy . but the mother 's yearning , that completest type of the life in another life which be the essence of real human love , feel the presence of the cherish child even in the debase , degrad man ; and to , this pale , hard - look culprit be the Hetty who have smile at he in the garden under the apple - tree bough -- she be that 's corpse , which he have tremble to look at the first time , and then be unwilling to turn away he eye from . but presently he hear something that compelle he to listen , and make the sense of sight less absorb . a woman be in the witness - box , a middle - aged woman , who speak in a firm distinct voice . she say , " my name be . I be a widow , and keep a small shop license to sell tobacco , snuff , and tea in , . the prisoner at the bar be the same young woman who come , look ill and tired , with a basket on she arm , and ask for a lodging at my house on evening , the 27th of . she have take the house for a public , because there be a figure against the door . and when I say I do not take in lodger , the prisoner begin to cry , and say she be too tired to go anywhere else , and she only want a bed for one night . and she prettiness , and she condition , and something respectable about she clothes and look , and the trouble she seem to be in make I as I could not find in my heart to send she away at once . I ask she to sit down , and give she some tea , and ask she where she be go , and where she friend were . she say she be go home to she friend : they be farme folk a good way off , and she would have a long journey that have cost she more money than she expect , so as she would hardly any money leave in she pocket , and be afraid of go where it would cost she much . she have be oblige to sell most of the thing out of she basket , but she would thankfully give a shilling for a bed . I see no reason why I should not take the young woman in for the night . I have only one room , but there be two bed in it , and I tell she she might stay with I . I think she have be lead wrong , and get into trouble , but if she be go to she friend , it would be a good work to keep she out of further harm . " the witness then state that in the night a child be bear , and she identify the baby - clothes then show to she as those in which she have herself dress the child . " those be the clothe . I make they myself , and have keep they by I ever since my last child be bear . I take a deal of trouble both for the child and the mother . I could not help take to the little thing and be anxious about it . I do not send for a doctor , for there see no need . I tell the mother in the day - time she must tell I the name of she friend , and where they live , and let I write to they . she say , by and by she would write herself , but not to - day . she would have no nay , but she would get up and be dress , in spite of everything I could say . she say she feel quite strong enough ; and it be wonderful what spirit she show . but I be not quite easy what I should do about she , and towards evening I make up my mind I would go , after meeting be over , and speak to we minister about it . I leave the house about half - past eight o'clock . I do not go out at the shop door , but at the back door , which open into a narrow alley . I have only get the ground - floor of the house , and the kitchen and bedroom both look into the alley . I leave the prisoner sit up by the fire in the kitchen with the baby on she lap . she have not cry or seem low at all , as she do the night before . I think she have a strange look with she eye , and she get a bit flush towards evening . I be afraid of the fever , and I think I would call and ask a acquaintance of mine , a experienced woman , to come back with I when I go out . it be a very dark night . I do not fasten the door behind I ; there be no lock ; it be a latch with a bolt inside , and when there be nobody in the house I always go out at the shop door . but I think there be no danger in leave it unfasten that little while . I be longer than I mean to be , for I have to wait for the woman that come back with I . it be a hour and a half before we get back , and when we go in , the candle be stand burn just as I leave it , but the prisoner and the baby be both gone . she
she would take she cloak and bonnet , but she would leave the basket and the thing in it .... I be dreadful frightene , and angry with she for go . I do not go to give information , because I ' no thought she mean to do any harm , and I know she have money in she pocket to buy she food and lodging . I do not like to set the constable after she , for she would a right to go from I if she like . " the effect of this evidence on be electrical ; it give he new force . Hetty could not be guilty of the crime -- she heart must have clung to she baby -- else why should she have take it with she ? she might have leave it behind . the little creature have die naturally , and then she have hide it . baby be so liable to death -- and there might be the strongest suspicion without any proof of guilt . he mind be so occupied with imaginary argument against such suspicion , that he could not listen to the cross-examination by 's counsel , who try , without result , to elicit evidence that the prisoner have show some movement of maternal affection towards the child . the whole time this witness be be examine , have stood as motionless as before : no word seem to arrest she ear . but the sound of the next witness 's voice touch a chord that be still sensitive , she give a start and a frightened look towards he , but immediately turn away she head and look down at she hand as before . this witness be a man , a rough peasant . he say : " my name be . I be a labourer , and live at 's , two mile out of . a week last , towards one o'clock in the afternoon , I be go towards , and about a quarter of a mile from the coppice I see the prisoner , in a red cloak , sit under a bit of a haystack not far off the stile . she get up when she see I , and seem as if she would be walk on the other way . it be a regular road through the field , and nothing very uncommon to see a young woman there , but I take notice of she because she look white and scared . I should have think she be a beggar- woman , only for she good clothes . I think she look a bit crazy , but it be no business of mine . I stand and look back after she , but she go right on while she be in sight . I have to go to the other side of the coppice to look after some stake . there be a road right through it , and bit of opening here and there , where the tree have be cut down , and some of th'ey not carry away . I do not go straight along the road , but turn off towards the middle , and take a shorter way towards the spot I want to get to . I have not get far out of the road into one of the open place before I hear a strange cry . I think it do not come from any animal I know , but I be not for stop to look about just then . but it go on , and see so strange to I in that place , I could not help stop to look . I begin to think I might make some money of it , if it be a new thing . but I have hard work to tell which way it come from , and for a good while I keep look up at the bough . and then I think it come from the ground ; and there be a lot of timber - chopping lie about , and loose piece of turf , and a trunk or two . and I look about among they , but could find nothing , and at last the cry stop . so I be for give it up , and I go on about my business . but when I come back the same way pretty nigh a hour after , I could not help lay down my stake to have another look . and just as I be stoop and lay down the stake , I see something odd and round and whitish lie on the ground under a nut - bush by the side of I . and I stoop down on hand and knee to pick it up . and I see it be a little baby 's hand . " at these word a thrill run through the court . be visibly trembl ; now , for the first time , she seem to be listen to what a witness say . " there be a lot of timber - chopping put together just where the ground go hollow , like , under the bush , and the hand come out from among they . but there be a hole leave in one place and I could see down it and see the child 's head ; and I make haste and do away the turf and the chopping , and take out the child . it have get comfortable clothes on , but it be body be cold , and I think it must be dead . I make haste back with it out of the wood , and take it home to my wife . she say it be dead , and I would better take it to the parish and tell the constable . and I say , ' I will
will lay my life it be that young woman 's child as I meet go to the coppice . ' but she seem to be go clean out of sight . and I take the child on to parish and tell the constable , and we go on to . and then we go look after the young woman till dark at night , and we go and give information at , as they might stop she . and the next morning , another constable come to I , to go with he to the spot where I find the child . and when we get there , there be the prisoner at - sit against the bush where I find the child ; and she cry out when she see we , but she never offer to move . she would get a big piece of bread on she lap . " have give a faint groan of despair while this witness be speak . he have hide he face on he arm , which rest on the boarding in front of he . it be the supreme moment of he suffering : be guilty ; and he be silently call to for help . he hear no more of the evidence , and be unconscious when the case for the prosecution have close --unconscious that be in the witness - box , telling of 's unblemished character in she own parish and of the virtuous habits in which she have be bring up . this testimony could have no influence on the verdict , but it be give as part of that plea for mercy which she own counsel would have make if he have be allow to speak for she -- a favour not grant to criminal in those stern time . at last lift up he head , for there be a general movement round he . the judge have address the jury , and they be retire . the decisive moment be not far off feel a shuddering horror that would not let he look at , but she have long relapse into she blank hard indifference . all eyes be strain to look at she , but she stand like a statue of dull despair . ' there be a mingled rustling , whisper , and low buzzing throughout the court during this interval . the desire to listen be suspend , and every one have some feeling or opinion to express in undertone . sit look blankly before he , but he do not see the object that be right in front of he eye -- the counsel and attorney talk with a air of cool business , and in low earnest conversation with the judge -- do not see sit down again in agitation and shake he head mournfully when somebody whisper to he . the inward action be too intense for to take in outward object until some strong sensation rouse he . it be not very long , hardly more than a quarter of a hour , before the knock which tell that the jury have come to they decision fall as a signal for silence on every ear . it be sublime -- that sudden pause of a great multitude which tell that one soul move in they all . and deeper the silence seem to become , like the deepening night , while the juryman 's name be call over , and the prisoner be make to hold up she hand , and the jury be ask for they verdict . " . " it be the verdict every one expect , but there be a sigh of disappointment from some heart that it be follow by no recommendation to mercy . still the sympathy of the court be not with the prisoner . the unnaturalness of she crime stand out the more harshly by the side of she hard immovability and obstinate silence . even the verdict , to distant eye , have not appear to move she , but those who be near see she trembling . the stillness be less intense until the judge put on he black cap , and the chaplain in he canonical be observe behind he . then it deepen again , before the crier have have time to command silence . if any sound be hear , it must have be the sound of beating heart . the judge speak , " .... " the blood rush to 's face , and then fle back again as she look up at the judge and keep she wide - open eye fix on he , as if fascinate by fear . have not yet turn towards she , there be a deep horror , like a great gulf , between they . but at the word " and then to be hang by the neck till you be dead , " a piercing shriek ring through the hall . it be 's shriek . start to he foot and stretch out he arm towards she . but the arm could not reach she : she have fall down in a fainting - fit , and be carry out of court . 's return when land at and read the letter from he , briefly announce he grand - father 's death , he first feeling be , " poor grandfather ! I wish I could have get to he to be with he when he die . he might have feel or wish something at the last that I shall never know now . it be a lonely death . " it be impossible to say that he grief be deeper than that . Pity and soften memory take place of the old antagonism , and in he busy thought about the future , as the chaise carry he rapidly along towards the home where he be now to be master ,
, there be a continually recurr effort to remember anything by which he could show a regard for he grandfather 's wish , without counteract he own cherish aim for the good of the tenant and the estate . but it be not in human nature -- only in human pretence -- for a young man like , with a fine constitution and fine spirit , think well of himself , believe that other think well of he , and have a very ardent intention to give they more and more reason for that good opinion -- it be not possible for such a young man , just come into a splendid estate through the death of a very old man whom he be not fond of , to feel anything very different from exultant joy . now he real life be begin ; now he would have room and opportunity for action , and he would use they . he would show the people what a fine country gentleman be ; he would not exchange that career for any other under the sun . he feel himself ride over the hill in the breezy autumn day , look after favourite plan of drainage and enclosure ; then admire on sombre morning as the best rider on the best horse in the hunt ; speak well of on market - day as a first - rate landlord ; by and by make speeches at election dinner , and show a wonderful knowledge of agriculture ; the patron of new plough and drill , the severe upbraider of negligent landowner , and withal a jolly fellow that everybody must like -- happy face greet he everywhere on he own estate , and the neighbour family on the best term with he . the Irwine should dine with he every week , and have they own carriage to come in , for in some very delicate way that yoArthu would devise , the lay - impropriator of the tithes would insist on pay a couple of hundred more to the vicar ; and he aunt should be as comfortable as possible , and go on live at the chase , if she like , in spite of she old - maidish way -- at least until he be marry , and that event lay in the indistinct background , for have not yet see the woman who would play the lady - wife to the first - rate country gentleman . these be 's chief thought , so far as a man 's thought through hour of travelling can be compress into a few sentence , which be only like the list of name tell you what be the scene in a long long panorama full of colour , of detail , and of life . the happy face yoArthu see greet he be not pale abstraction , but real ruddy face , long familiar to he : be there -- the whole Poyser family . what -- Hetty ? yes ; for be at ease about -- not quite at ease about the past , for a certain burning of the ears would come whenever he think of the scene with Adam last , but at ease about she present lot . , who have be a regular correspondent , tell he all the news about the old place and people , have send he word nearly three month ago that be not to marry , as he have think , but pretty . and himself have both tell all about it -- that have be deeply in love with these two year , and that now it be agree they be to be marry in . that stalwart rogue be more susceptible than the rector have think ; it be really quite a idyllic love affair ; and if it have not be too long to tell in a letter , he would have like to describe to yoArthu the blushing look and the simple strong word with which the fine honest fellow tell he secret . he know yoArthu would like to hear that have this sort of happiness in prospect . yes , indeed ! yoArthu feel there be not air enough in the room to satisfy he renovate life , when he have read that passage in the letter . he throw up the window , he rush out of door into the air , and greet every one who speak to he with a eager gaiety , as if there have be news of a fresh Nelson victory . for the first time that day since he have come to , he be in true boyish spirit . the load that have be press upon he be go , the haunting fear have vanish . he think he could conquer he bitterness towards now -- could offer he he hand , and ask to be he friend again , in spite of that painful memory which would still make he ear burn . he have be knock down , and he have be force to tell a lie : such thing make a scar , do what we will . but if Adam be the same again as in the old day , Arthur wish to be the same too , and to have mix up with he business and he future , as he have always desire before the accurse meeting in . Nay , he would do a great deal more for Adam than he should otherwise have do , when he come into the estate ; 's husband have a special claim on he -- Hetty herself should feel that any pain she have suffer through in the past be compensate to she a hundredfold . for really she could not have feel much , since she have so soon make up she mind to marry . you perceive clearly what sort of picture
picture Adam and Hetty make in the panorama of 's thought on he journey homeward . it be now ; they be soon to be marry : perhaps they be already marry . and now it be actually in he power to do a great deal for they . sweet -- sweet little ! the little puss have not care for he half as much as he care for she ; for he be a great fool about she still -- be almost afraid of see she -- indeed , have not car much to look at any other woman since he part from she . that little figure come towards he in the , those dark - fringed childish eye , the lovely lip put up to kiss he -- that picture have get no fainter with the lapse of month . and she would look just the same . it be impossible to think how he could meet she : he should certainly tremble . , how long this sort of influence last , for he be certainly not in love with now . he have be earnestly desire , for month , that she should marry , and there be nothing that contribute more to he happiness in these moment than the thought of they marriage . it be the exaggerating effect of imagination that make he heart still beat a little more quickly at the thought of she . when he see the little thing again as she really be , as 's wife , at work quite prosaically in she new home , he should perhaps wonder at the possibility of he past feeling . thank heaven it have turn out so well ! he should have plenty of affair and interest to fill he life now , and not be in danger of play the fool again . pleasant the crack of the post -boy 's whip ! pleasant the sense of be hurrie along in swift ease through English scene , so like those round he own home , only not quite so charming . here be a market - town -- very much like -- where the arm of the neighbour lord of the manor be borne on the sign of the principal inn ; then mere field and hedge , they vicinity to a market - town carry a agreeable suggestion of high rent , till the land begin to assume a trimmer look , the wood be more frequent , and at length a white or red mansion look down from a moderate eminence , or allow he to be aware of its parapet and chimney among the dense - look mass of oak and elm -- mass redden now with early bud . and close at hand come the village : the small church , with its red -tiled roof , look humble even among the faded half - timber house ; the old green gravestone with nettle round they ; nothing fresh and bright but the child , open round eye at the swift post-chaise ; nothing noisy and busy but the gape curs of mysterious pedigree . what a much prettier village be ! and it should not be neglect like this place : vigorous repair should go on everywhere among farm - building and cottage , and traveller in post-chaise , come along the road , should do nothing but admire as they go . and should superintend all the repair , for he have a share in 's business now , and , if he like , yoArthu would put some money into the concern and buy the old man out in another year or two . that be a ugly fault in 's life , that affair last summer , but the future should make amend . many man would have retain a feeling of vindictiveness towards , but he would not -- he would resolutely overcome all littleness of that kind , for he have certainly be very much in the wrong ; and though Adam have be harsh and violent , and have thrust on he a painful dilemma , the poor fellow be in love , and have real provocation . no , yoArthu have not a evil feeling in he mind towards any human being : he be happy , and would make every one else happy that come within he reach . and here be dear old Hayslope at last , sleep , on the hill , like a quiet old place as it be , in the late afternoon sunlight , and opposite to it the great shoulders of the , below they the purplish blackness of the hang wood , and at last the pale front of the , look out from among the oak of the chase , as if anxious for the heir 's return . " poor grandfather ! and he lie dead there . he be a young fellow once , come into the estate and make he plan . so the world go round ! must feel very desolate , poor thing ; but she shall be indulged as much as she indulge she fat . " the wheel of 's chaise have be anxiously listen for at the chase , for to - day be , and the funeral have already be defer two day . before it draw up on the gravel of the courtyard , all the servants in the house be assemble to receive he with a grave , decent welcome , befitt a house of death . a month ago , perhaps , it would have be difficult for they to have maintain a suitable sadness in they face , when be come to take possession ; but the heart of the head - servants be heavy that day for another cause than the death of the old squire , and more than one of they be long
long to be twenty mile away , as be , know what be to become of -- pretty -- whom they use to see every week . they have the partisanship of household servants who like they place , and be not inclin to go the full length of the severe indignation felt against he by the farming tenant , but rather to make excuse for he ; nevertheless , the upper servants , who have be on term of neighbourly intercourse with the Poyser for many year , could not help feel that the long - for event of the young squire 's come into the estate have be rob of all its pleasantness . to Arthur it be nothing surprising that the servants look grave and sad : he himself be very much touche on see they all again , and feel that he be in a new relation to they . it be that sort of pathetic emotion which have more pleasure than pain in it -- which be perhaps one of the most delicious of all state to a good - natured man , conscious of the power to satisfy he good nature . he heart swell agreeably as he say , " well , , how be my aunt ? " but now , the lawyer , who have be in the house ever since the death , come forward to give deferential greeting and answer all question , and walk with he towards the library , where he be expect he . be the only person in the house who know nothing about . she sorrow as a maiden daughter be unmixed with any other thought than those of anxiety about funeral arrangement and she own future lot ; and , after the manner of woman , she mourn for the father who have make she life important , all the more because she have a secret sense that there be little mourning for he in other heart . but yoArthu kiss she tearful face more tenderly than he have ever do in he life before . " dear aunt , " he say affectionately , as he hold she hand , " you loss be the greatest of all , but you must tell I how to try and make it up to you all the rest of you life . " " it be so sudden and so dreadful , , " poor begin , pour out she little plaint , and sit down to listen with impatient patience . when a pause come , he say : " now , aunt , I will leave you for a quarter of a hour just to go to my own room , and then I shall come and give full attention to everything . " " my room be all ready for I , I suppose , ? " he say to the butler , who seem to be linger uneasily about the entrance - hall . " yes , sir , and there be letter for you ; they be all laid on the writing - table in you dressing - room . " on enter the small anteroom which be call a dressing - room , but which Arthur really use only to lounge and write in , he just cast he eye on the writing - table , and see that there be several letter and packet lie there ; but he be in the uncomfortable dusty condition of a man who have have a long hurried journey , and he must really refresh himself by attend to he toilette a little , before he read he letter . be there , make everything ready for he , and soon , with a delightful freshness about he , as if he be prepare to begin a new day , he go back into he dressing - room to open he letter . the level ray of the low afternoon sun enter directly at the window , and as yoArthu seat himself in he velvet chair with they pleasant warmth upon he , he be conscious of that quiet well - be which perhaps you and I have feel on a sunny afternoon when , in we brightest youth and health , life have open a new vista for we , and long to - morrow of activity have stretch before we like a lovely plain which there be no need for hurrie to look at , because it be all we own . the top letter be place with it be address upward : it be in 's handwriting , yoArthu see at once ; and below the address be write , " to be deliver as soon as he arrive . " nothing could have be less surprising to he than a letter from at that moment : of course , there be something he wish to know earlier than it be possible for they to see each other . at such a time as that it be quite natural that Irwine should have something pressing to say . yoArthu break the seal with a agreeable anticipation of soon see the writer . " I send this letter to meet you on you arrival , , because I may then be at , whither I be call by the most painful duty it have ever be give I to perform , and it be right that you should know what I have to tell you without delay . " I will not attempt to add by one word of reproach to the retribution that be now fal on you : any other word that I could write at this moment must be weak and unmean by the side of those in which I must tell you the simple fact . " be in prison , and will be try on for the crime of child - murder . " ...
... yoArthu read no more . he start up from he chair and stand for a single minute with a sense of violent convulsion in he whole frame , as if the life be go out of he with horrible throb ; but the next minute he have rush out of the room , still clutch the letter -- he be hurrie along the corridor , and down the stair into the hall . be still there , but do not see he , as he pass like a hunt man across the hall and out along the gravel . the butler hurry out after he as fast as he elderly limb could run : he guess , he know , where the young squire be go . when get to the stable , a horse be be saddled , and be force himself to read the remain word of the letter . he thrust it into he pocket as the horse be lead up to he , and at that moment catch sight of 's anxious face in front of he . " tell they I be go -- go to , " he say in a muff tone of agitation -- spring into the saddle , and set off at a gallop . in the sunset that even a elderly gentleman be stand with he back against the smaller entrance - door of jail , say a few last word to the departing chaplain . the chaplain walk away , but the elderly gentleman stood still , look down on the pavement and strok he ching with a ruminat air , when he be rouse by a sweet clear woman 's voice , say , " can I get into the prison , if you please ? " he turn he head and look fixedly at the speaker for a few moment without answering . " I have see you before , " he say at last . " do you remember preach on the village green at in ? " " yes , sir , surely . be you the gentleman that stay to listen on horseback ? " " yes . why do you want to go into the prison ? " " I want to go to , the young woman who have be condemn to death -- and to stay with she , if I may be permit . have you power in the prison , sir ? " " yes ; I be a magistrate , and can get admittance for you . but do you know this criminal , ? " " yes , we be kin . my own aunt marry she uncle , . but I be away at , and do not know of this great trouble in time to get here before to - day . I entreat you , sir , for the love of we heavenly Father , to let I go to she and stay with she . " " how do you know she be condemn to death , if you be only just come from ? " " I have see my uncle since the trial , sir . he be go back to he home now , and the poor sinner be forsaken of all . I beseech you to get leave for I to be with she . " " what ! have you courage to stay all night in the prison ? she be very sullen , and will scarcely make answer when she be speak to . " " oh , sir , it may please to open she heart still . do not let we delay . " " come , then , " say the elderly gentleman , ring and gain admission , " I know you have a key to unlock heart . " mechanically take off she bonnet and shawl as soon as they be within the prison court , from the habit she have of throw they off when she preach or pray , or visit the sick ; and when they enter the jailer 's room , she lay they down on a chair unthinkingly . there be no agitation visible in she , but a deep concentrate calmness , as if , even when she be speak , she soul be in prayer repose on a unseen support . after speak to the jailer , the magistrate turn to she and say , " the turnkey will take you to the prisoner 's cell and leave you there for the night , if you desire it , but you can not have a light during the night -- it be contrary to rule . my name be : if I can help you in anything , ask the jailer for my address and come to I . I take some interest in this , for the sake of that fine fellow , . I happen to see he at Hayslope the same evening I hear you preach , and recognize he in court to - day , ill as he look . " " ah , sir , can you tell I anything about he ? can you tell I where he lodge ? for my poor uncle be too much weigh down with trouble to remember . " " close by here . I inquire all about he of . he lodge over a tinman 's shop , in the street on the right hand as you enter the prison . there be a old school - master with he . now , good - bye : I wish you success . " " farewell , sir . I be grateful to you . " as cross the prison court with the turnkey , the solemn evening light seem to make the wall higher than they be by day , and the sweet pale face in the cap be more than ever
ever like a white flower on this background of gloom . the turnkey look askance at she all the while , but never speak . he somehow feel that the sound of he own rude voice would be grat just then . he struck a light as they enter the dark corridor lead to the condemn cell , and then say in he most civil tone , " it will be pretty nigh dark in the cell a'ready , but I can stop with my light a bit , if you like . " " Nay , friend , thank you , " say . " I wish to go in alone . " " as you like , " say the jailer , turn the harsh key in the lock and open the door wide enough to admit . a jet of light from he lantern fall on the opposite corner of the cell , where be sit on she straw pallet with she face bury in she knee . it seem as if she be asleep , and yet the grating of the lock would have be likely to wake she . the door close again , and the only light in the cell be that of the evening sky , through the small high grating -- enough to discern human face by . stand still for a minute , hesitate to speak because might be asleep , and look at the motionless heap with a yearning heart . then she say , softly , " Hetty ! " there be a slight movement perceptible in 's frame -- a start such as might have be produce by a feeble electrical shock -- but she do not look up . speak again , in a tone make stronger by irrepressible emotion , " Hetty ... it be . " again there be a slight start movement through 's frame , and without uncover she face , she raise she head a little , as if listen . " Hetty ... be come to you . " after a moment 's pause , lift she head slowly and timidly from she knee and raise she eye . the two pale face be look at each other : one with a wild hard despair in it , the other full of sad yearning love . unconsciously open she arm and stretch they out . " do not you know I , ? do not you remember ? do you think I would not come to you in trouble ? " Hetty keep she eye fix on 's face -- at first like a animal that gaze , and gaze , and keep aloon . " I be come to be with you , Hetty -- not to leave you -- to stay with you -- to be you sister to the last . " slowly , while be speak , rise , take a step forward , and be clasp in 's arm . they stand so a long while , for neither of they feel the impulse to move apart again . Hetty , without any distinct thought of it , hang on this something that be come to clasp she now , while she be sink helpless in a dark gulf ; and feel a deep joy in the first sign that she love be welcome by the wretched lose one . the light get fainter as they stand , and when at last they sit down on the straw pallet together , they face have become indistinct . not a word be speak . wait , hope for a spontaneous word from , but she sit in the same dull despair , only clutch the hand that hold hers and lean she cheek against 's . it be the human contact she cling to , but she be not the less sinke into the dark gulf . begin to doubt whether be conscious who it be that sit beside she . she think suffering and fear might have drive the poor sinner out of she mind . but it be borne in upon she , as she afterwards say , that she must not hurry 's work : we be overhasty to speak -- as if do not manifest himself by we silent feeling , and make he love feel through ours . she do not know how long they sit in that way , but it get darker and darker , till there be only a pale patch of light on the opposite wall : all the rest be darkness . but she feel the presence more and more -- nay , as if she herself be a part of it , and it be the divine pity that be beat in she heart and be will the rescue of this helpless one . at last she be prompt to speak and find out how far be conscious of the present . " Hetty , " she say gently , " do you know who it be that sit by you side ? " " yes , " answer slowly , " it be . " " and do you remember the time when we be at the together , and that night when I tell you to be sure and think of I as a friend in trouble ? " " yes , " say . then , after a pause , she add , " but you can do nothing for I . you can not make them do anything . they will hang I o' -- it be now . " as say the last word , she cling closer to , shudder . " no , Hetty , I can not save you from that death . but be not the suffer less hard when you have somebody with you , that feel for you -- that you can speak to , and
and say what be in you heart ?... yes , Hetty : you lean on I : you be glad to have I with you . " " you will not leave I , ? you will keep close to I ? " " no , Hetty , I will not leave you . I will stay with you to the last .... but , Hetty , there be some one else in this cell besides I , some one close to you . " say , in a frightened whisper , " who ? " " some one who have be with you through all you hour of sin and trouble -- who have know every thought you have have -- have see where you go , where you lay down and rise up again , and all the deed you have try to hide in darkness . and on , when I can not follow you -- when my arm can not reach you -- when death have part we -- he who be with we now , and know all , will be with you then . it make no difference -- whether we live or die , we be in the presence of . " " oh , , will not nobody do anything for I ? will they hang I for certain ?... I would not mind if they would let I live . " " my poor Hetty , death be very dreadful to you . I know it be dreadful . but if you have a friend to take care of you after death -- in that other world -- some one whose love be greater than mine -- who can do everything ?... if we Father be you friend , and be willing to save you from sin and suffer , so as you should neither know wicked feeling nor pain again ? if you could believe he love you and would help you , as you believe I love you and will help you , it would not be so hard to die on , would it ? " " but I can not know anything about it , " say , with sullen sadness . " because , Hetty , you be shut up you soul against he , by try to hide the truth . 's love and mercy can overcome all thing -- we ignorance , and weakness , and all the burden of we past wickedness -- all thing but we wilful sin , sin that we cling to , and will not give up . you believe in my love and pity for you , , but if you have not let I come near you , if you would not have look at I or speak to I , you would have shut I out from help you . I could not have make you feel my love ; I could not have tell you what I feel for you . do not shut 's live out in that way , by cling to sin .... he can not bless you while you have one falsehood in you soul ; he pardoning mercy can not reach you until you open you heart to he , and say , 'I have do this great wickedness ; of , save I , make I pure from sin . ' while you cling to one sin and will not part with it , it must drag you down to misery after death , as it have drag you to misery here in this world , my poor , poor Hetty . it be sin that bring dread , and darkness , and despair : there be light and blessedness for we as soon as we cast it off . enter we soul then , and teach we , and bring we strength and peace . cast it off now , Hetty -- now : confess the wickedness you have do -- the sin you have be guilty of against you . let we kneel down together , for we be in the presence of . " obey 's movement , and sank on she knee . they still hold each other 's hand , and there be long silence . then say , " Hetty , we be before . he be wait for you to tell the truth . " still there be silence . at last Hetty speak , in a tone of beseeching -- " Dinah ... help I ... I can not feel anything like you ... my heart be hard . " hold the clinging hand , and all she soul go forth in she voice : " , thou present saviour ! thou hast know the depth of all sorrow : thou hast enter that black darkness where be not , and hast utter the cry of the forsaken . , and gather of the fruit of thy travail and thy plead . stretch forth thy hand , thou who be mighty to save to the uttermost , and rescue this lose one . she be clothed round with thick darkness . the fetter of she sin be upon she , and she can not stir to come to thee . she can only feel she heart be hard , and she be helpless . she cry to I , thy weak creature .... saviour ! it be a blind cry to thee . hear it ! Pierce the darkness ! look upon she with thy face of love and sorrow that thou didst turn on he who deny thee , and melt she hard heart . " see , , I bring she , as they of old bring the sick and helpless , and thou didst heal they . I bear she on my arm and carry she before thee . fear and trembling have take hold on she , but
but she tremble only at the pain and death of the body . breathe upon she thy life - give Spirit , and put a new fear within she -- the fear of she sin . make she dread to keep the accursed thing within she soul . make she feel the presence of the living , who behold all the past , to whom the darkness be as noonday ; who be wait now , at the eleventh hour , for she to turn to he , and confess she sin , and cry for mercy -- now , before the night of death come , and the moment of pardon be for ever fle , like yesterday that returneth not . " saviour ! it be yet time -- time to snatch this poor soul from everlasting darkness . I believe -- I believe in thy infinite love . what be my love or my pleading ? it be quench in thine . I can only clasp she in my weak arm and urge she with my weak pity . thou -- thou will breathe on the dead soul , and it shall arise from the unanswering sleep of death . " yea , , I see thee , come through the darkness come , like the morning , with heal on thy wing . the mark of thy agony be upon thee -- I see , I see thou be able and willing to save -- thou will not let she perish for ever . come , mighty saviour ! let the dead hear thy voice . let the eye of the blind be open . let she see that encompass she . let she tremble at nothing but at the sin that cut she off from he . melt the hard heart . Unseal the close lip : make she cry with she whole soul , ' Father , I have sinn . ' ... " " Dinah , " sob out , throw she arm round 's neck , " I will speak ... I will tell ... I will not hide it any more . " but the tear and sob be too violent . raise she gently from she knee and seat she on the pallet again , sit down by she side . it be a long time before the convulse throat be quiet , and even then they sit some time in stillness and darkness , hold each other 's hand . at last Hetty whisper , " I do do it , ... I bury it in the wood ... the little baby ... and it cry ... I hear it cry ... ever such a way off ... all night ... and I go back because it cry . " she pause , and then speak hurriedly in a louder , pleading tone . " but I think perhaps it would not die -- there might somebody find it . I do not kill it -- I do not kill it myself . I put it down there and cover it up , and when I come back it be gone .... it be because I be so very miserable , Dinah ... I do not know where to go ... and I try to kill myself before , and I could not . oh , I try so to dry myself in the pool , and I could not . I go to -- I run away -- do you know ? I go to find he , as he might take care of I ; and he be go ; and then I do not know what to do . I da not go back home again -- I could not bear it . I could not have bore to look at anybody , for they would have scorn I . I think of ' you sometimes , and think I would come to you , for I do not think you would be cross with I , and cry shame on I . I think I could tell you . but then the other folk 'uld come to know it at last , and I could not bear that . it be partly think of ' you make I come toward ; and , beside , I be so frightened at go wander about till I be a beggar- woman , and have nothing ; and sometimes it seem as if I must go back to the farm sooner than that . oh , it be so dreadful , ... I be so miserable ... I wish I have never be bear into this world . I should never like to go into the green field again -- I hate th'ey so in my misery . " pause again , as if the sense of the past be too strong upon she for word . " and then I get to , and I begin to feel frighten that night , because I be so near home . and then the little baby be bear , when I do not expect it ; and the thought come into my mind that I might get rid of it and go home again . the thought come all of a sudden , as I be lie in the bed , and it get stronger and stronger ... I long so to go back again ... I could not bear be so lonely and come to beg for want . and it give I strength and resolution to get up and dress myself . I feel I must do it ... I do not know how ... I think I would find a pool , if I could , like that other , in the corner of the field , in the dark . and when the woman go out , I feel as if I be strong enough to
to do anything ... I think I should get rid of all my misery , and go back home , and never let th'ey know why I run away I put on my bonnet and shawl , and go out into the dark street , with the baby under my cloak ; and I walk fast till I get into a street a good way off , and there be a public , and I get some warm stuff to drink and some bread . and I walk on and on , and I hardly feel the ground I trod on ; and it get lighter , for there come the moon -- oh , , it frightene I when it first look at I out of ' the cloud -- it never look so before ; and I turn out of the road into the field , for I be afraid of ' meeting anybody with the moon shin on I . and I come to a haystack , where I think I could lie down and keep myself warm all night . there be a place cut into it , where I could make I a bed , and I lay comfortable , and the baby be warm against I ; and I must have go to sleep for a good while , for when I wake it be morning , but not very light , and the baby be cry . and I see a wood a little way off ... I think there ' perhaps be a ditch or a pond there ... and it be so early I think I could hide the child there , and get a long way off before folk be up . and then I think I would go home -- I would get ride in cart and go home and tell them I have be to try and see for a place , and could not get one . I long so for it , , I long so to be safe at home . I do not know how I feel about the baby . I seem to hate it -- it be like a heavy weight hang round my neck ; and yet its cry go through I , and I da not look at its little hand and face . but I go on to the wood , and I walk about , but there be no water .... " shudder . she be silent for some moment , and when she begin again , it be in a whisper . " I come to a place where there be lot of chip and turf , and I sit down on the trunk of a tree to think what I should do . and all of a sudden I see a hole under the nut - tree , like a little grave . and it dart into I like lightning -- I would lay the baby there and cover it with the grass and the chip . I could not kill it any other way . and I would do it in a minute ; and , oh , it cry so , -- I could not cover it quite up -- I think perhaps somebody 'uld come and take care of it , and then it would not die . and I make haste out of the wood , but I could hear it cry all the while ; and when I get out into the field , it be as if I be hold fast -- I could not go away , for all I want so to go . and I sit against the haystack to watch if anybody 'uld come . I be very hungry , and I would only a bit of bread leave , but I could not go away . and after ever such a while -- hour and hour -- the man come -- he in a smock - frock , and he look at I so , I be frightened , and I make haste and go on . I think he be go to the wood and would perhaps find the baby . and I go right on , till I come to a village , a long way off from the wood , and I be very sick , and faint , and hungry . I get something to eat there , and buy a loaf . but I be frightene to stay . I hear the baby cry , and think the other folk hear it too -- and I go on . but I be so tired , and it be get towards dark . and at last , by the roadside there be a barn -- ever such a way off any house -- like the barn in 's , and I think I could go in there and hide myself among the hay and straw , and nobody 'uld be likely to come . I go in , and it be half full of ' truss of straw , and there be some hay too . and I make myself a bed , ever so far behind , where nobody could find I ; and I be so tired and weak , I go to sleep .... but oh , the baby 's crying keep wake I , and I think that man as look at I so be come and lay hold of I . but I must have sleep a long while at last , though I do not know , for when I get up and go out of the barn , I do not know whether it be night or morning . but it be morne , for it keep get lighter , and I turn back the way I would come . I could not help it , ; it be the baby 's crying make I
I go -- and yet I be frightened to death . I think that man in the smock - frock 'uld see I and know I put the baby there . but I go on , for all that . I would leave off think about go home -- it have go out o' my mind . I see nothing but that place in the wood where I would bury the baby ... I see it now . oh Dinah ! shall I allays see it ? " Hetty cling round and shudder again . the silence seem long before she go on . " I meet nobody , for it be very early , and I get into the wood .... I know the way to the place ... the place against the nut - tree ; and I could hear it cry at every step .... I think it be alive .... I do not know whether I be frightene or glad ... I do not know what I feel . I only know I be in the wood and hear the cry . I do not know what I feel till I see the baby be gone . and when I would put it there , I think I should like somebody to find it and save it from die ; but when I see it be go , I be strike like a stone , with fear . I never think of ' stirring , I feel so weak . I know I could not run away , and everybody as see I 'uld know about the baby . my heart go like a stone . I could not wish or try for anything ; it see like as if I should stay there for ever , and nothing 'uld ever change . but they come and take I away . " be silent , but she shudder again , as if there be still something behind ; and wait , for she heart be so full that tear must come before word . at last Hetty burst out , with a sob , " , do you think will take away that cry and the place in the wood , now I have tell everything ? " " let we pray , poor sinner . let we fall on we knee again , and pray to the of all mercy . " the hour of Suspense on morning , when the church bell in be ring for morning service , re-enter 's room , after a short absence , and say , " , here be a visitor want to see you . " be seat with be back towards the door , but he start up and turn round instantly , with a flushed face and a eager look . he face be even thinner and more worn than we have see it before , but he be wash and shave this morning . " be it any news ? " he say . " keep yourself quiet , my lad , " say ; " keep quiet . it be not what you be think of . it be the young woman come from the prison . she be at the bottom of ' the stair , and want to know if you think well to see she , for she have something to say to you about that poor castaway ; but she would not come in without you leave , she say . she think you would perhaps like to go out and speak to she . these preaching woman be not so back 'ard commonly , " mutter to himself . " ask she to come in , " say . he be stand with he face towards the door , and as enter , lift up she mild grey eye towards he , she see at once the great change that have come since the day when she have look up at the tall man in the cottage . there be a trembling in she clear voice as she put she hand into he and say , " be comforte , , the have not forsake she . " " bless you for come to she , " say . " bring I word yesterday as you be come . " they could neither of they say any more just yet , but stand before each other in silence ; and , too , who have put on he spectacle , see transfix , examine 's face . but he recovere himself first , and say , " sit down , young woman , sit down , " place the chair for she and retire to he old seat on the bed . " thank you , friend ; I will not sit down , " say , " for I must hasten back . she entreate I not to stay long away . what I come for , , be to pray you to go and see the poor sinner and bid she farewell . she desire to ask you forgiveness , and it be meet you should see she to - day , rather than in the early morning , when the time will be short . " stood trembl , and at last sank down on he chair again . " it will not be , " he say , " it will be put off -- there will perhaps come a pardon . say there be hope . he say , I need not quite give it up . " " that be a bless thought to I , " say , she eye fill with tear . " it be a fearful thing hurry she soul away so fast . " " but let what will be , " she add presently . " you will surely come , and let she speak the word
word that be in she heart . although she poor soul be very dark and discern little beyond the thing of the flesh , she be no longer hard . she be contrite , she have confess all to I . the pride of she heart have give way , and she lean on I for help and desire to be teach . this fill I with trust , for I can not but think that the breth sometimes err in measure the love by the sinner 's knowledge . she be go to write a letter to the friend at the for I to give they when she be go , and when I tell she you be here , she say , 'I should like to say good - bye to Adam and ask he to forgive I . ' you will come , ? perhaps you will even now come back with I . " " I can not , " say . " I can not say good - bye while there be any hope . I be listen , and listen -- I can not think o' nothing but that . it can not be as she will die that shameful death -- I can not bring my mind to it . " he get up from he chair again and look away out of the window , while stand with compassionate patience . in a minute or two he turn round and say , " I will come , ... to -morrow morning ... if it must be . I may have more strength to bear it , if I know it must be . tell she , I forgive she ; tell she I will come -- at the very last . " " I will not urge you against the voice of you own heart , " say . " I must hasten back to she , for it be wonderful how she cling now , and be not willing to let I out of she sight . she use never to make any return to my affection before , but now tribulation have open she heart . farewell , . we heavenly Father comfort you and strengthen you to bear all thing . " Dinah put out she hand , and press it in silence . be get up to lift the stiff latch of the door for she , but before he could reach it , she have say gently , " farewell , friend , " and be gone , with she light step down the stair . " well , " say , take off he spectacle and put they into he pocket , " if there must be woman to make trouble in the world , it be but fair there should be woman to be comforter under it ; and she be one -- she be one . it be a pity she be a ; but there be no get a woman without some foolishness or other . " never go to be that night . the excitement of suspense , heighten with every hour that bring he nearer the fatal moment , be too great , and in spite of he entreaty , in spite of he promise that he would be perfectly quiet , the schoolmaster watch too . " what do it matter to I , lad ? " say : " a night 's sleep more or less ? I shall sleep long enough , by and by , underground . let I keep thee company in trouble while I can . " it be a long and dreary night in that small chamber . Adam would sometimes get up and tread backward and forward along the short space from wall to wall ; then he would sit down and hide he face , and no sound would be hear but the ticking of the watch on the table , or the falling of a cinder from the fire which the schoolmaster carefully ten . sometimes he would burst out into vehement speech , " if I could ha ' do anything to save she -- if my bear anything would ha ' do any good ... but t ' have to sit still , and know it , and do nothing ... it be hard for a man to bear ... and to think of ' what might ha ' be now , if it have not be for .... o , it be the very day we should ha ' be marry . " " aye , my lad , " say tenderly , " it be heavy -- it be heavy . but you must remember this : when you think of marry she , you would a notion she would get another sort of a nature inside she . you do not think she could have get hardened in that little while to do what she be done . " " I know -- I know that , " say . " I think she be loving and tender - hear , and would not tell a lie , or act deceitful . how could I think any other way ? and if he would never come near she , and I would marry she , and be love to she , and take care of she , she might never ha ' do anything bad . what would it ha ' signify -- my have a bit of ' trouble with she ? it 'uld ha ' be nothing to this . " " there be no knowing , my lad -- there be no knowing what might have come . the 's bad for you to bear now : you must have time -- you must have time . but I have that opinion of you , that you will rise above it all and be
be a man again , and there may good come out of this that we do not see . " " Good come out of it ! " say passionately . " that do not alter thg evil : she ruin can not be undone . I hate that talk of ' people , as if there be a way o ' make amend for everything . they would more need be bring to see as the wrong they do can never be alte . when a man 's spoilead he fellow - creatur 's life , he be no right to comfort himself with think good may come out of it . somebody else 's good do not alter she shame and misery . " " well , lad , well , " say , in a gentle tone , strangely in contrast with he usual peremptoriness and impatience of contradiction , " it be likely enough I talk foolishness . I be a old fellow , and it be a good many year since I be in trouble myself . it be easy find reason why other folk should be patient . " " , " say penitently , " I be very hot and hasty . I owe you something different ; but you must not take it ill of I . " " not I , lad -- not I . " so the night wear on in agitation till the chill dawn and the grow light bring the tremulous quiet that come on the brink of despair . there would soon be no more suspense . " let we go to the prison now , , " say , when he see the hand of he watch at six . " if there be any news come , we shall hear about it . " the people be astir already , move rapidly , in one direction , through the street . try not to think where they be go , as they hurrie past he in that short space between he lodging and the prison gate . he be thankful when the gate shut he in from see those eager people . no ; there be no news come -- no pardon -- no reprieve . linger in the court half a hour before he could bring himself to send word to that he be come . but a voice catch he ear : he could not shut out the word . " the cart be to set off at half - past seven . " it must be say -- the last good - bye : there be no help . in ten minute from that time , be at the door of the cell . have send he word that she could not come to he ; she could not leave Hetty one moment ; but be prepare for the meeting . he could not see she when he enter , for agitation deaden he sense , and the dim cell be almost dark to he . he stand a moment after the door close behind he , trembl and stupefy . but he begin to see through the dimness -- to see the dark eye lift up to he once more , but with no smile in they . of , how sad they look ! the last time they have meet he be when he part from she with he heart full of joyous hopeful love , and they look out with a tearful smile from a pink , dimple , childish face . the face be marble now ; the sweet lip be pallid and half - open and quiver ; the dimple be all go -- all but one , that never go ; and the eye -- o , the worst of all be the likeness they have to 's . they be 's eye look at he with that mournful gaze , as if she have come back to he from the dead to tell he of she misery . she be cling close to ; she cheek be against 's . it seem as if she last faint strength and hope lay in that contact , and the pitying love that shine out from 's face look like a visible pledge of the . when the sad eye meet -- when and look at each other -- she feel the change in he too , and it seem to strike she with fresh fear . it be the first time she have see any be whose face seem to reflect the change in herself : be a new image of the dreadful past and the dreadful present . she tremble more as she look at he . " speak to he , Hetty , " say ; " tell he what be in you heart . " obey she , like a little child . " Adam ... I be very sorry ... i behave very wrong to you ... will you forgive I ... before I die ? " answer with a half - sob , " yes , I forgive thee Hetty . I forgave thee long ago . " it have see to as if he brain would burst with the anguish of meet 's eye in the first moment , but the sound of she voice utter these penitent word touch a chord which have be less strained . there be a sense of relief from what be become unbearable , and the rare tear come -- they have never come before , since he have hang on 's neck in the beginning of he sorrow . make a involuntary movement towards he , some of the love that she have once live in the midst of be come near she again . she keep hold of 's hand , but she go up to and say timidly , " will you
you kiss I again , , for all I have be so wick ? " take the blanched waste hand she put out to he , and they give each other the solemn unspeakable kiss of a lifelong parting . " and tell he , " Hetty say , in rather a stronger voice , " tell he ... for there be nobody else to tell he ... as I go after he and could not find he ... and I hate he and curse he once ... but say I should forgive he ... and I try ... for else will not forgive I . " there be a noise at the door of the cell now -- the key be be turn in the lock , and when the door open , see indistinctly that there be several face there . he be too agitated to see more -- even to see that 's face be one of they . he feel that the last preparation be begin , and he could stay no longer . room be silently make for he to depart , and he go to he chamber in loneliness , leave to watch and see the end . the last moment it be a sight that some people remembe better even than they own sorrow -- the sight in that grey clear morning , when the fatal cart with the two young woman in it be descry by the waiting watch multitude , cleave its way towards the hideous symbol of a deliberately inflict sudden death . all have hear of , the young woman who have bring the obstinate criminal to confess , and there be as much eagerness to see she as to see the wretched . but be hardly conscious of the multitude . when have catch sight of the vast crowd in the distance , she have clutch convulsively . " close you eye , Hetty , " say , " and let we pray without cease to . " and in a low voice , as the cart go slowly along through the midst of the gazing crowd , she pour forth she soul with the wrestling intensity of a last pleading , for the trembling creature that cling to she and clutch she as the only visible sign of love and pity . do not know that the crowd be silent , gaze at she with a sort of awe -- she do not even know how near they be to the fatal spot , when the cart stop , and she shrank appal at a loud shout hideous to she ear , like a vast yell of demon . 's shriek mingle with the sound , and they clasp each other in mutual horror . but it be not a shout of execration -- not a yell of exultant cruelty . it be a shout of sudden excitement at the appearance of a horseman cleave the crowd at full gallop . the horse be hot and distressed , but answer to the desperate spurring ; the rider look as if he eye be glaze by madness , and he see nothing but what be unseen by other . see , he have something in he hand -- he be hold it up as if it be a signal . the sheriff know he : it be , carry in he hand a hard - win release from death . another meeting in the the next day , at evening , two man be walk from opposite point towards the same scene , draw thither by a common memory . the scene be the by : you know who the man be . the old squire 's funeral have take place that morne , the will have be read , and now in the first breathing - space , have come out for a lonely walk , that he might look fixedly at the new future before he and confirm himself in a sad resolution . he think he could do that best in the Grove . Adam too have come from on evening , and to - day he have not leave home , except to go to the family at the and tell they everything that have leave untold . he have agree with the Poyser that he would follow they to they new neighbourhood , wherever that might be , for he mean to give up the management of the wood , and , as soon as it be practicable , he would wind up he business with and settle with he mother and Seth in a home within reach of the friend to whom he feel bound by a mutual sorrow . " Seth and I be sure to find work , " he say . " a man that have get we trade at he finger - end be at home everywhere ; and we must make a new start . my mother will not stand in the way , for she be tell I , since I come home , she would make up she mind to be bury in another parish , if I wish it , and if I would be more comfortable elsewhere . it be wonderful how quiet she be be ever since I come back . it seem as if the very greatness of ' the trouble have quiet and calm she . we shall all be better in a new country , though there be some I shall be loath to leave behind . but I will not part from you and yours , if I can help it , . trouble 's make we kin . " " aye , lad , " say . " we will go out o' hearing of ' that man 's name . but I doubt we shall ne 'er go far enough for folk not to find out as
as we have get they belong to we as be transport of 'er the seas , and be like to be hang . we shall have that flyin ' up in we face , and we child 's after we . " that be a long visit to the , and draw too strongly on 's energie for he to think of see other , or re-enter on he old occupations till the morrow . " but to - morrow , " he say to himself , " I will go to work again . I shall learn to like it again some time , maybe ; and it be right whether I like it or not . " this evening be the last he would allow to be absorb by sorrow : suspense be go now , and he must bear the unalterable . he be resolve not to see again , if it be possible to avoid he . he have no message to deliver from now , for have see . and distrust himself -- he have learn to dread the violence of he own feeling . that word of 's -- that he must remember what he have feel after give the last blow to in the -- have remain with he . these thought about , like all thought that be charge with strong feeling , be continually recurr , and they always call up the image of the -- of that spot under the overarching bough where he have catch sight of the two bending figure , and have be possess by sudden rage . " I will go and see it again to - night for the last time , " he say ; " it will do I good ; it will make I feel over again what I feel when I would knock he down . I feel what poor empty work it be , as soon as I would do it , before I begin to think he might be dead . " in this way it happen that and be walk towards the same spot at the same time . have on he working - dress again , now , for he have throw off the other with a sense of relief as soon as he come home ; and if he have have the basket of tool over he shoulder , he might have be take , with he pale waste face , for the spectre of the who enter the on that evening eight month ago . but he have no basket of tool , and he be not walk with the old erectness , look keenly round he ; he hand be thrust in he side pocket , and he eye rest chiefly on the ground . he have not long enter the , and now he pause before a beech . he know that tree well ; it be the boundary mark of he youth -- the sign , to he , of the time when some of he earliest , strongest feeling have leave he . he feel sure they would never return . and yet , at this moment , there be a stirring of affection at the remembrance of that Arthur Donnithorne whom he have believe in before he have come up to this beech eight month ago . it be affection for the dead : that exist no longer . he be disturb by the sound of approaching footstep , but the beech stand at a turning in the road , and he could not see who be come until the tall slim figure in deep mourning suddenly stand before he at only two yard ' distance . they both start , and look at each other in silence . often , in the last fortnight , have imagine himself as close to as this , assail he with word that should be as harrow as the voice of remorse , force upon he a just share in the misery he have cause ; and often , too , he have tell himself that such a meeting have better not be . but in imagine the meeting he have always see Arthur , as he have meet he on that evening in the , florid , careless , light of speech ; and the figure before he touch he with the sign of suffering . know what suffering be -- he could not lay a cruel finger on a bruise man . he feel no impulse that he need to resist . Silence be more just than reproach . yoArthu be the first to speak . " , " he say , quietly , " it may be a good thing that we have meet here , for I wish to see you . I should have ask to see you to - morrow . " he pause , but say nothing . " I know it be painful to you to meet I , " yoArthu go on , " but it be not likely to happen again for year to come . " " no , sir , " say , coldly , " that be what I mean to write to you to - morrow , as it would be better all dealings should be at a end between we , and somebody else put in my place . " yoArthu feel the answer keenly , and it be not without a effort that he speak again . " it be partly on that subject I wish to speak to you . I do not want to lessen you indignation against I , or ask you to do anything for my sake . I only wish to ask you if you will help I to lessen the evil consequence of the past , which be unchangeable . I do not mean consequence to myself , but to other .
. it be but little I can do , I know . I know the worst consequence will remain ; but something may be do , and you can help I . will you listen to I patiently ? " " yes , sir , " say , after some hesitation ; " I will hear what it be . if I can help to mmend anything , I will . anger ' ull mmend nothing , I know . we have have enough of ' that . " " I be go to the Hermitage , " say . " will you go there with I and sit down ? we can talk better there . " the Hermitage have never be enter since they leave it together , for have lock up the key in he desk . and now , when he open the door , there be the candle burn out in the socket ; there be the chair in the same place where remember sitting ; there be the waste - paper basket full of scrap , and deep down in it , feel in a instant , there be the little pink silk handkerchief . it would have be painful to enter this place if they previous thought have be less painful . they sit down opposite each other in the old place , and say , " I be go away , ; I be go into the army . " poor feel that ought to be affect by this announcement -- ought to have a movement of sympathy towards he . but 's lip remain firmly close , and the expression of he face unchange . " what I want to say to you , " yoArthu continue , " be this : one of my reason for go away be that no one else may leave -- may leave they home on my account . I would do anything , there be no sacrifice I would not make , to prevent any further injury to other through my -- through what have happen . " be word have precisely the opposite effect to that he have anticipate . think he perceive in they that notion of compensation for irretrievable wrong , that self - soothing attempt to make evil bear the same fruit as good , which most of all rouse he indignation . he be as strongly impell to look painful fact right in the face as yoArthu be to turn away he eye from they . moreover , he have the wakeful suspicious pride of a poor man in the presence of a rich man . he feel he old severity return as he say , " the time 's past for that , sir . a man should make sacrifice to keep clear of do a wrong ; sacrifice will not undo it when it be done . when people 's feeling have get a deadly wound , they can not be cure with favour . " " favour ! " say , passionately ; " no ; how can you suppose I mean that ? but the Poyser -- tell I the Poyser mean to leave the place where they have liv so many year -- for generation . do not you see , as do , that if they could be persuade to overcome the feeling that drive they away , it would be much better for they in the end to remain on the old spot , among the friend and neighbour who know they ? " " that be true , " say coldly . " but then , sir , folk 's feeling be not so easily overcome . it will be hard for to go to a strange place , among strange face , when he be be breed up on the , and he father before he ; but then it 'uld be harder for a man with he feeling to stay . I do not see how the thing 's to be make any other than hard . there be a sort of ' damage , sir , that can not be make up for . " yoArthu be silent some moments . in spite of other feeling dominant in he this evening , he pride wince under 's mode of treat he . be not he himself suffer ? be not he too oblige to renounce he most cherish hope ? it be now as it have be eight month ago -- be force to feel more intensely the irrevocableness of he own wrong - do . he be present the sort of resistance that be the most irritat to 's eager ardent nature . but he anger be subdue by the same influence that have subdue 's when they first confront each other -- by the mark of suffering in a long familiar face . the momentary struggle end in the feeling that he could bear a great deal from , to whom he have be the occasion of bearing so much ; but there be a touch of pleading , boyish vexation in he tone as he say , " but people may make injury worse by unreasonable conduct -- by give way to anger and satisfye that for the moment , instead of think what will be the effect in the future . " if I be go to stay here and act as landlord , " he add presently , with still more eagerness -- " if I be careless about what I have do -- what I have be the cause of , you would have some excuse , , for go away and encourage other to go . you would have some excuse then for try to make the evil worse . but when I tell you I be go away for year -- when you know what that mean for I , how
how it cut off every plan of happiness I have ever for -- it be impossible for a sensible man like you to believe that there be any real ground for the Poyser refuse to remain . I know they feeling about disgrace -- . Irwine have tell I all ; but he be of opinion that they might be persuade out of this idea that they be disgrac in the eyes of they neighbour , and that they can not remain on my estate , if you would join he in he effort -- if you would stay yourself and go on manage the old woods . " yoArthu pause a moment and then add , pleadingly , " you know that be a good work to do for the sake of other people , besides the owner . and you do not know but that they may have a better owner soon , whom you will like to work for . if I die , my cousin will have the estate and take my name . he be a good fellow . " Adam could not help be move : it be impossible for he not to feel that this be the voice of the honest warm - hear Arthur whom he have love and be proud of in old day ; but nearer memory would not be thrust away . he be silent ; yet see a answer in he face that induce he to go on , with grow earnestness . " and then , if you would talk to the Poyser -- if you would talk the matter over with -- he mean to see you to - morrow -- and then if you would join you argument to he to prevail on they not to go .... I know , of course , that they would not accept any favour from I -- I mean nothing of that kind -- but I be sure they would suffer less in the end . Irwine think so too . and be to have the chief authority on the estate -- he have consent to undertake that . they will really be under no man but one whom they respect and like . it would be the same with you , , and it could be nothing but a desire to give I worse pain that could incline you to go . " yoArthu be silent again for a little while , and then say , with some agitation in he voice , " I would not act so towards you , I know . if you be in my place and I in yours , I should try to help you to do the best . " make a hasty movement on he chair and look on the ground . yoArthu go on , " perhaps you have never do anything you have have bitterly to repent of in you life , Adam ; if you have , you would be more generous . you would know then that it be worse for I than for you . " yoArthu rise from he seat with the last word , and go to one of the window , look out and turn he back on , as he continue , passionately , " have not I love she too ? do not I see she yesterday ? not I carry the thought of she about with I as much as you will ? and do not you think you would suffer more if you have be in fault ? " there be silence for several minute , for the struggle in 's mind be not easily decide . Facile nature , whose emotion have little permanence , can hardly understand how much inward resistance he overcome before he rise from he seat and turn towards . yoArthu hear the movement , and turn round , meet the sad but soften look with which say , " it be true what you say , sir . I be hard -- it be in my nature . I be too hard with my father , for do wrong . I have be a bit hard t ' everybody but she . I feel as if nobody pitie she enough -- she suffer cut into I so ; and when I think the folk at the farm be too hard with she , I say I would never be hard to anybody myself again . but feel overmuch about she have perhaps make I unfair to you . I have know what it be in my life to repent and feel it be too late . I feel I have be too harsh to my father when he be go from I -- I feel it now , when I think of he . I have no right to be hard towards they as have do wrong and repent . " speak these word with the firm distinctness of a man who be resolve to leave nothing unsaid that he be bound to say ; but he go on with more hesitation . " I would not shake hand with you once , sir , when you ask I -- but if you be willing to do it now , for all I refuse then ... " be white hand be in 's large grasp in a instant , and with that action there be a strong rush , on both side , of the old , boyish affection . " , " yoArthu say , impell to full confession now , " it would never have happene if I would know you love she . that would have help to save I from it . and I do struggle . I never mean to injure she . I deceive you afterwards -- and that lead on to worse ; but I think it be force upon I , I think
think it be the best thing I could do . and in that letter I tell she to let I know if she be in any trouble : do not think I would not have do everything I could . but I be all wrong from the very first , and horrible wrong have come of it . know , I would give my life if I could undue it . " they sit down again opposite each other , and say , tremulously , " how do she seem when you leave she , sir ? " " do not ask I , , " yoArthu say ; " I feel sometimes as if I should go mad with thinking of she look and what she say to I , and then , that I could not get a full pardon -- that I could not save she from that wretch fate of be transport -- that I can do nothing for she all those year ; and she may die under it , and never know comfort any more . " " ah , sir , " say , for the first time feel he own pain merge in sympathy for , " you and I will often be think of ' the same thing , when we be a long way off one another . I will pray to help you , as I pray he to help I . " " but there be that sweet woman -- that , " yoArthu say , pursue he own thought and not know what have be the sense of 's word , " she say she shall stay with she to the very last moment -- till she go ; and the poor thing cling to she as if she find some comfort in she . I could worship that woman ; I do not know what I should do if she be not there . , you will see she when she come back . I could say nothing to she yesterday -- nothing of what I feel towards she . tell she , " yoArthu go on hurriedly , as if he want to hide the emotion with which he speak , while he take off he chain and watch , " tell she I ask you to give she this in remembrance of I -- of the man to whom she be the one source of comfort , when he think of ... I know she do not care about such thing -- or anything else I can give she for its own sake . but she will use the watch -- I shall like to think of she use it . " " I will give it to she , sir , " say , " and tell she you word . she tell I she should come back to the people at the . " " and you will persuade the Poyser to stay , ? " say , reminde of the subject which both of they have forget in the first interchange of revive friendship . " you will stay yourself , and help to carry out the repair and improvement on the estate ? " " there be one thing , sir , that perhaps you do not take account of , " say , with hesitat gentleness , " and that be what make I hang back longer . you see , it be the same with both I and the Poyser : if we stay , it be for we own worldly interest , and it look as if we would put up with anything for the sake of ' that . I know that be what they will feel , and I can not help feel a little of it myself . when folk have get a honourable independent spirit , they do not like to do anything that might make them seem base - mind . " " but no one who know you will think that , . that be not a reason strong enough against a course that be really more generous , more unselfish than the other . and it will be know -- it shall be make known , that both you and the Poyser stay at my entreaty . , do not try to make thing worse for I ; I be punished enough without that . " " no , sir , no , " say , look at with mournful affection . " forbid I should make thing worse for you . I use to wish I could do it , in my passion -- but that be when I think you do not feel enough . I will stay , sir , I will do the best I can . it be all I have get to think of now -- to do my work well and make the world a bit better place for they as can enjoy it . " " then we will part now , . you will see to - morrow , and consult with he about everything . " " be you go soon , sir ? " say . " as soon as possible -- after I have make the necessary arrangement . good - bye , . I shall think of you go about the old place . " " good - bye , sir . bless you . " the hand be clasp once more , and leave the Hermitage , feel that sorrow be more bearable now hatre be gone . as soon as the door be close behind he , go to the waste - paper basket and take out the little pink silk handkerchief . at the the first autumnal afternoon sunshine of 1801-- more than eighteen month after that parting of and in the Hermitage -- be on the yard at the ; and the bull -
- dog be in one of he most excited moments , for it be that hour of the day when the cow be be drive into the yard for they afternoon milking . no wonder the patient beasts run confusedly into the wrong place , for the alarming din of the bull - dog be mingl with more distant sound which the timid feminine creature , with pardonable superstition , imagine also to have some relation to they own movement -- with the tremendous crack of the waggoner 's whip , the roar of he voice , and the booming thunder of the waggon , as it leave the rick - yard empty of its golden load . the milking of the cow be a sight Poyser love , and at this hour on mild day she be usually stand at the house door , with she knitt in she hand , in quiet contemplation , only heighten to a keener interest when the vicious yellow cow , who have once kick over a pailful of precious milk , be about to undergo the preventive punishment of have she hinder - leg strap . to -day , however , . give but a divided attention to the arrival of the cow , for she be in eager discussion with , who be stitch 's shirt - collar , and have borne patiently to have she thread break three time by pull at she arm with a sudden insistence that she should look at " , " that be , at a large wooden doll with no leg and a long skirt , whose bald head , seat in she small chair at 's side , be caresse and presse to she fat cheek with much fervour . Totty be larger by more than two year ' growth than when you first see she , and she have on a black frock under she pinafore . too have on a black gown , which seem to heighten the family likeness between she and . in other respects there be little outward change now discernible in we old friend , or in the pleasant house - place , bright with polished oak and pewter . " I never see the like to you , , " be say , " when you have once take anything into you head : there be no more move you than the rooted tree . you may say what you like , but I do not believe that be religion ; for what be the on the mount about , as you be so fond of ' read to the boy , but do what other folk 'uld have you do ? but if it be anything unreasonable they want you to do , like take you cloak off and give it to th'ey , or let th'ey slap you I ' the face , I daresay you would be ready enough . it be only when one 'uld have you do what be plain common sense and good for yourself , as you be obstinate th ' other way . " " Nay , dear aunt , " say , smile slightly as she go on with she work , " I be sure you wish 'uld be a reason for I to do anything that I do not feel it be wrong to do . " " ! you drive I past bearing . what be there wrong , I should like to know , I ' stay along wi' you own friend , as be th ' happier for have you with th'ey a ' be willing to provide for you , even if you work do not more nor pay th'ey for the bit o' sparrow 's victual y's eat and the bit of ' rag you put on ? a ' who be it , I should like to know , as you be bound t ' help and comfort I ' the world more nor you own flesh and blood -- a ' I th ' only aunt you have get above - ground , a ' am bring to the brink of ' the grave welly every winter as come , a ' there be the child as sit beside you ' ull break she little heart when you go , a ' the grandfather not be dead a twelvemonth , a ' you uncle 's ull miss you so as never be -- a - lighting he pipe a ' wait on he , a ' now I can trust you wi' the butter , a ' have have all the trouble of ' teach you , and there be all the sew to be do , an' I must have a strange gell out o' Treddles 'on to do it -- a ' all because you must go back to that bare heap of ' stone as the very crow fly over a ' will not stop at . " " dear aunt , " say , look up in 's face , " it be you kindness make you say I be useful to you . you do not really want I now , for and be clever at they work , and you be in good health now , by the blessing of , and my uncle be of a cheerful countenance again , and you have neighbour and friend not a few -- some of they come to sit with my uncle almost daily . indeed , you will not miss I ; and at there be breth and sister in great need , who have none of those comfort you have around you . I feel that I be call back to those amongst whom my lot be first cast . I feel draw again towards the hill where I use to be bless in carry the word of life to the sinful and
and desolate . " " you feel ! yes , " say , return from a parenthetic glance at the cow , " that be allay the reason I be to sit down wig , when you have a mind to do anything contrairy . what do you want to be preach for more than you be preach now ? do not you go off , the knows where , every a - preaching and pray ? a ' have not you get enow at to go and look at , if church - folk 's face be too handsome to please you ? a ' be not there them I ' this parish as you have get under hand , and they be like enough to make friend wi' again as soon as you back 's turn ? there be that -- she will be flaunt I ' new finery three week after you be go , I will be bound . she will no more go on in she new way without you than a dog ' ull stand on its hind - leg when there be nobody look . but I suppose it do to matter so much about folk 's soul I ' this country , else you would be for staying with you own aunt , for she be none so good but what you might help she to be better . " there be a certain something in 's voice just then , which she do not wish to be notice , so she turn round hastily to look at the clock , and say : " see there ! it be tea - time ; a ' if be I ' the rick - yard , he will like a cup . here , , my chicken , let mother put you bonnet on , and then you go out into the rick - yard and see if 's there , and tell he he must not go away again without come t ' have a cup of ' tea ; and tell you brothers to come in too . " Totty trot off in she flapping bonnet , while Mrs . Poyser set out the bright oak table and reach down the tea - cup . " you talk of ' they gell and be clever I ' they work , " she begin again ; " it be fine talking . they be all the same , clever or stupid -- one can not trust them out of ' one be sight a minute . they want somebody 's eye on th'ey constant if they be to be keep to they work . a ' suppose I be ill again this winter , as I be the winter before last ? who be to look after 'em then , if you be gone ? a ' there be that bless child -- something be sure t ' happen to she -- they will let she tumble into the fire , or get at the kettle wi' the boiling lard I not , or some mischief as ' ull lame she for life ; an' it will be all you fault , . " " aunt , " say , " I promise to come back to you in the winter if you be ill . do not think I will ever stay away from you if you be in real want of I . but , indeed , it be needful for my own soul that I should go away from this life of ease and luxury in which I have all thing too richly to enjoy -- at least that I should go away for a short space . no one can know but myself what be my inward need , and the besetment I be most in danger from . you wish for I to stay be not a call of duty which I refuse to hearke to because it be against my own desire ; it be a temptation that I must resist , lest the love of the creature should become like a mist in my soul shut out the heavenly light . " " it pass my cunning to know what you mean by ease and luxury , " say , as she cut the bread and butter . " it be true there be good victual enough about you , as nobody shall ever say I do not provide enough and to spare , but if there be ever a bit of ' odds a ' end as nobody else 'uld eat , you be sure to pick it out ... but look there ! there be a - carry the little un in . I wonder how it be he be come so early . " hasten to the door for the pleasure of look at she darling in a new position , with love in she eye but reproof on she tongue . " oh for shame , ! gell of ' five year old should be asham to be carry . why , , she will break you arm , such a big gell as that ; set she down -- for shame ! " " Nay , nay , " say , " I can lift she with my hand -- I 've no need to take my arm to it . " Totty , look as serenely unconscious of remark as a fat white puppy , be set down at the door - place , and the mother enforce she reproof with a shower of kiss . " you be surprised to see I at this hour of ' the day , " say . " yes , but come in , " say , make way for he ; " there be no bad news , I hope ? " " no , nothing bad , " answer , as
as he go up to and put out he hand to she . she have laid down she work and stand up , instinctively , as he approached she . a faint blush die away from she pale cheek as she put she hand in he and look up at he timidly . " it be a errand to you bring I , , " say , apparently unconscious that he be hold she hand all the while ; " mother be a bit ailing , and she be set she heart on you come to stay the night with she , if you will be so kind . I tell she I would call and ask you as I come from the village . she overwork herself , and I can not persuade she to have a little girl t ' help she . I do not know what be to be do . " Adam release 's hand as he cease speak , and be expect a answer , but before she have open she lip say , " look there now ! I tell you there be folk enow t ' help I ' this parish , wi'out go further off . there be . get as old and cas'alty as can be , and she will not let anybody but you go a - nigh she hardly . the folk at have lear not by this time to do better wi'out you nor she can . " " I will put my bonnet on and set off directly , if you do not want anything do first , , " say , fold up she work . " yes , I do want something done . I want you t ' have you tea , child ; it be all ready -- and you will have a cup , , if y ' arena in too big a hurry . " " yes , I will have a cup , please ; and then I will walk with . I be go straight home , for I have get a lot of ' timber valuation to write out . " " why , , lad , be you here ? " say , enter warm and coatless , with the two black - eyed boy behind he , still look as much like he as two small elephant be like a large one . " how be it we have get sight of ' you so long before foddering - time ? " " I come on a errand for mother , " say . " she have get a touch of she old complaint , and she want to go and stay with she a bit . " " well , we will spare she for you mother a little while , " say . " but we win to spare she for anybody else , of and 'y she husband . " " ! " say , who be at the most prosaic and literal period of the boyish mind . " why , have not get a husband . " " spare she ? " say , place a seed - cake on the table and then seat herself to pour out the tea . " but we must spare she , it seem , and not for a husband neither , but for she own megrim . , what be you do to you little sister 's doll ? make the child naughty , when she would be good if you would let she . you shan to have a morsel o' cake if you behave so . " Tommy , with true brotherly sympathy , be amuse himself by turn 's skirt over she bald head and exhibit she truncate body to the general scorn -- a indignity which cut to the heart . " what do you think 's be a - tell I since dinner - time ? " continue , look at she husband . " Eh ! I be a poor un at guessing , " say Poyser . " why , she mean to go back to again , and work I ' the mill , and starve herself , as she use to do , like a creatur as have get no friend . " do not readily find word to express he unpleasant astonishment ; he only look from he wife to , who have now seate herself beside , as a bulwark against brotherly playfulness , and be busy herself with the child 's tea . if he have be give to make general reflection , it would have occur to he that there be certainly a change come over , for she never use to change colour ; but , as it be , he merely observe that she face be flush at that moment . think she look the prettier for it : it be a flush no deeper than the petal of a monthly rose . perhaps it come because she uncle be look at she so fixedly ; but there be no knowing , for just then be say , with quiet surprise , " why , I hope be settle among we for life . I think she would give up the notion of ' go back to she old country . " " thought ! yes , " say , " and so would anybody else ha ' thought , as have get they right end up'ard . but I suppose you must be a to know what a ' ull do . it be ill guess what the bat be fly after . " " why , what have we do to you . Dinah , as you must go away from we ? " say , still pause over he tea - cup . " it be like break you word , welly , for you
you aunt never have no thought but you would make this you home . " " Nay , uncle , " say , try to be quite calm . " when I first come , I say it be only for a time , as long as I could be of any comfort to my aunt . " " well , a ' who say you would ever leave off be a comfort to I ? " say . " if you do to mean to stay wi' I , you would better never ha ' come . they have ha's never have a cushion do not miss it . " " Nay , nay , " say , who object to exaggerate view . " Thee mustna say so ; we should ha ' be ill off wi'out she , Lady day be a twelvemont ' . we mun be thankful for that , whether she stay or no . but I can to think what she mun leave a good home for , to go back int ' a country where the land , most o not , isna worth ten shilling a acre , rent and profit . " " why , that be just the reason she want to go , as fur as she can give a reason , " say . " she say this country 's too comfortable , an' there be too much t ' eat , a ' folk arena miserable enough . and she be go next week . I can to turn she , say what I will . it be allay the way wi' they meek - face people ; you may 's well pelt a bag o' feather as talk to th'ey . but I say it isna religion , to be so obstinate -- be it now , ? " see that be more disturbed than he have ever see she by any matter relate to herself , and , anxious to relieve she , if possible , he say , look at she affectionately , " Nay , I can not find fault with anything Dinah do . I believe she thought be better than we guess , let th'ey be what they may . I should ha ' be thankful for she to stay among we , but if she think well to go , I would not cross she , or make it hard to she by object . we owe she something different to that . " as it often happen , the word intend to relieve she be just too much for 's susceptible feeling at this moment . the tear come into the grey eye too fast to be hidden and she get up hurriedly , mean it to be understand that she be go to put on she bonnet . " mother , what be cry for ? " say . " she be not a naughty dell . " " Thee 'st go a bit too yofu , " say . " we have no right t ' interfere with she do as she like . a ' thee ' dst be as angry as could be wi' I , if I say a word against anything she do . " " because you would very like be find fault wi'out reason , " say . " but there be reason I ' what I say , else I should to say it . it be easy talk for they as can not love she so well as she own aunt do . a ' I get so used to she ! I shall feel as uneasy as a new sheared sheep when she be go from I . a ' to think of she leave a parish where she be so look on . there be make as much of she as if she be a lady , for all she be a , a ' wig that magget of ' preach in she head -- forgi'e I if I be I ' the wrong to call it so . " " aye , " say , look jocose ; " but thee dostna tell what he say to thee about it one day . the missis be say , , as the preaching be the only fault to be find wi' , and say , ' but you must not find fault with she for that , . Poyser ; you forget she be get no husband to preach to . I will answer for it , you give many a good sermon . ' the parson have thee there , " add , laugh unctuously . " I tell on it , a ' he laugh too . " " yes , it be a small joke set man laugh when they sit a - staring at one another with a pipe I ' they mouth , " say . " he way and he would have all the sharpness to himself . if the chaff - cutter have the making of we , we should all be straw , I reckon . Totty , my chicken , go upstairs to cousin , and see what she be do , and give she a pretty kiss . " this errand be devise for as a means of check certain threatening symptom about the corner of the mouth ; for , no longer expectant of cake , be lift up he eyelid with he forefinger and turn he eyeball towards in a way that she feel to be disagreeably personal . " you be rare and busy now -- eh , ? " say . " have get so bad wig he asthmy , it be well if he will ever do much ride about again . " " yes , we have get a pretty bit of ' building on hand now , " say ,
, " what with the repair on thg estate , and the new house at . " " I will bet a penny that new house Burge be building on he own bit of ' land be for he and to go to , " say . " he will be for lay by business soon , I will warrant , and be want you to take to it all and pay he so much by thg 's ear . we shall see you live on th ' hill before another twelvemont 's over . " " well , " say , " I should like t ' have the business in my own hand . it be not as I mind much about get any more money . we have enough and to spare now , with only we two self and mother ; but I should like t ' have my own way about thing -- I could try plan then , as I can not do now . " " you get on pretty well wi' the new steward , I reckon ? " say . " yes , yes ; he be a sensible man enough ; understand farming -- he be carry on the draining , and all that , capital . you must go some day towards the side and see what alteration they be make . but he be get no notion about building . you can so seldom get hold of a man as can turn he brain to more nor one thing ; it be just as if they wear blinker like th 's horse and could see nothing of ' one side of th'ey . now , there be have get notion of ' building more nor most architect ; for as for thg architect , they set up to be fine fellow , but the most of th'ey do not know where to set a chimney so as it sha not be quarrell with a door . my notion be , a practical builder that have get a bit of ' taste make the best architect for common thing ; and I have ten time the pleasure I ' see after the work when I have make the plan myself . " listen with a admir interest to 's discourse on building , but perhaps it suggest to he that the building of he corn -rick have be proceed a little too long without the control of the master 's eye , for when have do speak , he get up and say , " well , lad , I will bid you good - bye now , for I be off to the rick - yard again . " rise too , for he see Dinah entering , with she bonnet on and a little basket in she hand , proceed by . " you be ready , I see , , " say ; " so we will set off , for the sooner I be at home the better . " " mother , " say , with she treble pipe , " be say she prayer and cry ever so . " " Hush , hush , " say the mother , " little gell must not chatter . " Whereupon the father , shak with silent laughter , set Totty on the white deal table and desire she to kiss he . and , you perceive , have no correct principles of education . " come back to - morrow if . do not want you , , " say : " but you can stay , you know , if she be ill . " so , when the good - bye have be say , and leave the together . in the do not ask to take he arm when they get out into the lane . he have never yet do so , often as they have walk together , for he have observe that she never walk arm -in - arm with , and he think , perhaps , that kind of support be not agreeable to she . so they walk apart , though side by side , and the close poke of she little black bonnet hide she face from he . " you can not be happy , then , to make the you home , ? " say , with the quiet interest of a brother , who have no anxiety for himself in the matter . " it be a pity , see they be so fond of you . " " you know , , my heart be as they heart , so far as love for they and care for they welfare go , but they be in no present need . they sorrow be heale , and I feel that I be call back to my old work , in which I find a blessing that I have miss of late in the midst of too abundant worldly good . I know it be a vain thought to flee from the work that appoint we , for the sake of find a greater bless to we own soul , as if we could choose for ourselves where we shall find the fulness of the presence , instead of seek it where alone it be to be find , in loving obedience . but now , I believe , I have a clear showing that my work lie elsewhere -- at least for a time . in the year to come , if my aunt 's health should fail , or she should otherwise need I , I shall return . " " you know best , , " say . " I do not believe you would go against the wish of they that love you , and be akin to you , without a good and sufficient reason in you own conscience
conscience . I have no right to say anything about my be sorry : you know well enough what cause I have to put you above every other friend I have get ; and if it have be order so that you could ha ' be my sister , and live with we all we life , I should ha ' count it the greatest blessing as could happen to we now . but tell I there be no hope of ' that : you feeling be different , and perhaps I be take too much upon I to speak about it . " make no answer , and they walk on in silence for some yard , till they come to the stone stile , where , as have pass through first and turn round to give she he hand while she mount the unusually high step , she could not prevent he from see she face . it struck he with surprise , for the grey eye , usually so mild and grave , have the bright uneasy glance which accompany suppress agitation , and the slight flush in she cheek , with which she have come downstairs , be heighten to a deep rose -colour . she look as if she be only sister to . be silent with surprise and conjecture for some moment , and then he say , " I hope I have not hurt or displease you by what I have say , . perhaps I be make too free . I have no wish different from what you see to be best , and I be satisfied for you to live thirty mile off , if you think it right . I shall think of you just as much as I do now , for you be bound up with what I can no more help remember than I can help my heart beat . " poor Adam ! thus do man blunder . make no answer , but she presently say , " have you hear any news from that poor young man , since we last spoke of he ? " always call so ; she have never lose the image of he as she have see he in the prison . " yes , " say . " read I part of a letter from he yesterday . it be pretty certain , they say , that there will be a peace soon , though nobody believe it will last long ; but he say he do not mean to come home . he be no heart for it yet , and it be better for other that he should keep away . think he be in the right not to come . it be a sorrowful letter . he ask about you and the Poyser , as he always do . there be one thing in the letter cut I a good deal : ' you can not think what a old fellow I feel , ' he say ; ' I make no scheme now . I be the best when I have a good day 's march or fight before I . ' " " he be of a rash , warm - hear nature , like , for whom I have always feel great pity , " say . " that meeting between the brother , where be so loving and generous , and so timid and distrustful , notwithstand he sense of the favour , have always touch I greatly . truly , I have be tempt sometimes to say that be of a mean spirit . but that be we trial : we must learn to see the good in the midst of much that be unlovely . " " ah , " say , " I like to read about best , in th' . he carry a hard business well through , and die when other folk be go to reap the fruit . a man must have courage to look at he life so , and think what will come of it after he be dead and gone . a good solid bit of ' work last : if it be only lay a floor down , somebody be the better for it be do well , besides the man as do it . " they be both glad to talk of subject that be not personal , and in this way they go on till they pass the bridge across the , when turn round and say , " ah , here 's . I think he would be home soon . do he know of you be go , ? " " yes , I tell he last . " remembe now that have come home much depresse on evening , a circumstance which have be very unusual with he of late , for the happiness he have in see every week seem long to have outweigh the pain of know she would never marry he . this evening he have he habitual air of dreamy benignant contentment , until he come quite close to and see the trace of tear on she delicate eyelid and eyelash . he give one rapid glance at he brother , but be evidently quite outside the current of emotion that have shaken : he wear he every day look of unexpectant calm . try not to let see that he have notice she face , and only say , " I be thankful you be come , , for mother 's be hunger after the sight of you all day . she begin to talk of you the first thing in the morning . " when they enter the cottage , be seat in she arm - chair , too tired with set out the evening meal , a task she always perform a long time beforehand , to go and meet
meet they at the door as usual , when she hear the approaching footstep . " Coom , child , the e't coom at last , " she say , when go towards she . " what dost mane by lavin ' I a week a ' ne 'er coomin ' a - nigh I ? " " dear friend , " say , take she hand , " you be not well . if I would know it sooner , I would have come . " " a ' how 's thee t ' know if thee dostna coom ? th ' lad on 'y know what I tell th'ey . as long as ye can stir hand and foot the man think ye be hearty . but I be none so bad , on 'y a bit of a cold set I achin ' . a ' th ' lad tease I so t ' ha ' somebody wi' I t ' do the work -- they make I aco worse wig talkin ' . if thee 's dst come and stay wi' I , they would let I alone . the Poyser can to want thee so bad as I do . but take thy bonnet off , a ' let I look at thee . " be move away , but hold she fast , while she be take off she bonnet , and look at she face as one look into a newly gather snowdrop , to renew the old impressions of purity and gentleness . " what be the matter wi' thee ? " say , in astonishment ; " thee 'st be a - cryin '. " " it be only a grief that will pass away , " say , who do not wish just now to call forth 's remonstrance by disclose she intention to leave . " you shall know about it shortly -- we will talk of it to - night . I shall stay with you to - night . " be pacify by this prospect . and she have the whole evening to talk with alone ; for there be a new room in the cottage , you remember , build nearly two year ago , in the expectation of a new inmate ; and here always sit when he have write to do or plan to make . sit there too this evening , for he know he mother would like to have all to herself . there be two pretty picture on the two side of the wall in the cottage . on one side there be the broad - shouldere , large - featured , hardy old woman , in she blue jacket and buff kerchief , with she dim - ey anxious look turn continually on the lily face and the slight form in the black dress that be either move lightly about in helpful activity , or seate close by the old woman 's arm -chair , hold she withered hand , with eye lift up towards she to speak a language which understand far better than the or the hymn - book . she would scarcely listen to read at all to - night . " Nay , nay , shut the book , " she say . " we mun talk . I want t ' know what thee be cryin ' about . get trouble of ' thy own , like other folk ? " on the other side of the wall there be the two brothers so like each other in the midst of they unlikeness : Adam with knit brows , shaggy hair , and dark vigorous colour , absorb in he " figure " ; , with large rug feature , the close copy of he brother 's , but with thing , wavy , brown hair and blue dreamy eye , as often as not look vaguly out of the window instead of at he book , although it be a newly buy book -- 's abridgment of 's life , which be full of wonder and interest for he . have say to , " Can I help thee with anything in here to - night ? I do not want to make a noise in the shop . " " no , lad , " answer , " there be nothing but what I must do myself . 'st get thy new book to read . " and often , when be quite unconscious , , as he pause after draw a line with he ruler , look at he brother with a kind smile dawning in he eye . he know " th ' lad like to sit full of ' thoughts he could give no account of ; they would never come t ' anything , but they make he happy , " and in the last year or so , have be get more and more indulgent to . it be part of that grow tenderness which come from the sorrow at work within he . for , though you see he quite master of himself , work hard and delighte in he work after he inborn inalienable nature , have not outlive he sorrow -- have not feel it slip from he as a temporary burden , and leave he the same man again . do any of we ? forbid . it would be a poor result of all we anguish and we wrestl if we win nothing but we old self at the end of it -- if we could return to the same blind love , the same self - confident blame , the same light thoughts of human suffering , the same frivolous gossip over blight human life , the same feeble sense of that unknown towards which we have send forth irrepressible cry in we loneliness . let we rather be thankful that we sorrow
sorrow life in we as a indestructible force , only change its form , as force do , and pass from pain into sympathy -- the one poor word which include all we best insight and we best love . not that this transformation of pain into sympathy have completely take place in yet . there be still a great remnant of pain , and this he feel would subsist as long as she pain be not a memory , but a exist thing , which he must think of as renew with the light of every new morning . but we get accustom to mental as well as bodily pain , without , for all that , lose we sensibility to it . it become a habit of we life , and we cease to imagine a condition of perfect ease as possible for we . be chasten into submission , and we be contente with we day when we have be able to bear we grief in silence and act as if we be not suffer . for it be at such period that the sense of we life have visible and invisible relation , beyond any of which either we present or prospective self be the centre , grow like a muscle that we be oblige to lean on and exert . that be 's state of mind in this second autumn of he sorrow . he work , as you know , have always be part of he religion , and from very early day he see clearly that good carpentry be 's -- be that form of 's will that most immediately concern he . but now there be no margin of dream for he beyond this daylight reality , no holiday - time in the work - day world , no moment in the distance when duty would take off she iron glove and breast - plate and clasp he gently into rest . he conceive no picture of the future but one make up of hard - work day such as he live through , with grow contentment and intensity of interest , every fresh week . love , he think , could never be anything to he but a liive memory -- a limb lop off , but not go from consciousness . he do not know that the power of love be all the while gain new force within he ; that the new sensibility buy by a deep experience be so many new fibre by which it be possible , nay , necessary to he , that he nature should intertwine with another . yet he be aware that common affection and friendship be more precious to he than they use to be -- that he cling more to he mother and Seth , and have a unspeakable satisfaction in the sight or imagination of any small addition to they happiness . the Poyser , too --hardly three or four day pass but he feel the need of see they and interchange word and look of friendliness with they . he would have feel this , probably , even if have not be with they , but he have only say the simplest truth in tell that he put she above all other friend in the world . could anything be more natural ? for in the darkest moments of memory the thought of she always come as the first ray of return comfort . the early day of gloom at the have be gradually turn into soft moonlight by she presence ; and in the cottage , too , for she have come at every spare moment to soothe and cheer poor , who have be stricken with a fear that subdue even she querulousness at the sight of she darl 's grief - worn face . he have become used to watch she light quiet movement , she pretty love way to the child , when he go to the ; to listen for she voice as for a recurrent music ; to think everything she say and do be just right , and could not have be better . in spite of he wisdom , he could not find fault with she for she overindulgence of the child , who have manage to convert Dinah the preacher , before whom a circle of rough man have often tremble a little , into a convenient household slave -- though herself be rather asham of this weakness , and have some inward conflict as to she departure from the precept of . yes , there be one thing that might have be better ; she might have love and consent to marry he . he feel a little vexed , for he brother 's sake , and he could not help think regretfully how , as 's wife , would have make they home as happy as it could be for they all -- how she be the one be that would have soothe they mother 's last day into peacefulness and rest . " it be wonderful she do not love th ' lad , " have say sometimes to himself , " for anybody 'uld think he be just cut out for she . but she heart 's so take up with other thing . she be one of ' those woman that feel no drawing towards have a husband and child of ' they own . she think she should be fill up with she own life then , and she be be use so to live in other folk 's care , she can not bear the thought of she heart be shut up from th'ey . I see how it be , well enough . she be cut out o' different stuff from most woman : I see that long ago . she be never easy but when she be help somebody , and marriage
marriage 'uld interfere with she way -- that be true . I have no right to be contrive and think it 'uld be better if she would have , as if I be wiser than she be -- or than either , for he make she what she be , and that be one of ' the greatest blessing I have ever have from he hand , and other besides I . " this self - reproof have recur strongly to 's mind when he gather from 's face that he have woun she by refer to he wish that she have accept , and so he have endeavoure to put into the strongest word he confidence in she decision as right -- he resignation even to she go away from they and cease to make part of they life otherwise than by live in they thought , if that separation be choose by herself . he feel sure she know quite well enough how much he care to see she continually -- to talk to she with the silent consciousness of a mutual great remembrance . it be not possible she should hear anything but self - renounce affection and respect in he assurance that he be contente for she to go away ; and yet there remain a uneasy feeling in he mind that he have not say quite the right thing -- that , somehow , have not understand he . must have risen a little before the sun the next morning , for she be downstairs about five o'clock . so be , for , through 's obstinate refusal to have any woman - helper in the house , he have learn to make himself , as say , " very handy in the housework , " that he might save he mother from too great weariness ; on which ground I hope you will not think he unmanly , any more than you can have think the gallant unmanly when he make the gruel for he invalid sister . , who have sit up late at he writing , be still asleep , and be not likely , say , to be down till breakfast - time . often as have visit during the last eighteen month , she have never sleep in the cottage since that night after 's death , when , you remember , praise she deft movement and even give a modified approval to she porridge . but in that long interval have make great advance in household cleverness , and this morning , since be there to help , she be bend on bring everything to a pitch of cleanliness and order that would have satisfi she . the cottage be far from that standard at present , for 's rheumatism have force she to give up she old habits of dilettante scouring and polishing . when the kitchen be to she mind , go into the new room , where have be write the night before , to see what sweeping and dusting be need there . she open the window and let in the fresh morning air , and the smell of the sweet - brier , and the bright low - slant ray of the early sun , which make a glory about she pale face and pale auburn hair as she hold the long brush , and sweep , singe to herself in a very low tone -- like a sweet summer murmur that you have to listen for very closely -- one of 's hymn : Eternal beam of light divine , Fountain of unexhausted love , in whom the Father 's glory shine , through earth beneath and heaven above ; ! the weary wanderer 's rest , give I thy easy yoke to bear ; with steadfast patience arm my breast , with spotless love and holy fear . speak to my warring passion , " peace ! " say to my trembling heart , " be still ! " thy power my strength and fortress be , for all thing serve thy sovereign will . she lay by the brush and take up the duster ; and if you have ever live in 's household , you would know how the duster behave in 's hand -- how it go into every small corner , and on every ledge in and out of sight -- how it go again and again round every bar of the chair , and every leg , and under and over everything that lay on the table , till it come to 's papers and ruler and the open desk near they . dust up to the very edge of these and then hesitate , look at they with a longing but timid eye . it be painful to see how much dust there be among they . as she be look in this way , she hear 's step just outside the open door , towards which she back be turn , and say , raise she clear treble , " , be you brother wrathful when he papers be stir ? " " yes , very , when they be not put back in the right place , " say a deep strong voice , not 's . it be as if have put she hand unawar on a vibrating chord . she be shaken with a intense thrill , and for the instant feel nothing else ; then she know she cheek be glow , and da not look round , but stand still , distress because she could not say good - morning in a friendly way . , find that she do not look round so as to see the smile on he face , be afraid she have think he serious about he wrathfulness , and go up to she , so that she be oblige to look at he . "
" what ! you think I be a cross fellow at home , ? " he say , smilingly . " Nay , " say , look up with timid eye , " not so . but you might be put about by find thing meddle with ; and even the man , the meekest of man , be wrathful sometimes . " " come , then , " say , look at she affectionately , " I will help you move the thing , and put th'ey back again , and then they can not get wrong . you be get to be you aunt 's own niece , I see , for particularness . " they begin they little task together , but have not recover herself sufficiently to think of any remark , and look at she uneasily . Dinah , he think , have seem to disapprove he somehow lately ; she have not be so kind and open to he as she use to be . he want she to look at he , and be as pleased as he be himself with do this bit of playful work . but do not look at he -- it be easy for she to avoid look at the tall man -- and when at last there be no more dusting to be do and no further excuse for he to linger near she , he could bear it no longer , and say , in rather a pleading tone , " Dinah , you be not displease with I for anything , be you ? I have not say or do anything to make you think ill of I ? " the question surprise she , and relieve she by give a new course to she feeling . she look up at he now , quite earnestly , almost with the tear come , and say , " oh , no , ! how could you think so ? " " I could not bear you not to feel as much a friend to I as I do to you , " say . " and you do not know the value I set on the very thought of you , . that be what I mean yesterday , when I say I would be content for you to go , if you think right . I mean , the thought of you be worth so much to I , I should feel I ought to be thankful , and not grumble , if you see right to go away . you know I do mind part with you , ? " " yes , dear friend , " say , trembl , but try to speak calmly , " I know you have a brother 's heart towards I , and we shall often be with one another in spirit ; but at this season I be in heaviness through manifold temptation . you must not mark I . I feel call to leave my kindred for a while ; but it be a trial -- the flesh be weak . " see that it pain she to be oblige to answer . " I hurt you by talk about it , , " he say . " I will say no more . let 's see if 's ready with breakfast now . " that be a simple scene , reader . but it be almost certain than you , too , have be in love -- perhaps , even , more than once , though you may not choose to say so to all you feminine friend . if so , you will know more think the slight word , the timid look , the tremulous touch , by which two human soul approach each other gradually , like two little quivering rain - stream , before they mingle into one -- you will no more think these thing trivial than you will think the first - detect sign of come spring trivial , though they be but a faint indescribable something in the air and in the song of the bird , and the tiniest perceptible budding on the hedge - row branch . those slight word and look and touch be part of the soul 's language ; and the finest language , I believe , be chiefly make up of unimposing word , such as " light , " " sound , " " star , " " music " -- word really not worth look at , or hearing , in themselves , any more than " chip " or " sawdust . " it be only that they happen to be the sign of something unspeakably great and beautiful . I be of opinion that love be a great and beautiful thing too , and if you agree with I , the smallest sign of it will not be chip and sawdust to you : they will rather be like those little word , " light " and " music , " stirr the long - win fibre of you memory and enrich you present with you most precious past . 's touch of rheumatism could not be make to appear serious enough to detain another night from the , now she have make up she mind to leave she aunt so soon , and at even the friend must part . " for a long while , " have say , for she have tell of she resolve . " then it will be for all my life , an' I shall ne 'er see thee again , " say . " long while ! I and get no long while t ' live . An' I shall be take bad a ' die , a ' thee canst ne 'er come a - nigh I , an' I shall die a - longing for thee . "
" that have be the key - note of she wailing talk all day ; for be not in the house , and so she put no restraint on she complain . she have try poor Dinah by return again and again to the question , why she must go away ; and refuse to accept reason , which seem to she nothing but whe and " contrairiness " ; and still more , by regret that she " couldna ' ha ' one of ' the lad " and be she daughter . " Thee couldstna put up wi' , " she say . " he isna cliver enough for thee , happen , but he would ha ' be very good t ' thee -- he be as handy as can be at doin 's thing for I when I be bad , an' he be as fond of ' the a ' chappellin ' as thee art thysen . but happen , thee ' dst like a husband better as be na just the cut of ' thysen : the runnin 's brook be to athirst for th 's rain . Adam 'uld ha ' done for thee -- I know he would -- a ' he might come t ' like thee well enough , if thee 's dst stop . but he be as stubborn as th' iron bar -- there be no bending he no way but 's own . but he would be a fine husband for anybody , be they who they will , so look - on ang so cliver as he be . and he would be rare a ' lovin ': it do I good on 'y a look of ' the lad 's eye when he mean kind tow 'rt I . " try to escape from 's closest look and question by find little task of housework that keep she move about , and as soon as come home in the evening she put on she bonnet to go . it touch keenly to say the last good - bye , and still more to look round on she way across the field and see the old woman still stand at the door , gaze after she till she must have be the faintest speck in the dim aged eye . " the of love and peace be with they , " pray , as she look back from the last stile . " make they glad accord to the day wherein thou hast afflict they , and the year wherein they have see evil . it be thy will that I should part from they ; let I have no will but thine . " turn into the house at last and sit down in the workshop near , who be busy himself there with fit some bits of turn wood he have bring from the village into a small work - box , which he mean to give to before she go away . " the e't see she again o' afore she go , " be she first word . " if thee wast good for anything , thee ' dst make she come in again o' night wi' thee , and see I once more . " " Nay , mother , " say . " Dinah 'uld be sure to come again if she see right to come . I should have no need to persuade she . she only think it 'uld be troubling thee for nuy , just to come in to say good - bye over again . " " she would ne 'er go away , I know , if 'uld be fond on she a ' marry she , but everything be so contrairy , " say , with a burst of vexation . pause a moment and look up , with a slight blush , at he mother 's face . " what ! have she say anything of ' that sort to thee , mother ? " he say , in a lower tone . " ? Nay , she will say nothin ' . it be on 'y the man as have to wait till folk say thing afore they find th'ey out . " " well , but what make thee think so , mother ? what be put it into thy head ? " " it be no matter what be put it into my head . my head 's none so hollow as it must get in , a ' nuy to put it there . I know she be fond on he , as I know th ' wind 's comin ' in at the door , a ' that be anoof . a ' he might be willin ' to marry she if he know ' she be fond on he , but he will ne 'er think o not if somebody do to put it into 's head . " he mother 's suggestion about 's feeling towards be not quite a new thought to , but she last word alarme he , lest she should herself undertake to open 's eye . he be not sure about 's feeling , and he think he be sure about 's . " Nay , mother , nay , " he say , earnestly , " thee mustna think of ' speak of ' such thing to . 'st no right to say what 's feeling be if she hasto tell thee , and it 'uld do nothing but mischief to say such thing to . he feel very grateful and affectionate toward , but he be no thought towards she that 'uld incline he to make she he wife , and I do not believe 'uld marry he either . I do not think she will marry at all . " " Eh , " say , impatiently . "
" Thee think 'st so ' cause she would na ha ' thee . she will ne 'er marry thee ; thee mightst as well like she t ' ha ' thy brother . " be hurt . " mother , " he say , in a remonstrat tone , " do not think that of I . I should be as thankful t ' have she for a sister as thee wouldst t ' have she for a daughter . I have no more thought about myself in that thing , and I shall take it hard if ever thee say 'st it again . " " well , well , then thee shouldstto cross I wi's sayin ' thing arena as I say they be . " " but , mother , " say , " thee ' dst be do a wrong by tell what thee think 'st about she . it 'uld do nothing but mischief , for it 'uld make uneasy if he do to feel the same to she . and I be pretty sure he feel nothing of ' the sort . " " Eh , do nto tell I what the e't sure on ; thee know 'st nuy about it . what be he allays goin ' to the Poyser ' for , if he do to want t ' see she ? he go twice where he use t ' go once . happen he knowsna as he want t ' see she ; he knowsna as I put salt in 's broth , but he would miss it pretty quick if it warna there . he will ne 'er think of ' marry if it be to put into 's head , a ' if thee ' dst any love for thy mother , thee ' dst put he up t o't a ' not let she go away out of ' my sight , when I might ha' she to make a bit of ' comfort for I afore I go to be to my old man under the white thorn . " " Nay , mother , " say , " thee mustto think I unkind , but I should be go against my conscience if I take upon I to say what 's feeling be . and besides that , I think I should give offence to by speak to he at all about marry ; and I counsel thee not to d o't . may 'st be quite deceive about . Nay , I be pretty sure , by word she say to I last Sabbath , as she be no mind to marry . " " Eh , the e't as contrairy as the rest on th'ey . if it war summat I do to want , it 'uld be do fast enough . " rise from the bench at this , and go out of the workshop , leave in much anxiety lest she should disturb 's mind about . he consol himself after a time with reflect that , since 's trouble , have be very timid about speak to he on matter of feeling , and that she would hardly dare to approach this tenderest of all subject . even if she do , he hope would not take much notice of what she say . be right in believe that would be hold in restraint by timidity , and during the next three day , the interval in which she have a opportunity of speak to be too rare and short to cause she any strong temptation . but in she long solitary hour she brood over she regretful thought about , till they have grow very near that point of unmanageable strength when thought be apt to take we out of they secret nest in a startling manner . and on morning , when go away to chapel at , the dangerous opportunity come . morning be the happiest time in all the week to , for as there be no service at church till the afternoon , be always at home , do nothing but read , a occupation in which she could venture to interrupt he . moreover , she have always a better dinner than usual to prepare for she son -- very frequently for and herself alone , Seth be often away the entire day -- and the smell of the roast meat before the clear fire in the clean kitchen , the clock tick in a peaceful manner , she darl seat near she in he best clothes , do nothing very important , so that she could go and streak she hand across he hair if she like , and see he look up at she and smile , while , rather jealous , pok he muzzle up between they -- all these thing make poor 's earthly paradise . the book Adam most often read on a morning be he large picture , and this morning it lay open before he on the round white deal table in the kitchen ; for he sit there in spite of the fire , because he know he mother like to have he with she , and it be the only day in the week when he could indulge she in that way . you would have like to see read he . he never open it on a weekday , and so he come to it as a holiday book , serve he for history , biography , and poetry . he hold one hand thrust between he waistcoat button , and the other ready to turn the page , and in the course of the morning you would have see many change in he face . sometimes he lip move in semi-articulation -- it be when he come to a speech that he could fancy himself utter , such as 's die speech to
to the people ; then he eyebrow would be raise , and the corner of he mouth would quiver a little with sad sympathy -- something , perhaps old 's meeting with he son , touch he closely ; at other time , over the , a very solemn look would come upon he face , and he would every now and then shake he head in serious assent , or just lift up he hand and let it fall again . and on some morning , when he read in the , of which he be very fond , the son of 's keen - ed word would bring a delighted smile , though he also enjoy the freedom of occasionally differ from a Apocryphal writer . for know the article quite well , as become a good churchman . , in the pause of attend to she dinner , always sit opposite to he and watch he , till she could rest no longer without go up to he and give he a caress , to call he attention to she . this morning he be read the accord to , and have be stand close by he for some minute , strok he hair , which be smoother than usual this morning , and look down at the large page with silent wonderment at the mystery of letter . she be encourage to continue this caress , because when she first go up to he , he have throw himself back in he chair to look at she affectionately and say , " why , mother , thee look 'st rare and hearty this morning . Eh , want I t ' look at he . he can not abide to think I love thee the best . " say nothing , because she want to say so many thing . and now there be a new leaf to be turn over , and it be a picture -- that of the angel seat on the great stone that have be roll away from the sepulchre . this picture have one strong association in 's memory , for she have be remind of it when she first see , and have no sooner turn the page , and lift the book sideway that they might look at the angel , than she say , " that be she -- that be . " Adam smile , and , look more intently at the angel 's face , say , " it be a bit like she ; but 's prettier , I think . " " well , then , if thee think 'st she so pretty , why be not fond on she ? " look up in surprise . " why , mother , dost think I do not set store by ? " " Nay , " say , frightene at she own courage , yet feel that she have break the ice , and the water must flow , whatever mischief they might do . " what be th's use of ' settin ' store by thing as be thirty mile off ? if thee wast fond enough on she , thee wouldstna let she go away . " " but I have no right t ' hinder she , if she think well , " say , look at he book as if he want to go on reading . he foresee a series of complaint tend to nothing . sit down again in the chair opposite to he , as she say : " but she would to think well if thee wastna so contrairy . " da not venture beyond a vague phrase yet . " Contrairy , mother ? " say , look up again in some anxiety . " what have I do ? what dost mean ? " " why , the e't never look at nothin ' , nor think of ' nothin ' , but thy figurin , a ' thy work , " say , half - crying . " a ' dost think thee canst go on so all thy life , as if thee wast a man cut out of ' timber ? a ' what wut do when thy mother 's gone , a ' nobody to take care on thee as thee gett 'st a bit of ' victual comfortable I ' the mornin ' ? " " what hast get I ' thy mind , mother ? " say , vex at this whimpering . " I can to see what the e't drive at . be there anything I could do for thee as I do not do ? " " aye , a ' that there be . Thee might 'st do as I should ha ' somebody wi' I to comfort I a bit , a ' wait on I when I be bad , a ' be good to I . " " well , mother , whose fault be it there be to some tidy body I ' th ' house t ' help thee ? it be to by my wish as thee hast a stroke of ' work to do . we can afford it --I have tell thee often enough . it 'uld be a deal better for we . " " Eh , what be the use of ' talk of ' tidy body , when thee mean 'st one of ' th's wench out of ' th ' village , or somebody from Treddles 'on as I ne 'er set eye on I ' my life ? I would sooner make a shift a ' get into my own coffin afore I die , nor ha ' they folk to put I in . " be silent , and try to go on reading . that be the utmost severity he could show towards he mother on a morning .
. but have go too far now to check herself , and after scarcely a minute 's quietness she begin again . " Thee mightst know well enough who ' ti I would like t ' ha ' wi' I . it be na many folk I send for t ' come a ' see I . I reckon . a ' thee 'st have the fetching ' on she time enow . " " Thee mean 'st Dinah , mother , I know , " say . " but it be no use set thy mind on what can not be . if 'uld be willing to stay at , it be not likely she can come away from she aunt 's house , where they hold she like a daughter , and where she be more bound than she be to we . if it have be so that she could ha ' marry , that 'uld ha ' be a great blessing to we , but we can not have thing just as we like in this life . Thee must try and make up thy mind to do without she . " " , but I canna ma ' up my mind , when she be just cut out for thee ; an' nuy shall ma ' I believe as do to make she a ' send she there of ' purpose for thee . what be it sinnify about she bein' a Methody ! it 'uld happen wear out on she wi' marryin '. " throw himself back in he chair and look at he mother . he understand now what she have be aim at from the beginning of the conversation . it be as unreasonable , impracticable a wish as she have ever urge , but he could not help be move by so entirely now a idea . the chief point , however , be to chase away the notion from he mother 's mind as quickly as possible . " mother , " he say , gravely , " the e't talk wild . do not let I hear thee say such thing again . it be no good talk of ' what can never be . be not for marry ; she be fix she heart on a different sort of ' life . " " very like , " say , impatiently , " very like she be none for marr' , when they as she would be willin ' t ' marry wonto ax she . I should na ha ' be for marr' thy feyther if he would ne ax I ; a ' she be as fond of ' thee as e'er I war o's Thias , poor fellow . " the blood rush to 's face , and for a few moment he be not quite conscious where he be . he mother and the kitchen have vanish for he , and he see nothing but 's face turn up towards he . it seem as if there be a resurrection of he dead joy . but he wake up very speedily from that dream ( the waking be chill and sad ) , for it would have be very foolish in he to believe he mother 's word -- she could have no ground for they . he be prompt to express he disbelief very strongly -- perhaps that he might call forth the proof , if there be any to be offer . " what dost say such thing for , mother , when thee 'st get no foundation for th'ey ? Thee know 'st nothing as give thee a right to say that . " " then I notch as gi 'e I a right to say as the year 's turn , for all I feel it fust the when I get up I ' th ' morning . she be to fond of ' , I reckon , be she ? she do to want to marry he ? but I can see as she do to behave tow 'rt thee as she da tow 'rt Seth . she make no more of ' 's come a - nigh she nor if he war , but she be all of a tremble when the e't a -sittin ' down by she at breakfast a ' a - look at she . Thee think 'st thy mother know nuy , but she war alive afore thee wast bear . " " but thee canst to be sure as the trembling mean love ? " say anxiously . " Eh , what else should it mane ? it isna hate , I reckon . a ' what should she do but love thee ? the e't make to be love -- for where 's there a straighter cliverer man ? a ' what be it sinnify she bein' a ? it be on 'y the marigold I ' th ' parridge . " have thrust he hand in he pocket , and be look down at the book on the table , without see any of the letter . he be trembl like a gold - seeker who see the strong promise of gold but see in the same moment a sickening vision of disappointment . he could not trust he mother 's insight ; she have see what she wish to see . and yet -- and yet , now the suggestion have be make to he , he remember so many thing , very slight thing , like the stirring of the water by a imperceptible breeze , which seem to he some confirmation of he mother 's word . notice that he be move . she go on , " a ' the e't find out as the e't poorly aff when she be gone . the e't fonder on she nor thee know 'st . thy eye follow she
she about , welly as 's follow thee . " Adam could sit still no longer . he rise , take down he hat , and go out into the field . the sunshine be on they : that early autumn sunshine which we should know be not summer 's , even if there be not the touch of yellow on the lime and chestnut ; the sunshine too , which have more than autumnal calmness for the working man ; the morning sunshine , which still leave the dew-crystal on the fine gossamer web in the shadow of the bushy hedgerow . need the calm influence ; he be amaze at the way in which this new thought of 's love have take possession of he , with a overmastering power that make all other feeling give way before the impetuous desire to know that the thought be true . , that till that moment the possibility of they ever be lover have never cross he mind , and yet now , all he long suddenly go out towards that possibility . he have no more doubt or hesitation as to he own wish than the bird that fly towards the opening through which the daylight gleam and the breath of heaven enter . the autumnal sunshine soothe he , but not by prepare he with resignation to the disappointment if he mother -- if he himself -- prove to be mistaken about . it soothe he by gentle encouragement of he hope . she love be so like that calm sunshine that they seem to make one presence to he , and he believe in they both alike . and be so bound up with the sad memory of he first passion that he be not forsak they , but rather give they a new sacredness by love she . Nay , he love for she have grow out of that past : it be the noon of that morning . but ? would the lad be hurt ? hardly ; for he have see quite contented of late , and there be no selfish jealousy in he ; he have never be jealous of he mother 's fondness for . but have he see anything of what they mother talk about ? longe to know this , for he think he could trust 's observation better than he mother 's . he must talk to before he go to see , and , with this intention in he mind , he walk back to the cottage and say to he mother , " do say anything to thee about when he be come home ? will he be back to dinner ? " " aye , lad , he will be back for a wonder . he be to go to . he be go somewhere else a -preachin ' and a - prayin '. " " Hast any notion which way he be go ? " say . " , but he aften go to th' . know 'st more of 's goings nor I do . " want to go and meet , but he must content himself with walk about the near field and get sight of he as soon as possible . that would not be for more than a hour to come , for Seth would scarcely be at home much before they dinner - time , which be twelve o'clock . but could not sit down to he reading again , and he saunter along by the brook and stood lean against the stile , with eager intense eye , which look as if they see something very vividly ; but it be not the brook or the willows , not the field or the sky . again and again he vision be interrupt by wonder at the strength of he own feeling , at the strength and sweetness of this new love -- almost like the wonder a man feel at the add power he find in himself for a art which he have laid aside for a space . how be it that the poets have say so many fine thing about we first love , so few about we later love ? be they first poem they best ? or be not those the best which come from they fuller think , they larger experience , they deeper - root affections ? the boy 's flutelike voice have its own spring charm ; but the man should yield a richer deeper music . at last , there be , visible at the farthest stile , and hasten to meet he . be surprised , and think something unusual must have happen , but when come up , he face say plainly enough that it be nothing alarm . " where hast be ? " say , when they be side by side . " I have be to the , " say . " have be speak the to a little company of hearer at 's , as they call he . they be folk as never go to church hardly -- they on the common -- but they will go and hear a bit . she be be speak with power this forenoon from the word , come not to call the righteous , but sinner to repentance . ' and there be a little thing happen as be pretty to see . the woman mostly bring they child with th'ey , but to - day there be one stout curly head fellow about three or four year old , that I never see there before . he be as naughty as could be at the beginning while I be pray , and while we be singe , but when we all sit down and begin to speak , th' young un stood stock still all at once , and begin to look at she with 's mouth
mouth open , and presently he run away from 's mother and go to , and pull at she , like a little dog , for she to take notice of he . so lift he up and hold th ' lad on she lap , while she go on speak ; and he be as good as could be till he go to sleep -- and the mother cry to see he . " " it be a pity she should to be a mother herself , " say , " so fond as the child be of she . Dost think she be quite fix against marrying , ? Dost think nothing 'uld turn she ? " there be something peculiar in he brother 's tone , which make Seth steal a glance at he face before he answer . " it 'uld be wrong of I to say nothing 'uld turn she , " he answer . " but if thee mean 'st it about myself , I have give up all thought as she can ever be my wife . she call I she brother , and that be enough . " " but dost think she might ever get fond enough of anybody else to be willing to marry th'ey ? " say rather shyly . " well , " say , after some hesitation , " it be cross my mind sometimes of ' late as she might ; but 'uld let no fondness for the creature draw she out of ' the path as she believe have mark out for she . if she think the leading be not from , she be not one to be bring under the power of it . and she be allays seem clear about that -- as she work be to minister t ' other , and make no home for herself I ' this world . " " but suppose , " say , earnestly , " suppose there be a man as 'uld let she do just the same and not interfere with she -- she might do a good deal of ' what she do now , just as well when she be marry as when she be single . other woman of she sort have marry -- that be to say , not just like she , but woman as preach and attend on the sick and needy . there be as she talk of . " a new light have break in on . he turn round , and lay he hand on 's shoulder , say , " why , wouldst like she to marry , ? " look doubtfully at 's inquiring eye and say , " Wouldst be hurt if she be to be fonder of ' I than of ' thee ? " " Nay , " say warmly , " how canst think it ? have I feel thy trouble so little that I should to feel thy joy ? " there be silence a few moment as they walk on , and then say , " I ' no notion as thee 's dst ever think of she for a wife . " " but be it of ' any use to think of she ? " say . " what dost say ? mother 's make I as I hardly know where I be , with what she be be say to I this forenoon . she say she be sure feel for I more than common , and 'uld be willing t ' have I . but I be afraid she speak without book . I want to know if thee 'st see anything . " " it be a nice point to speak about , " say , " and I be afraid of ' be wrong ; beside , we 've no right t ' intermeddle with people 's feeling when they would not tell them themselves . " pause . " but thee mightst ask she , " he say presently . " she take no offence at I for ask , and thee 'st more right than I have , only the e't not in the Society . but do not hold wi' they as be for keep the so strict to themselves . she do not mind about make folk enter the , so as they be fit t ' enter the kingdom of ' . some of ' the breth at Treddles 'on be displease with she for that . " " where will she be the rest of ' the day ? " say . " she say she should not leave the farm again to - day , " say , " because it be she last Sabbath there , and she be go t ' read out of ' the big wi' the child . " think -- but do not say --" then I will go this afternoon ; for if I go to church , my thought ' ull be with she all the while . they must se th ' anthey without I to - day . " and it be about three o'clock when enter the farmyard and rouse and the dog from they do . say everybody be go to church " but th' young missis " -- so he call -- but this do not disappoind , although the " everybody " be so liberal as to include the dairymaid , whose work of necessity be not unfrequently incompatible with church - go . there be perfect stillness about the house . the door be all close , and the very stone and tubs seem quieter than usual . hear the water gently dripp from the pump -- that be the only sound -- and he knock at the house door rather softly , as be suitable in that stillness . the door open , and stand before he
he , colour deeply with the great surprise of see at this hour , when she know it be he regular practice to be at church . yesterday he would have say to she without any difficulty , " I come to see you , : I know the rest be not at home . " but to - day something prevent he from say that , and he put out he hand to she in silence . neither of they speak , and yet both wish they could speak , as enter , and they sit down . take the chair she have just leave ; it be at the corner of the table near the window , and there be a book lie on the table , but it be not open . she have be sit perfectly still , look at the small bit of clear fire in the bright grate . sit down opposite she , in 's three - corner chair . " you mother be not ill again , I hope , ? " say , recover herself . " say she be well this morning . " " no , she be very hearty to - day , " say , happy in the sign of 's feel at the sight of he , but shy . " there be nobody at home , you see , " say ; " but you will wait . you have be hinder from go to church to - day , doubtless . " " yes , " say , and then pause , before he add , " I be think about you : that be the reason . " this confession be very awkward and sudden , feel , for he think must understand all he mean . but the frankness of the word cause she immediately to interpret they into a renewal of he brotherly regret that she be go away , and she answer calmly , " do not be careful and trouble for I , . I have all thing and abound at . and my mind be at rest , for I be not seek my own will in go . " " but if thing be different , , " say , hesitatingly . " if you know thing that perhaps you do not know now .... " look at he inquiringly , but instead of go on , he reach a chair and bring it near the corner of the table where she be sitte . she wonder , and be afraid -- and the next moment she thought fly to the past : be it something about those distant unhappy one that she do not know ? look at she . it be so sweet to look at she eye , which have now a self - forgetful questioning in they -- for a moment he forgot that he want to say anything , or that it be necessary to tell she what he mean . " Dinah , " he say suddenly , take both she hand between he , " I love you with my whole heart and soul . I love you next to who make I . " 's lip become pale , like she cheek , and she tremble violently under the shock of painful joy . she hand be cold as death between 's . she could not draw they away , because he hold they fast . " do not tell I you can not love I , . do not tell I we must part and pass we life away from one another . " the tear be trembl in 's eye , and they fall before she could answer . but she speak in a quiet low voice . " yes , dear , we must submit to another will . we must part . " " not if you love I , Dinah -- not if you love I , " say passionately . " tell I -- tell I if you can love I better than a brother ? " be too entirely reliant on the guidance to attempt to achieve any end by a deceptive concealment . she be recover now from the first shock of emotion , and she look at with simple sincere eye as she say , " yes , , my heart be draw strongly towards you ; and of my own will , if I have no clear show to the contrary , I could find my happiness in be near you and ministere to you continually . I fear I should forget to rejoice and weep with other ; nay , I fear I should forget the presence , and seek no love but yours . " do not speak immediately . they sit look at each other in delicious silence -- for the first sense of mutual love exclude other feeling ; it will have the soul all to itself . " then , , " say at last , " how can there be anything contrary to what be right in we belong to one another and spend we life together ? who put this great love into we heart ? can anything be holier than that ? for we can help one another in everything as be good . I would never think of ' put myself between you and , and say you ought not to do this and you ought not to do that . you would follow you conscience as much as you do now . " " yes , , " say , " I know marriage be a holy state for those who be truly call to it , and have no other drawing ; but from my childhood upwards I have be lead towards another path ; all my peace and my joy have come from have no life of my
my own , no want , no wish for myself , and live only in and those of he creature whose sorrow and joy he have give I to know . those have be very bless year to I , and I feel that if I be to listen to any voice that would draw I aside from that path , I should be turn my back on the light that have shine upon I , and darkness and doubt would take hold of I . we could not bless each other , , if there be doubt in my soul , and if I year , when it be too late , after that better part which have once be give I and I have put away from I . " " but if a new feeling have come into you mind , , and if you love I so as to be willing to be nearer to I than to other people , be not that a sign that it be right for you to change you life ? do not the love make it right when nothing else would ? " " , my mind be full of questionings about that ; for now , since you tell I of you strong love towards I , what be clear to I have become dark again . I feel before that my heart be too strongly draw towards you , and that you heart be not as mine ; and the thought of you have take hold of I , so that my soul have lose its freedom , and be become enslaved to a earthly affection , which make I anxious and careful about what should befall myself . for in all other affection I have be content with any small return , or with none ; but my heart be begin to hunger after a equal love from you . and I have no doubt that I must wrestle against that as a great temptation , and the command be clear that I must go away . " " but now , dear , dear , now you know I love you better than you love I ... it be all different now . you will not think of ' go . you will stay , and be my dear wife , and I shall thank for give I my life as I never thanke he before . " " , it be hard to I to turn a deaf ear ... you know it be hard ; but a great fear be upon I . it seem to I as if you be stretch out you arm to I , and beckon I to come and take my ease and live for my own delight , and , the man of , be stand look towards I , and point to the sinful , and suffer , and afflict . I have see that again and again when I have be sit in stillness and darkness , and a great terror have come upon I lest I should become hard , and a lover of self , and no more bear willingly the Redeemer 's cross . " have close she eye , and a faint shudder go through she . " Adam , " she go on , " you would not desire that we should seek a good through any unfaithfulness to the light that be in we ; you would not believe that could be a good . we be of one mind in that . " " yes , , " say sadly , " I will never be the man t ' urge you against you conscience . but I can not give up the hope that you may come to see different . I do not believe you love I could shut up you heart -- it be only add to what you have be before , not take away from it . for it seem to I it be the same with love and happiness as with sorrow -- the more we know of it the better we can feel what other people 's life be or might be , and so we shall only be more tender to th'ey , and wishful to help th'ey . the more knowledge a man have , the better he will do 's work ; and feel 's a sort of ' knowledge . " be silent ; she eye be fix in contemplation of something visible only to herself . go on presently with he pleading , " and you can do almost as much as you do now . I will not ask you to go to church with I of a . you shall go where you like among the people , and teach th'ey ; for though I like church best , I do not put my soul above yours , as if my word be better for you to follow than you own conscience . and you can help the sick just as much , and you will have more means of ' make th'ey a bit comfortable ; and you will be among all you own friend as love you , and can help th'ey and be a blessing to 'em till they die day . surely , Dinah , you would be as near to as if you be live lonely and away from I . " make no answer for some time . be still hold she hand and look at she with almost trembling anxiety , when she turn she grave loving eye on he and say , in rather a sad voice , " Adam there be truth in what you say , and there be many of the breth and sister who have greater strength than I have , and find they heart enlarge by the care of husband and kindr
kindr . but I have not faith that it would be so with I , for since my affection have be set above measure on you , I have have less peace and joy in . I have feel as it be a division in my heart . and think how it be with I , . that life I have lead be like a land I have trode in blessedness since my childhood ; and if I long for a moment to follow the voice which call I to another land that I know not , I can not but fear that my soul might hereafter yearn for that early blessedness which I have forsake ; and where doubt enter there be not perfect love . I must wait for clearer guidance . I must go from you , and we must submit ourselves entirely to the . we be sometimes require to lay we natural lawful affections on the altar . " Adam da not plead again , for 's be not the voice of caprice or insincerity . but it be very hard for he ; he eye get dim as he look at she . " but you may come to feel satisfied ... to feel that you may come to I again , and we may never part , ? " " we must submit ourselves , . with time , we duty will be make clear . it may be when I have enter on my former life , I shall find all these new thought and wish vanish , and become as thing that be not . then I shall know that my calling be not towards marriage . but we must wait . " " Dinah , " say mournfully , " you can not love I so well as I love you , else you would have no doubt . but it be natural you should not , for I be not so good as you . I can not doubt it be right for I to love the best thing 's ever give I to know . " " Nay , . it seem to I that my love for you be not weak , for my heart wait on you word and look , almost as a little child wait on the help and tenderness of the strong on whom it depend . if the thought of you take slight hold of I , I should not fear that it would be a idol in the temple . but you will strengthen I -- you will not hinder I in seek to obey to the uttermost . " " let we go out into the sunshine , , and walk together . I will speak no word to disturb you . " they go out and walk towards the field , where they would meet the family come from church . say , " take my arm , , " and she take it . that be the only change in they manner to each other since they be last walk together . but no sadness in the prospect of she go away -- in the uncertainty of the issue -- could rob the sweetness from 's sense that love he . he think he would stay at the all that evening . he would be near she as long as he could . " hey - day ! there be along , " say , as he open the far gate into the . " I could to think how he happen away from church . why , " add good , after a moment 's pause , " what dost think have just jump into my head ? " " Summat as have na far to jump , for it be just under we nose . you mean as 's fond of ' . " " aye ! hast ever have any notion of it before ? " " to be sure I have , " say , who always decline , if possible , to be take by surprise . " I be not one o' those as can see the cat I ' the dairy a ' wonder what she be come after . " " never saidst a word to I about it . " " well , I be not like a bird - clapper , force to make a rattle when the wind blow on I . I can keep my own counsel when there be no good I ' speak . " " but will ha ' none of ' he . Dost think she will ? " " Nay , " say , not sufficiently on she guard against a possible surprise , " she will never marry anybody , if he be not a and a cripple . " " it 'uld ha ' be a pretty thing though for 'em t ' marry , " say , turn he head on one side , as if in pleased contemplation of he new idea . " Thee ' dst ha ' like it too , ? " " ah ! I should . I should ha ' be sure of she then , as she would not go away from I to , welly thirty mile off , and I not get a creatur to look to , only neighbour , as be no kin to I , a ' most of th'ey woman as I would be asham to show my face , if my dairy thing war like they 'n . there may well be streaky butter I ' the market . I should be glad to see the poor thing settle like a woman , with a house of she own over she head ; and we would stock she well wi' linen and feather , for I love she next to my own child . a
a ' she make one feel safer when she be I ' the house , for she be like the driven snow : anybody might sin for two as have she at they elbow . " " Dinah , " say , run forward to meet she , " mother say you will never marry anybody but a Methodist cripple . what a silly you must be ! " a comment which follow up by seize with both arm , and dance along by she side with incommodious fondness . " why , , we miss you I ' the singe to - day , " say . " how be it ? " " I want to see -- she be go away so soon , " say . " ah , lad ! can you persuade she to stop somehow ? find she a good husband somewhere I ' the parish . if you will do that , we will forgive you for missing church . but , anyway , she be to go before the harvest supper o' , and you must come then . there be comin ' , a ' happen . you will be sure a ' come , now , at seven ? the missis win to have it a bit later . " " aye , " say , " I will come if I can . but I can not often say what I will do beforehand , for the work often hold I longer than I expect . you will stay till the end of ' the week , ? " " yes , yes ! " say . " we will have no nay . " " she be no call to be in a hurry , " observ . " Scarceness o' victual ' ull keep : there be no need to be hasty wi' the cooking . a ' scarceness be what there be the biggest stock of I ' that country . " smile , but give no promise to stay , and they talk of other thing through the rest of the walk , linger in the sunshine to look at the great flock of geese grazing , at the new corn-rick , and at the surprising abundance of fruit on the old pear -tree ; and have already haste home , side by side , each holding , carefully wrap in she pocket - handkerchief , a prayer - book , in which she could read little beyond the large letter and the Amens . surely all other leisure be hurry compare with a sunny walk through the field from " afternoon church " -- as such walk use to be in those old leisurely time , when the boat , glid sleepily along the canal , be the newest locomotive wonder ; when book have most of they old brown - leather cover , and open with remarkable precision always in one place . be gone -- go where the spinning - wheel be gone , and the pack - horse , and the slow waggon , and the pedlar , who bring bargain to the door on sunny afternoon . Ingenious philosopher tell you , perhaps , that the great work of the steam - engine be to create leisure for mankind . do not believe they : it only create a vacuum for eager thought to rush in . even idleness be eager now -- eager for amusement ; pro to excursion - train , art museum , periodical literature , and excit novel ; prone even to scientific theorizing and cursory peep through microscope . be quite a different personage . he only read one newspaper , innocent of leader , and be free from that periodicity of sensation which we call post-time . he be a contemplative , rather stout gentleman , of excellent digestion ; of quiet perception , undisease by hypothesis ; happy in he inability to know the causis of thing , prefer the thing themselves . he live chiefly in the country , among pleasant seat and homestead , and be fond of saunter by the fruit - tree wall and scent the apricot when they be warm by the morning sunshine , or of shelter himself under the orchard bough at noon , when the summer pear be fall . he know nothing of weekday service , and think none the worse of the sermon if it allow he to sleep from the text to the blessing ; like the afternoon service best , because the prayer be the shortest , and not asham to say so ; for he have a easy , jolly conscience , broad - back like himself , and able to carry a great deal of beer or port-wine , not be make squeamish by doubt and qualm and lofy aspiration . life be not a task to he , but a sinecure . he finger the guinea in he pocket , and eat he dinner , and sleep the sleep of the irresponsible , for have he not keep up he character by go to church on the afternoon ? Fine old ! do not be severe upon he , and judge he by we modern standard . he never go to , or hear a popular preacher , or read Tracts for the or . the As be go homeward , on evening , in the six o'clock sunlight , he see in the distance the last load of barley win its way towards the yard - gate of the , and hear the chant of " ! " rise and sinke like a wave . Fainter and fainter , and more musical through the grow distance , the falling die sound still reach he , as he neare the . the low westering sun shone right on the shoulder of the old , turn the unconscious sheep
sheep into bright spot of light ; shone on the window of the cottage too , and make they a - flame with a glory beyond that of amber or amethyst . it be enough to make feel that he be in a great temple , and that the distant chant be a sacred song . " it be wonderful , " he think , " how that sound go to one 's heart almost like a funeral bell , for all it tell one of ' the joyfullest time of ' the year , and the time when man be mostly the thankfullest . I suppose it be a bit hard to we to think anything be over and go in we life ; and there be a parting at the root of all we joy . it be like what I feel about . I should never ha ' come to know that she love 'uld be the greatest of ' blessing to I , if what I count a blessing have not be wrench and tear away from I , and leave I with a greater need , so as I could crave and hunger for a greater and a better comfort . " he expect to see again this evening , and get leave to accompany she as far as ; and then he would ask she to fix some time when he might go to , and learn whether the last best hope that have be bear to he must be resign like the rest . the work he have to do at home , besides put on he best clothes , make it seven before he be on he way again to the , and it be questionable whether , with he longest and quickest stride , he should be there in time even for the roast beef , which come after the plum pudding , for 's supper would be punctual . great be the clatter of knife and pewter plate and tin can when enter the house , but there be no hum of voice to this accompaniment : the eating of excellent roast beef , provide free of expense , be too serious a business to those good farm - labourer to be perform with a divided attention , even if they have have anything to say to each other -- which they have not . and , at the head of the table , be too busy with he carving to listen to 's or 's ready talk . " here , , " say , who be stand and look on to see that and do they duty as waiter , " here be a place keep for you between and the boy . it be a poor tale you could not come to see the pudding when it be whole . " look anxiously round for a fourth woman 's figure , but be not there . he be almost afraid of ask about she ; besides , he attention be claim by greeting , and there remain the hope that be in the house , though perhaps disinclin to festivity on the eve of she departure . it be a goodly sight -- that table , with 's round good - humoured face and large person at the head of it help he servants to the fragrant roast beef and please when the empty plate come again . , though usually blest with a good appetite , really forget to finish he own beef to - night -- it be so pleasant to he to look on in the interval of carving and see how the other enjoy they supper ; for be they not men who , on all the day of the year except and , eat they cold dinner , in a makeshift manner , under the hedgerow , and drank they beer out of wooden bottle -- with relish certainly , but with they mouth towards the zenith , after a fashion more endurable to duck than to human biped . have some faint conception of the flavour such man must find in hot roast beef and fresh - draw ale . he hold he head on one side and screw up he mouth , as he nudge , and watch half - wit , otherwise know as " , " receive he second plateful of beef . a grin of delight break over 's face as the plate be set down before he , between he knife and fork , which he hold erect , as if they have be sacr taper . but the delight be too strong to continue smoulder in a grin -- it burst out the next instant in a long - drawn " haw , haw ! " follow by a sudden collapse into utter gravity , as the knife and fork dart down on the prey . 's large person shook with he silent unctuous laugh . he turn towards . Poyser to see if she too have be observant of , and the eye of husband and wife meet in a glance of good - natured amusement . " " be a great favourite on the farm , where he play the part of the old jester , and make up for he practical deficiencies by he success in repartee . he hit , I imagine , be those of the flail , which fall quite at random , but nevertheless smash a insect now and then . they be much quote at sheep - shearing and haymak time , but I refrain from record they here , lest 's wit should prove to be like that of many other bygone jester eminent in they day -- rather of a temporary nature , not deal with the deeper and more lasting relation of thing . accept , have some pride in he servants and labourer ,
, think with satisfaction that they be the best worth their pay of any set on the estate . there be , for example ( , probably , if the truth be know , but he be call , and be not conscious of any claim to a fifth letter ) , the old man with the close leather cap and the network of wrinkle on he sun -browned face . be there any man in who know better the " natur " of all farming work ? he be one of those invaluable labourer who can not only turn they hand to everything , but in everything they turn they hand to . it be true 's knee be much bent outward by this time , and he walk with a perpetual curtsy , as if he be among the most reverent of man . and so he be ; but I be oblige to admit that the object of he reverence be he own skill , towards which he perform some rather affect act of worship . he always thatch the rick -- for if anything be he forte more than another , it be thatch -- and when the last touch have be put to the last beehive rick , , whose home lay at some distance from the farm , would take a walk to the rick - yard in he best clothes on a morning and stand in the lane , at a due distance , to contemplate he own thatching walk about to get each rick from the proper point of view . as he curtsy along , with he eye upturn to the straw knob imitative of golden glob at the summit of the beehive rick , which indeed be gold of the best sort , you might have imagine he to be engage in some pagan act of adoration . be a old bachelor and repute to have stocking full of coin , concern which he master crack a joke with he every pay - night : not a new unseasoned joke , but a good old one , that have be try many time before and have wear well . " th ' young measter be a merry mon , " frequently remark ; for have begin he career by frightene away the crow under the last but one , he could never cease to account the reign a young master . I be not asham of commemorat old . you and I be indebt to the hard hand of such man -- hand that have long ago mingl with the soil they till so faithfully , thriftily make the best they could of the earth 's fruit , and receive the smallest share as they own wage . then , at the end of the table , opposite he master , there be , the shepherd and head-man , with the ruddy face and broad shoulders , not on the best term with old Kester ; indeed , they intercourse be confine to a occasional snarl , for though they probably differ little concerning hed and ditch and the treatment of ewe , there be a profound difference of opinion between they as to they own respective merit . when and happen to be on the same farm , they be not sentimentally polite to each other . , indeed , be not by any mean a honey man . he speech have usually something of a snarl in it , and he broad - shouldered aspect something of the bull - dog expression -- " do not you meddle with I , and I will not meddle with you . " but he be honest even to the splitting of a oat - grain rather than he would take beyond he acknowledged share , and as " close - fiste " with he master 's property as if it have be he own -- throw very small handfuls of damaged barley to the chicken , because a large handful affect he imagination painfully with a sense of profusion . good -tempered , the waggoner , who love he horse , have he grudge against in the matter of corn . they rarely speak to each other , and never look at each other , even over they dish of cold potatoe ; but then , as this be they usual mode of behaviour towards all mankind , it would be a unsafe conclusion that they have more than transient fit of unfriendliness . the bucolic character at , you perceive , be not of that entirely genial , merry , broad - grinning sort , apparently observe in most district visit by artist . the mild radiance of a smile be a rare sight on a field - labourer 's face , and there be seldom any gradation between bovine gravity and a laugh . be every labourer so honest as we friend . at this very table , among 's man , there be that big , a very powerful thresher , but detect more than once in carry away he master 's corn in he pocket -- a action which , as be not a philosopher , could hardly be ascribe to absence of mind . however , he master have forgive he , and continue to employ he , for the have live on the common time out of mind , and have always work for the Poyser . and on the whole , I daresay , society be not much the worse because have not six month of it at the treadmill , for he view of depredation be narrow , and the House of correction might have enlarge they . as it be , eat he roast beef to - night with a serene sense of have steal nothing more than a few pea and bean as see for he garden since the last harvest
harvest supper , and feel warrant in think that 's suspicious eye , for ever upon he , be a injury to he innocence . but now the roast beef be finished and the cloth be draw , leave a fair large deal table for the bright drinking - can , and the foam brown jug , and the bright brass candlestick , pleasant to behold . now , the great ceremony of the evening be to begin -- the harvest - song , in which every man must join . he might be in tune , if he like to be singular , but he must not sit with close lip . the movement be oblige to be in triple time ; the rest be ad libitum . as to the origin of this song -- whether it come in its actual state from the brain of a single rhapsodist , or be gradually perfect by a school or succession of rhapsodist , I be ignorant . there be a stamp of unity , of individual genius upon it , which incline I to the former hypothesis , though I be not blind to the consideration that this unity may rather have arisen from that consensus of many minds which be a condition of primitive thought , foreign to we modern consciousness . some will perhaps think that they detect in the first quatrain a indication of a lost line , which later rhapsodist , fail in imaginative vigour , have supply by the feeble device of iteration . other , however , may rather maintain that this very iteration be a original felicity , to which none but the most prosaic minds can be insensible . the ceremony connect with the song be a drinking ceremony . ( that be perhaps a painful fact , but then , you know , we can not reform we forefather . ) during the first and second quatrain , sung decidedly forte , no can be fill . here be a health unto we master , the founder of the feast ; here be a health unto we master and to we mistress ! and may he doings prosper , Whate 'er he take in hand , for we be all he servants , and be at he command . but now , immediately before the third quatrain or chorus , sung fortissimo , with emphatic rap of the table , which give the effect of cymbal and drum together , 's can be fill , and he be bound to empty it before the chorus cease . then drink , boy , drink ! and see ye do not spill , for if ye do , ye shall drink two , for ' ttis we master 's will . when have go successfully through this test of steady - hand manliness , it be the turn of old , at he right hand -- and so on , till every man have drink he initiatory pint under the stimulus of the chorus . -- the rogue -- take care to spill a little by accident ; but ( too officiously , think ) interfere to prevent the exaction of the penalty . to any listener outside the door it would have be the reverse of obvious why the " drink , boy , drink ! " should have such a immediate and often - repeat encore ; but once enter , he would have see that all face be at present sober , and most of they serious -- it be the regular and respectable thing for those excellent farm - labourer to do , as much as for elegant lady and gentleman to smirk and bow over they wine - glass . , whose ears be rather sensitive , have go out to see what sort of evening it be at a early stage in the ceremony , and have not finish he contemplation until a silence of five minute declare that " drink , boy , drink ! " be not likely to begin again for the next twelvemonth . much to the regret of the boy and Totty : on they the stillness fall rather flat , after that glorious thumping of the table , towards which , seat on she father 's knee , contribute with she small might and small fist . when re-enter , however , there appear to be a general desire for solo music after the choral . declare that the waggoner know a song and be " allays singe like a lark I ' the stable , " whereupon say encouragingly , " come , , lad , let 's hear it . " look sheepish , tuck down he head , and say he could not s , but this encourage invitation of the master 's be echo all round the table . it be a conversational opportunity : everybody could say , " come , , " except , who never relax into the frivolity of unnecessary speech . at last , 's next neighbour , , begin to give emphasis to he speech by nudge , at which Tim , grow rather savage , say , " let I alooan , will ye ? else I will ma ' ye se a toon ye win to like . " a good - temper waggoner 's patience have limit , and be not to be urge further . " well , then , , ye be the lad to se , " say , willing to show that he be not discomfit by this check . " S ' my loove 's a roo wi'out a thorn . ' " the amatory be a young man of a unconscious abstract expression , which be due probably to a squint of superior intensity rather than to any mental characteristic ; for he be not indifferent to 's invitation , but blush
blush and laugh and rub he sleeve over he mouth in a way that be regard as a symptom of yielding . and for some time the company appear to be much in earnest about the desire to hear 's song . but in vain . the lyricism of the evening be in the cellar at present , and be not to be draw from that retreat just yet . meanwhile the conversation at the head of the table have take a political turn . be not above talk politics occasionally , though he pique himself rather on a wise insight than on specific information . he see so far beyond the mere fact of a case that really it be superfluous to know they . " I be no reader of ' the paper myself , " he observ to - night , as he fill he pipe , " though I might read it fast enough if I like , for there 's have th'ey and 's do with them I ' no time . but there be , now , sit I ' the chimney - corner and read the paper pretty nigh from morning to night , and when he be get to th' end of not he be more addle - head than he be at the beginning . he be full of ' this peace now , as they talk on ; he be be read and read , and think he be get to the bottom o not . ' why , Lor ' bless you , , ' say I , ' you see no more into this thing nor you can see into the middle of a potato . I will tell you what it be : you think it will be a fine thing for the country . and I be not again ' it -- mark my word -- I be not again ' it . but it be my opinion as there be they at the head of ' this country as be worse enemie to we nor and all the mounseer he be get at back ; for as for the mounseer , you may skewer half - a - dozen of th'ey at once as if they war frog . ' " " aye , aye , " say , listen with a air of much intelligence and edification , " they ne 'er eat a bit of ' beef I ' they life . mostly sallet , I reckon . " " and say I to , " continue , " ' will you try to make I believe as furriner like they can do we half th ' harm they minister do with they bad government ? if 'uld turn th'ey all away and govern by himself , he would see everything right . he might take on again if he like ; but I do not see myself what we want wi's anybody besides and parliament . it be that nest of ' minister do the mischief , I tell you . ' " " ah , it be fine talk , " observe , who be now seate near she husband , with on she lap -- " it be fine talking . it be hard work to tell which be old when everybody be get boot on . " " as for this peace , " say , turn he head on one side in a dubitative manner and give a precautionary puff to he pipe between each sentence , " I do not know . ' war be a fine thing for the country , a ' how will you keep up price wi'out it ? a ' they french be a wicked sort of ' folk , by what I can make out . what can you do better nor fight 'em ? " " ye be partly right there , , " say , " but I be not again ' the peace -- to make a holiday for a bit . we can break it when we like , an' I be in no fear o' Bony , for all they talk so much of ' he cliverness . that be what I say to Mill this morning . Lor ' bless you , he see no more through !... why , I put he up to more in three minute than he get from 's paper all the year round . say I , ' be I a gardener as know he business , or be not I , ? answer I then . ' 'To be sure y ' be , , ' say he -- he be not a bad fellow , be not , for a butler , but weak I ' the head . ' well , ' say I , ' you talk of ' 's cliverness ; would it be any use my be a first - rate gardener if I would get nuy but a quagmire to work on ? ' ' no , ' say he . ' well ,' I say , ' that be just what it be wi's . I will not deny but he may be a bit cliver -- he be no Frenchman born , as I understand -- but what be he get at 's back but mounseer ? ' " pause a moment with a emphatic stare after this triumphant specimen of Socratic argument , and then add , thump the table rather fiercely , " why , it be a sure thing -- and there be they ' ull bear witness t o't -- as I ' one regiment where there be one man a-misse , they put the regimental on a big monkey , and they fit he as the shell fit the walnut , and you could not tell the monkey from the mounseer ! " " ah !
! think of ' that , now ! " say , impress at once with the political bearing of the fact and with its striking interest as a anecdote in natural history . " come , , " say , " that be a little too strong . you do not believe that . it be all nonsense about the french be such poor sticnks . 's see them in they own country , and he say they have plenty of ' fine fellow among th'ey . and as for knowledge , and contrivance , and manufacture , there be a many thing as we be a fine sight behind th'ey in . it be poor foolishness to run down you enemy . why , and the rest of th'ey 'uld have no merit I ' beat th'ey , if they be such offal as folk pretend . " look doubtfully at , puzzl by this opposition of authority . 's testimony be not to be dispute ; but , on the other hand , be a know fellow , and he view be less startling . have never " hear tell " of the french be good for much . have find no answer but such as be implied in take a long dratch of ale and then look down fixedly at the proportion of he own leg , which he turn a little outward for that purpose , when return from the fireplace , where he have be smoke he first pipe in quiet , and break the silence by say , as he thrust he forefinger into the canister , " why , , how happen you not to be at church on ? answer I that , you rascal . the anthem go limpe without you . be you go to disgrase you schoolmaster in he old age ? " " no , , " say . " and can tell you where I be . I be in no bad company . " " she be gone , -- go to , " say , reminde of for the first time this evening . " I think you would ha ' persuade she better . nought 'uld hold she , but she must go yesterday forenoon . the missis have hardly get over it . I think she would ha ' no sperrit for th 's harvest supper . " have think of several time since have come in , but she have have " no heart " to mention the bad news . " what ! " say , with a air of disgust . " be there a woman concerned ? then I give you up , . " " but it be a woman you and speak well on , , " say . " come now , you can to draw back ; you say once as woman would na ha ' be a bad invention if they would all be like . " " I mean she voice , man -- I mean she voice , that be all , " say . " I can bear to hear she speak without want to put wool in my ear . as for other thing , I daresay she be like the rest of ' the woman -- think two and two will come to make five , if she cry and bother enough about it . " " aye , aye ! " say ; " one 'uld think , a ' hear some folk talk , as the man war ' cute enough to count the corn in a bag of ' wheat wi' only smell at it . they can see through a barn - door , they can . perhaps that be the reason they can see so little of ' this side of n't . " shook with delighted laughter and wink at , as much as to say the schoolmaster be in for it now . " ah ! " say sneeringly , " the woman be quick enough -- they be quick enough . they know the rights of a story before they hear it , and can tell a man what he thought be before he know th'ey himself . " " like enough , " say , " for the man be mostly so slow , they thought overrun 'em , a ' they can only catch th'ey by the tail . I can count a stocking - top while a man 's get 's tongue ready a ' when he out wi' he speech at last , there be little broth to be make o not . it be you dead chick take the longest hatching ' . Howiver , I be not denyin ' the woman be foolish : make th'ey to match the man . " " ! " say . " aye , as vinegar match one 's tooth . if a man say a word , he wife will match it with a contradiction ; if he be a mind for hot meat , he wife will match it with cold bacon ; if he laugh , she will match he with whimpering . she be such a match as the horse - fly be to th' horse : she be get the right venom to s he with -- the right venom to s he with . " " yes , " say , " I know what the man like -- a poor soft , as 'ud simper at 'em like the picture of ' the sun , whether they do right or wrong , a ' say thank you for a kick , a ' pretend she do to know which end she stand uppermost , till she husband tell she . that be what a man want in a wife , mostly ; he want to make sure o' one fool as ' ull
ull tell he he be wise . but there be some man can do wi'out that -- they think so much of ' themselves a'ready . a ' that be how it be there be old bachelor . " " come , , " say jocosely , " you mun get marry pretty quick , else you will be set down for a old bachelor ; a ' you see what the woman ' ull think on you . " " well , " say , willing to conciliate and set a high value on he own compliment , " I like a cleverish woman -- a woman o' sperrit -- a managing woman . " " you be out there , , " say , dryly ; " you be out there . you judge o ' you garden - stuff on a better plan than that . you pick the thing for what they can excel in -- for what they can excel in . you do not value you pea for they root , or you carrot for they flower . now , that be the way you should choose woman . they cleverness will never come too much -- never come too much -- but they make excellent simpleton , ripe and strong - flavoure . " " what dost say to that ? " say , throw himself back and look merrily at he wife . " ! " answer , with dangerous fire kindling in she eye . " why , I say as some folk 's tongue be like the clock as run on strikin ' , not to tell you the time of ' the day , but because there be summat wrong I ' they own inside ... " would probably have bring she rejoinder to a further climax , if every one 's attention have not at this moment be call to the other end of the table , where the lyricism , which have at first only manifest itself by 's sotto voce performance of " my love 's a rose without a thorn , " have gradually assume a rather deafening and complex character . , think slightly of 's vocalization , be impelled to supersede that feeble buzz by a spirited commencement of " , " but be not to be put down so easily , and show himself capable of a copious crescendo , which be render it doubtful whether the rose would not predominate over the mower , when old , with a entirely unmoved and immovable aspect , suddenly set up a quavering treble -- as if he have be a alarum , and the time be come for he to go off . the company at 's end of the table take this form of vocal entertainment very much as a matter of course , be free from musical prejudice ; but lay down he pipe and put he finger in he ear ; and , who have be long to go ever since he have hear be not in the house , rose and say he must bid good - night . " I will go with you , lad , " say ; " I will go with you before my ear be split . " " I will go round by the common and see you home , if you like , , " say . " aye , aye ! " say ; " then we can have a bit of ' talk together . I never get hold of you now . " " Eh ! it be a pity but you would sit it out , " say . " they will all go soon , for th ' missis niver let them stay past ten . " but be resolute , so the good - night be say , and the two friend turn out on they starlight walk together . " there be that poor fool , , whimper for I at home , " say . " I can never bring she here with I for fear she should be strike with 's eye , and the poor bitch might go limpe for ever after . " " I have never any need to drive back , " say , laugh . " he always turn back of he own head when he find out I be come here . " " aye , aye , " say . " a terrible woman !--made of needle , make of needle . but I stick to -- I shall always stick to . and he like the needle , help he ! he be a cushion make on purpose for th'ey . " " but she be a downright good - natur would woman , for all that , " say , " and as true as the daylight . she be a bit cross wi' the dog when they offer to come in thg house , but if they depend on she , she would take care and have th'ey well feed . if she tongue 's keen , she heart 's tender : I have see that in time of ' trouble . she be one o' those woman as be better than they word . " " well , well , " say , " I do not say th ' apple be not sound at the core ; but it set my tooth on edge -- it set my tooth on edge . " the meeting on the 's haste to go away , and draw hope rather than discouragement from it . she be fearful lest the strength of she feel towards he should hinder she from waiting and listen faithfully for the ultimate guiding voice from withing . " I wish I have ask she to write to I , though , " he think . " and yet even
even that might disturb she a bit , perhaps . she want to be quite quiet in she old way for a while . and I have no right to be impatient and interrupt she with my wish . she be tell I what she mind be , and she be not a woman to say one thing and mean another . I will wait patiently . " that be 's wise resolution , and it thrive excellently for the first two or three week on the nourishment it get from the remembrance of 's confession that afternoon . there be a wonderful amount of sustenance in the first few word of love . but towards the middle of the resolution begin to dwindle perceptibly , and show dangerous symptom of exhaustion . the week be unusually long : Dinah must surely have have more than enough time to make up she mind . let a woman say what she will after she have once tell a man that she love he , he be a little too flushed and exalt with that first dratch she offer he to care much about the taste of the second . he tread the earth with a very elastic step as he walk away from she , and make light of all difficulty . but that sort of glow die out : memory get 's sadly dilute with time , and be not strong enough to revive we . be no longer so confident as he have be . he begin to fear that perhaps 's old life would have too strong a grasp upon she for any new feeling to triumph . if she have not feel this , she would surely have write to he to give he some comfort ; but it appear that she hold it right to discourage he . as 's confidence wane , he patience wane with it , and he think he must write himself . he must ask not to leave he in painful doubt longer than be needful . he sit up late one night to write she a letter , but the next morning he burn it , afraid of its effect . it would be worse to have a discouraging answer by letter than from she own lip , for she presence reconcile he to she will . you perceive how it be : Adam be hunger for the sight of , and when that sort of hunger reach a certain stage , a lover be likely to still it though he may have to put he future in pawn . but what harm could he do by go to ? Dinah could not be displease with he for it . she have not forbide he to go . she must surely expect that he would go before long . by the second in this view of the case have become so clear to Adam that he be already on he way to , on horseback this time , for he hour be precious now , and he have borrowed 's good nag for the journey . what keen memory go along the road with he ! he have often be to and back since that first journey to , but beyond the greystone walls , the broken country , the meagre tree , seem to be tell he afresh the story of that painful past which he know so well by heart . but no story be the same to we after a lapse of time -- or rather , we who read it be no longer the same interpreter -- and this morning bring with he new thought through that grey country , thought which give a altered significance to its story of the past . that be a base and selfish , even a blasphemous , spirit which rejoice and be thankful over the past evil that have blight or crush another , because it have be make a source of unforeseen good to ourselves . Adam could never cease to mourn over that mystery of human sorrow which have be bring so close to he ; he could never thank for another 's misery . and if I be capable of that narrow - sigh joy in 's behalf , I should still know he be not the man to feel it for himself . he would have shake he head at such a sentiment and say , " 's evil , and sorrow 's sorrow , and you can not alter it be natur by wrap it up in other word . other folk be not create for my sake , that I should think all square when thing turn out well for I . " but it be not ignoble to feel that the fuller life which a sad experience have bring we be worth we own personal share of pain . surely it be not possible to feel otherwise , any more than it would be possible for a man with cataract to regret the painful process by which he dim blurre sight of man as tree walking have be exchange for clear outline and effulgent day . the growth of higher feeling within we be like the growth of faculty , bring with it a sense of add strength . we can no more wish to return to a narrower sympathy than a painter or a musician can wish to return to he cruder manner , or a philosopher to he less complete formula . something like this sense of enlarge be be in 's mind this morning , as he ride along in vivid recollection of the past . he feel towards , the hope of pass he life with she , have be the distant unseen point towards which that hard journey from eighteen month ago have be lead he . and deep as he love for have be -- so deep
deep that the root of it would never be tear away -- he love for be better and more precious to he , for it be the outgrowth of that fuller life which have come to he from he acquaintance with deep sorrow . " it be like as if it be a new strength to I , " he say to himself , " to love she and know as she love I . I shall look t ' she to help I to see thing right . for she be better than I be -- there 's less of ' self in she , and pride . and it be a feeling as give you a sort of ' liberty , as if you could walk more fearless , when you have more trust in another than y ' have in yourself . I have always be think I know better than they as belong to I , and that be a poor sort of ' life , when you can not look to they nearest to you t ' help you with a bit better think than what you have get inside you a's ready . " it be more than two o'clock in the afternoon when come in sight of the grey town on the hill - side and look searchingly towards the green valley below , for the first glimpse of the old thatch roof near the ugly red mill . the scene look less harsh in the soft sunshine than it have in the eager time of early spring , and the one grand charm it possess in common with all wide - stretch woodless region -- that it fill you with a new consciousness of the overarching sky -- have a milder , more soothing influence than usual , on this almost cloudless day . 's doubt and fear melt under this influence as the delicate weblike cloud have gradually melt away into the clear blue above he . he seem to see 's gentle face assure he , with it be look alone , of all he long to know . he do not expect to be at home at this hour , but he get down from he horse and tie it at the little gate , that he might ask where she be go to - day . he have set he mind on follow she and bring she home . she be go to 's , a hamlet about three mile off , over the hill , the old woman tell he -- have set off directly after morning chapel , to preach in a cottage there , as she habit be . anybody at the town would tell he the way to 's . so get on he horse again and ride to the town , put up at the old inn and take a hasty dinner there in the company of the too chatty landlord , from whose friendly question and reminiscence he be glad to escape as soon as possible and set out towards 's . with all he haste it be nearly four o'clock before he could set off , and he think that as have go so early , she would perhaps already be near return . the little , grey , desolate - look hamlet , unscree by sheltering tree , lay in sight long before he reach it , and as he come near he could hear the sound of voice singe a hymn . " perhaps that be the last hymn before they come away , " thought . " I will walk back a bit and turn again to meet she , farther off the village . " he walk back till he get nearly to the top of the hill again , and seate himself on a loose stone , against the low wall , to watch till he should see the little black figure leave the hamlet and win up the hill . he choose this spot , almost at the top of the hill , because it be away from all eyes -- no house , no cattle , not even a nibbling sheep near -- no presence but the still light and shadows and the great embracing sky . she be much longer come than he expect . he wait a hour at least watch for she and think of she , while the afternoon shadow lengthen and the light grow softer . at last he see the little black figure come from between the grey house and gradually approach the foot of the hill . slowly , think , but be really walk at she usual pace , with a light quiet step . now she be begin to wind along the path up the hill , but would not move yet ; he would not meet she too soon ; he have set he heart on meet she in this assure loneliness . and now he begin to fear lest he should startle she too much . " yet , " he think , " she be not one to be overstartle ; she be always so calm and quiet , as if she be prepare for anything . " what be she think of as she wound up the hill ? perhaps she have find complete repose without he , and have cease to feel any need of he love . on the verge of a decision we all tremble : hope pause with fluttering wing . but now at last she be very near , and rise from the stone wall . it happen that just as he walk forward , have pause and turn round to look back at the village -- who do not pause and look back in mount a hill ? be glad , for , with the fine instinct of a lover , he feel that it would
would be best for she to hear he voice before she see he . he come within three pace of she and then say , " Dinah ! " she start without look round , as if she connect the sound with no place . " ! " say again . he know quite well what be in she mind . she be so accustom to think of impression as purely spiritual monition that she look for no material visible accompaniment of the voice . but this second time she look round . what a look of yearning love it be that the mild grey eye turn on the strong dark - eyed man ! she do not start again at the sight of he ; she say nothing , but move towards he so that he arm could clasp she round . and they walk on so in silence , while the warm tear fell . be content , and say nothing . it be who speak first . " Adam , " she say , " it be the . my soul be so knit to your that it be but a divided life I live without you . and this moment , now you be with I , and I feel that we heart be fill with the same love . I have a fulness of strength to bear and do we heavenly 's Will that I have lose before . " pause and look into she sincere eye . " then we will never part any more , , till death part we . " and they kiss each other with a deep joy . what greater thing be there for two human soul than to feel that they be join for life -- to strengthen each other in all labour , to rest on each other in all sorrow , to minister to each other in all pain , to be one with each other in silent unspeakable memory at the moment of the last parting ? Marriage Bells in little more than a month after that meeting on the hill -- on a rimy morning in departing -- and be marry . it be a event much thought of in the village . all 's man have a holiday , and all 's , and most of those who have a holiday appear in they best clothes at the wedding . I think there be hardly a inhabitant of specially mention in this history and still resident in the parish on this morning who be not either in church to see and marry , or near the church door to greet they as they come forth . and she daughter be wait at the churchyard gate in they carriage ( for they have a carriage now ) to shake hand with the bride and bridegroom and wish they well ; and in the absence of at , , , and have feel it incumbent on they to represent " the family " at the chase on the occasion . the churchyard walk be quite line with familiar face , many of they face that have first look at when she preach on the Green . and no wonder they show this eager interest on she marriage morning , for nothing like and the history which have bring she and together have be know at within the memory of man . , in she neatest cap and frock , be cry , though she do not exactly know why ; for , as she cousin , who stand near she , judiciously suggest , be not go away , and if be in low spirit , the best thing for she to do be to follow 's example and marry a honest fellow who be ready to have she . next to , just within the church door , there be the Poyser child , pee round the corner of the pew to get a sight of the mysterious ceremony ; 's face wear a unusual air of anxiety at the idea of see cousin come back look rather old , for in 's experience no married people be young . I envy they all the sight they have when the marriage be fairly ended and lead out of church . she be not in black this morning , for she aunt would by no means allow such a risk of incurr bad luck , and have herself make a present of the wedding dress , make all of grey , though in the usual Quaker form , for on this point Dinah could not give way . so the lily face look out with sweet gravity from under a grey Quaker bonnet , neither smile nor blush , but with lip trembl a little under the weight of solemn feeling . , as he press she arm to he side , walk with he old erectness and he head throw rather backward as if to face all the world better . but it be not because he be particularly proud this morning , as be the wont of bridegroom , for he happiness be of a kind that have little reference to man 's opinion of it . there be a tinge of sadness in he deep joy ; know it , and do not feel aggrieved . there be three other couple , follow the bride and bridegroom : first , , look as cheery as a bright fire on this rimy morning , lead quiet , the bridesmaid ; then come serenely happy , with on he arm ; and last of all , with -- in a new gown and bonnet , too busy with she pride in she son and she delight in possesse the one daughter she have desire to devise a single pretext for complaint . have consent to attend the wedding at 's earnest request , under protest
protest against marriage in general and the marriage of a sensible man in particular . nevertheless , have a joke against he after the wedding dinner , to the effect that in the vestry he have give the bride one more kiss than be necessary . behind this last couple come , glad at heart over this good morning 's work of join and . for he have see in the worst moment of he sorrow ; and what better harvest from that painful see - time could there be than this ? the love that have bring hope and comfort in the hour of despair , the love that have find its way to the dark prison cell and to poor 's darker soul -- this strong gentle love be to be 's companion and helper till death . there be much shaking of hand mingl with " bless you be " and other good wish to the four couple , at the churchyard gate , answer for the rest with unwonted vivacity of tongue , for he have all the appropriate wedding - day joke at he command . and the woman , he observ , could never do anything but put finger in eye at a wedding . even could not trust herself to speak as the neighbour shook hand with she , and begin to cry in the face of the very first person who tell she she be get young again . , have a slight touch of rheumatism , do not join in the ringing of the bell this morning , and , look on with some contempt at these informal greeting which require no official co-operation from the clerk , begin to hum in he musical bass , " oh what a joyful thing it be , " by way of prelud a little to the effect he intend to produce in the wedding psalm next . " that be a bit of good news to cheer , " say to he mother , as they drive off . " I shall write to he the first thing when we get home . " it be near the end of , in 1807 . the workshop have be shut up half a hour or more in 's timber - yard , which use to be 's , and the mellow evening light be fall on the pleasant house with the buff wall and the soft grey thatch , very much as it do when we see bring in the key on that evening nine year ago . there be a figure we know well , just come out of the house , and shade she eye with she hand as she look for something in the distance , for the ray that fall on she white borderless cap and she pale auburn hair be very dazzling . but now she turn away from the sunlight and look towards the door . we can see the sweet pale face quite well now : it be scarcely at all altered -- only a little fuller , to correspond to she more matronly figure , which still seem light and active enough in the plain black dress . " I see he , , " say , as she look into the house . " let we go and meet he . come , , come with mother . " the last call be answer immediately by a small fair creature with pale auburn hair and grey eye , little more than four year old , who run out silently and put she hand into she mother 's . " come , uncle , " say . " aye , aye , we be come , " answer from , and presently appear stoop under the doorway , be taller than usual by the black head of a sturdy two - year - old nephew , who have cause some delay by demand to be carry on uncle 's shoulder . " better take he on thy arm , , " say , look fondly at the stout black - eyed fellow . " he be troublesome to thee so . " " Nay , nay : Addy like a ride on my shoulder . I can carry he so for a bit . " a kindness which yoing acknowledge by drumm he heel with promising force against 's chest . but to walk by 's side , and be tyrannize over by 's and 's child , be 's earthly happiness . " where didst see he ? " ask , as they walk on into the adjoining field . " I can not catch sight of he anywhere . " " between the hedge by the roadside , " say . " I see he hat and he shoulder . there he be again . " " trust thee for catching sight of he if he be anywhere to be see , " say , smile . " the e't like poor mother use to be . she be always on the look out for , and could see he sooner than other folk , for all she eye get dim . " " he be be longer than he expect , " say , take 's watch from a small side pocket and look at it ; " it be nigh upon seven now . " " aye , they would have a deal to say to one another , " say , " and the meeting 'uld touch th'ey both pretty closish . why , it be get on towards eight year since they part . " " yes , " say , " be greatly move this morning at the thought of the change he should see in the poor young man , from the sickness he have undergone , as well as the year which have change we all . and
and the death of the poor wanderer , when she be come back to we , have be sorrow upon sorrow . " " see , , " say , lower the young one to he arm now and point , " there be come -- at the far stile . " hasten she step , and little run on at she utmost speed till she clasp she father 's leg . patt she head and lifte she up to kiss she , but could see the mark of agitation on he face as she approach he , and he put she arm within he in silence . " well , youngster , must I take you ? " he say , try to smile , when Addy stretch out he arm -- ready , with the usual baseness of infancy , to give up he uncle Seth at once , now there be some rarer patronage at hand . " it be cut I a good deal , , " say at last , when they be walk on . " find he greatly alte ? " say . " why , he be alter and yet not alte . I should ha ' know he anywhere . but he colour 's change , and he look sadly . however , the doctor say he will soon be set right in he own country air . he be all sound in th 's inside ; it be only the fever shatte he so . but he speak just the same , and smile at I just as he do when he be a lad . it be wonderful how he be always have just the same sort of ' look when he smile . " " I have never see he smile , poor young man , " say . " but thee will see he smile , to - morrow , " say . " he ask after thee the first thing when he begin to come round , and we could talk to one another . ' I hope she be not alte , ' he say , 'I remember she face so well . ' I tell he ' no , ' " continue , look fondly at the eyes that be turn towards he , " only a bit plumper , as thee ' dst a right to be after seven year . 'I may come and see she to - morrow , may not I ? ' he say ; 'i long to tell she how I have think of she all these year . ' " " tell he I would always use the watch ? " say . " aye ; and we talk a deal about thee , for he say he never see a woman a bit like thee . 'I shall turn some day ,' he say , ' when she preach out of door , and go to hear she . ' and I say , ' Nay , sir , you can not do that , for have forbid the woman preach , and she be give it up , all but talk to the people a bit in they house . ' " " ah , " say , who could not repress a comment on this point , " and a sore pity it be o's conference ; and if have see as I do , we would ha ' leave the Wesleyans and join a body that 'uld put no bond on Christian liberty . " " Nay , lad , nay , " say , " she be right and thee wast wrong . there be no rule so wise but what it be a pity for somebody or other . most of ' the woman do more harm nor good with they preaching -- they have not get 's gift nor she sperrit -- and she be see that , and she think it right to set thg example o' submitting , for she be not hold from other sort of ' teaching . and I agree with she , and approve of ' what she do . " be silent . this be a standing subject of difference rarely allude to , and , wish to quit it at once , say , " Didst remember , , to speak to the word my uncle and aunt entrust to thee ? " " yes , and he be go to the with the day after to - morrow . come in while we be talk about it , and he would have it as the must see nobody but thee to - morrow . he say -- and he be in the right of it -- as it will be bad for he t ' have he feeling stir with see many people one after another . ' we must get you strong and hearty , ' he say , ' that be the first thing to be do , and then you shall have you own way . but I shall keep you under you old tutor 's thumb till then . ' 's fine and joyful at have he home again . " be silent a little while , and then say , " it be very cutting when we first see one another . he would never hear about poor Hetty till meet he in , for the letter miss he on he journey . the first thing he say to I , when we would get o' one another 's hand be , ' I could never do anything for she , -- she liv long enough for all the suffering -- and I would think so of the time when I might do something for she . but you tell I the truth when you say to I once , " there be a sort of wrong
