the on the of I : and 1 . outside Dorlcote 2 . , of , about 3 . he advice concern a for 4 . be expect 5 . 6 . the Aunts and Uncles be come 7 . the and . his 9 . to 10 . than she expect 11 . Maggie tries to run away from Her shadow 12 . and at 13 . the of ii : School - time 1 . 's " first half " 2 . the 3 . the 4 . " the young idea " 5 . 's 6 . a love - scene 7 . the golden Gates be pass III : the Downfall 1 . what have happen at home 2 . 's , or 3 . the 4 . a 5 . to the Oyster 6 . tend to refute the popular prejudice against the present of a pocket - knife 7 . how a to . Daylight on the wreck 9 . a item add to the : the of 1 . a Variation of to 2 . the be Pierce by the 3 . a voice from the : wheat and 1 . in the 2 . aunt the of 's 3 . the 4 . another love - scene 5 . the 6 . the - Triumph 7 . a day of Reckoning : the great Temptation 1 . a Duet in Paradise 2 . first Impression 3 . confidential moments 4 . and 5 . show that have open the Oyster 6 . Illustrat the law of attraction 7 . Re-enter 8 . Wakem in a 9 . Charity in - 10 . the 11 . in the Lane 12 . a family party 13 . along by the tide 14 . Waking : the final rescue 1 . the return to the 2 . 's 3 . show that be capable of surprising Us 4 . and 5 . the last conflict I and Girl_ I a wide plain , where the broadening Floss hurry on between its green bank to the sea , and the loving tide , rush to meet it , check its passage with a impetuous embrace . on this mighty tide the black ship -- laden with the fresh - scent fir - plank , with round sack of oil - bear see , or with the dark glitter of coal -- be borne along to the town of 's , which show its a , flute red roof and the broad gable of its wharve between the low wood hill and the river - brink , tinge the water with a soft purple hue under the transient glance of this sun . far away on each hand stretch the rich pasture , and the patch of dark earth make ready for the seed of broad - leave green crop , or touch already with the tint of the tender - blad autumn - sown corn . there be a remnant still of last year 's golden cluster of beehive - rick rise at interval beyond the hedgerow ; and everywhere the hedgerow be stud with tree ; the distant ship seem to be lift they mast and stretch they red - brown sail close among the branch of the spreading ash . just by the red -roofed town the tributary flow with a lively current into the Floss . how lovly the little river be , with it be dark change wavelet ! it seem to I like a liive companion while I wander along the bank , and listen to its low , placid voice , as to the voice of one who be deaf and loving . I remember those large dipping willows . I remember the stone bridge . and this be . I must stand a minute or two here on the bridge and look at it , though the cloud be threaten , and it be far on in the afternoon . even in this leafless time of depart it be pleasant to look at , -- perhaps the chill , damp season add a charm to the trimly keep , comfortable dwelling - house , as old as the elm and chestnut that shelter it from the northern blast . the stream be brimful now , and lie high in this little withy plantation , and half drown the grassy fringe of the croft in front of the house . as I look at the full stream , the vivid grass , the delicate bright - green powder soften the outline of the great trunk and branch that glebe from under the bare purple bough , I be in love with moistness , and envy the white duck that be dip they head far into the water here among the with , unmindful of the awkward appearance they make in the drier world above . the rush of the water and the booming of the mill bring a dreamy deafness , which seem to heighten the peacefulness of the scene . they be like a great curtain of sound , shutt one out from the world beyond . and now there be the thunder of the huge cover wagon come home with sack of grain . that honest wagoner be think of he dinner , get sadly dry in the oven at this late hour ; but he will not touch it till he have feed he horse , -- the strong , submissive , meek - eyed beasts , who , I fancy , be look mild reproach at he from between they blinker , that he should crack he whip at they in that awful manner as if they need that hint ! see how they stretch they shoulders up the slope toward the bridge , with all the more energy because they be so near home . look at they grand shaggy foot that seem to grasp the
the firm earth , at the patient strength of they neck , bow under the heavy collar , at the mighty muscle of they struggling haunch ! I should like well to hear they neigh over they hardly earn feed of corn , and see they , with they moist necks free from the harness , dip they eager nostril into the muddy pond . now they be on the bridge , and down they go again at a swifter pace , and the arch of the covered wagon disappear at the turning behind the tree . now I can turn my eye toward the mill again , and watch the unresting wheel send out its diamond jet of water . that little girl be watch it too ; she have be stand on just the same spot at the edge of the water ever since I pause on the bridge . and that queer white cur with the brown ear seem to be leap and bark in ineffectual remonstrance with the wheel ; perhaps he be jealous because he playfellow in the beaver bonnet be so rapt in its movement . it be time the little playfellow go in , I think ; and there be a very bright fire to tempt she : the red light shine out under the deepening gray of the sky . it be time , too , for I to leave off rest my arm on the cold stone of this bridge .... ah , my arm be really benumb . I have be press my elbow on the arm of my chair , and dream that I be stand on the bridge in front of , as it look one afternoon many year ago . before I doze off , I be go to tell you what and Tulliver be talk about , as they sit by the bright fire in the left - hand parlor , on that very afternoon I have be dream of . ii , of , about " what I want , you know , " say , --" what I want be to give a good eddication ; a eddication as will be a bread to he . that be what I be think of when I give notice for he to leave the academy at - day . I mean to put he to a downright good school at . the two year at thg academy 'uld ha ' do well enough , if I would mean to make a miller and farmer of he , for he be have a fine sight more schoolin ' nor _i_ ever get . all the learning _my father ever pay for be a bit of ' birch at one end and the alphabet at 's other . but I should like to be a bit of a scholard , so as he might be up to the trick o' these fellow as talk fine and write with a flourish . it 'uld be a help to I wi' these lawsuit , and arbitrations , and thing . I would not make a downright lawyer of ' the lad ,-- I should be sorry for he to be a raskill , -- but a sort of ' engineer , or a surveyor , or a auctioneer and vallyer , like , or one of ' they smartish business as be all profit and no outlay , only for a big watch - chain and a high stool . they be pretty nigh all one , and they be not far off be even wi' the law , _I_ believe ; for look I ' the face as hard as one cat look another . _he be none frightene at he . " be speak to he wife , a blond comely woman in a fan - shape cap ( I be afraid to think how long it be since fan - shaped cap be worn , they must be so near come in again . at that time , when be nearly forty , they be new at 's , and consider sweet thing ) . " well , , you know best : _I have no objection . but have not I better kill a couple of ' fowl , and have th ' aunt and uncle to dinner next week , so as you may hear what sister Glegg and sister Pullet have get to say about it ? there be a couple of ' fowl _wants_ kill ! " " you may kill every fowl I ' the yard if you like , ; but I shall ask neither aunt nor uncle what I be to do wi' my own lad , " say , defiantly . " dear heart ! " say , shock at this sanguinary rhetoric , " how can you talk so , ? but it be you way to speak disrespectful of ' my family ; and sister throw all the blame upo 'me , though I be sure I be as innocent as the babe unborn . for nobody be ever hear I say as it be not lucky for my child to have aunt and uncle as can live independent . Howiver , if 's to go to a new school , I should like he to go where I can wash he and mmend he ; else he might as well have calico as linen , for they would be one as yallow as th' other before they have be wash half - a - dozen time . and then , when the box be goin ' back 'ard and forrard , I could send the lad a cake , or a pork -pie , or a apple ; for he can do with a extry bit , bless he ! whether they stind he at the meal or no . my child can eat as much victual
victual as most , thank ! " " well , well , we will not send he out of ' reach of ' the carrier 's cart , if other thing fit in , " say . " but you must not put a speak I ' the wheel about the washing , ' if we can not get a school near enough . that be the fault I have to find wi' you , Bessy ; if you see a stick I ' the road , you be allays thinkin ' you can not step over it . you would want I not to hire a good wagoner , ' cause he would get a mole on he face . " " dear heart ! " say , in mild surprise , " when do I iver make objection to a man because he would get a mole on he face ? I be sure I be rether fond of ' the moles ; for my brother , as be dead an' gone , have a mole on he brow . but I can not remember you iver offer to hire a wagoner with a mole , . there be have not a mole on he face no more nor you have , an' I be all for have you hire _him ; ang so you do hire he , a ' if he have not die of ' th ' inflammation , as we pay for attend he , he would very like ha ' be drivin ' the wagon now . he might have a mole somewhere out of ' sight , but how be I to know that , ? " " no , no , Bessy ; I do not mean justly the mole ; I mean it to stand for summat else ; but niver mind -- it be puzzl work , talk is . what I be think on , be how to find the right sort of ' school to send to , for I might be to 'en in again , as I have be wi's th ' academy . I will have nothing to do wi' a ' cademy again : whativer school I send to , it sha ' not be a ' cademy ; it shall be a place where the lad spend they time I ' summat else besides blacke the family 's shoe , and get up the potatoe . it be a uncommon puzzling thing to know what school to pick . " pause a minute or two , and div with both hand into he breech pocket as if he hope to find some suggestion there . apparently he be not disappoint , for he presently say , " I know what i will do : I will talk it over wi' Riley ; he be come to - morrow , t ' arbitrate about the dam . " " well , , I have put the sheet out for the best bed , and 's get them hang at the fire . they be not the best sheet , but they be good enough for anybody to sleep in , be he who he will ; for as for they best Holland sheet , I should repent buy 'em , only they will do to lay we out in . a ' if you be to die to - morrow , , they be mang beautiful , a ' all ready , a ' smell o' lavender as it 'uld be a pleasure to lay them out ; an' they lie at the left - hand corner of ' the big oak linen - chest at the back : not as I should trust anybody to look th'ey out but myself . " as utter the last sentence , she draw a bright bunch of key from she pocket , and single out one , rub she thumb and finger up and down it with a placid smile while she look at the clear fire . if have be a susceptible man in he conjugal relation , he might have suppose that she draw out the key to aid she imagination in anticipat the moment when he would be in a state to justify the production of the best sheet . happily he be not so ; he be only susceptible in respect of he right to water - power ; moreover , he have the marital habit of not listen very closely , and since he mention of , have be apparently occupy in a tactile examination of he woollen stocking . " I think I have hit it , , " be he first remark after a short silence . " 's as likely a man as any to know of ' some school ; he be have schooling himself , a ' go about to all sort of ' place , arbitratin ' and vallyin ' and that . and we shall have time to talk it over to - morrow night when the business be done . I want to be such a sort of ' man as , you know , -- as can talk pretty nigh as well as if it be all write out for he , and know a good lot of ' word as do not mean much , so as you can not lay hold of them I ' law ; and a good solid knowledge of ' business too . " " well , " say , " so far as talk proper , and know everything , and walk with a bend in he back , and set he hair up , I should not mind the lad be bring up to that . but they fine - talk man from the big town mostly wear the false shirt - fronts ; they wear a frill till it be all a mess
mess , and then hide it with a bib ; I know do . and then , if 's to go and live at , like , he will have a house with a kitchen hardly big enough to turn in , a ' niver get a fresh egg for he breakfast , a ' sleep up three pair of ' stair , -- or four , for what I know , -- and be burnt to death before he can get down . " " no , no , " say , " I 've no thought of he go to : I mean he to set up he office at . 's , close by we , a ' live at home . but , " continue after a pause , " what I be a bit afraid on is , as have not get the right sort of ' brain for a smart fellow . I doubt he be a bit slowish . he take after you family , . " " yes , that he do , " say , accept the last proposition entirely on its own merit ; " he be wonderful for like a deal of ' salt in he broth . that be my brother 's way , and my father 's before he . " " it seem a bit a pity , though , " say , " as the lad should take after the mother 's side instead of ' the little wench . that be the worst o not wi' cross of ' breed : you can never justly calkilate what will come o not . the little un take after my side , now : she be twice as ' cute as . too ' cute for a woman , I be afraid , " continue , turn he head dubiously first on one side and then on the other . " it be no mischief much while she be a little un ; but a over -'cute woman 's no better nor a long - tailed sheep , -- she will fetch none the bigger price for that . " " yes , it _i a mischief while she be a little un , , for it run to naughtiness . how to keep she in a clean pinafore two hour together pass my cunning . a ' now you put I I ' mind , " continue , rise and go to the window , " I do not know where she be now , a ' it be pretty nigh tea - time . ah , I think so ,--wanderin ' up a ' down by the water , like a wild thing : she will tumble in some day . " rap the window sharply , beckon , and shake she head , -- a process which she repeat more than once before she return to she chair . " you talk of ' ' cuteness , , " she observe as she sit down , " but I be sure the child 's half a idiot I ' some thing ; for if I send she upstairs to fetch anything , she forget what she be go for , a ' perhaps ' ull sit down on the floor I ' the sunshine a ' plait she hair a ' s to herself like a creatur ' , all the while I be wait for she downstair . that niver run I ' my family , thank ! no more nor a brown skin as make she look like a mulatter . I do not like to fly I ' the face o' Providence , but it seem hard as I should have but one gell , a ' she so comical . " " Pooh , nonsense ! " say ; " she be a straight , black - eyed wench as anybody need wish to see . I do not know I ' what she be behind other folk 's child ; and she can read almost as well as the parson . " " but she hair will not curl all I can do with it , and she be so franzy about have it put I ' paper , and I have such work as never be to make she stand and have it pinch with th ' iron . " " cut it off -- cut it off short , " say the father , rashly . " how can you talk so , ? she be too big a gell -- gone nine , and tall of she age -- to have she hair cut short ; an' there be she cousin 's get a row of ' curl round she head , a ' not a hair out of ' place . it seem hard as my sister should have that pretty child ; I be sure take more after I nor my own child do . , , " continue the mother , in a tone of half - coaxing fretfulness , as this small mistake of nature enter the room , " where be the use of ' my tell you to keep away from the water ? you will tumble in and be drownd some day , a ' then you will be sorry you do not do as mother tell you . " 's hair , as she throw off she bonnet , painfully confirm she mother 's accusation . , desire she daughter to have a curled crop , " like other folk 's child , " have have it cut too short in front to be push behind the ear ; and as it be usually straight a hour after it have be take out of paper , be incessantly toss she head to keep the dark , heavy lock out of she gleaming black eye , -- a action
action which give she very much the air of a small Shetland pony . " oh , dear , oh , dear , , what be you thinkin 'on , to throw you bonnet down there ? take it upstairs , there be a good gell , a ' let you hair be brush , a ' put you other pinafore on , a ' change you shoe , do , for shame ; a ' come an' go on with you patchwork , like a little lady . " " oh , mother , " say , in a vehemently cross tone , " I do not want to do my patchwork . " " what ! not you pretty patchwork , to make a counterpane for you aunt ? " " it be foolish work , " say , with a toss of she mane , -- " tear thing to piece to sow them together again . and I do not want to do anything for my aunt . I do not like she . " Exit Maggie , drag she bonnet by the string , while laugh audibly . " I wonder at you , as you will laugh at she , , " say the mother , with feeble fretfulness in she tone . " you encourage she I ' naughtiness . a ' she aunt will have it as it be I spoil she . " be what be call a good - tempered person , -- never cry , when she be a baby , on any slighter ground than hunger and pins ; and from the cradle upward have be healthy , fair , plump , and dull - wit ; in short , the flower of she family for beauty and amiability . but milk and mildness be not the best thing for keeping , and when they turn only a little sour , they may disagree with young stomach seriously . I have often wonder whether those early Madonnas of , with the blond face and somewhat stupid expression , keep they placidity undistur when they strong - limbed , strong - willed boy get a little too old to do without clothing . I think they must have be give to feeble remonstrance , get more and more peevish as it become more and more ineffectual . he advice concern a for the gentleman in the ample white cravat and shirt - frill , take he brandy - and - water so pleasantly with he good friend , be , a gentleman with a waxen complexion and fat hand , rather highly educated for a auctioneer and appraiser , but large - hear enough to show a great deal of _bonhomie_ toward simple country acquaintance of hospitable habit . spoke of such acquaintance kindly as " people of the old school . " the conversation have come to a pause . , not without a particular reason , have abstain from a seventh recital of the cool retort by which have show himself too many for , and how thWakey have have he comb cut for once in he life , now the business of the dam have be settle by arbitration , and how there never would have be any dispute at all about the height of water if everybody be what they should be , and have not make the lawyer . be , on the whole , a man of safe traditional opinion ; but on one or two point he have trust to he unassisted intellect , and have arrive at several questionable conclusion ; amongst the rest , that rat , weevil , and lawyer be create by . Unhappily he have no one to tell he that this be rampant Manichaeism , else he might have see he error . but to - day it be clear that the good principle be triumphant : this affair of the water - power have be a tangle business somehow , for all it seem -- look at it one way -- as plain as water 's water ; but , big a puzzle as it be , it have not get the better of . take he brandy - and - water a little stronger than usual , and , for a man who might be suppose to have a few hundred lie idle at he banker 's , be rather incautiously open in express he high estimate of he friend 's business talents . but the dam be a subject of conversation that would keep ; it could always be take up again at the same point , and exactly in the same condition ; and there be another subject , as you know , on which be in pressing want of 's advice . this be he particular reason for remain silent for a short space after he last dratch , and rub he knee in a meditative manner . he be not a man to make a abrupt transition . this be a puzzling world , as he often say , and if you drive you wagon in a hurry , you may light on a awkward corner . , meanwhile , be not impatient . why should he be ? even , one would think , must have be patient in he slipper on a warm hearth , take copious snuff , and sipp gratuitous brandy - and - water . " there be a thing I have get I ' my head , " say at last , in rather a lower tone than usual , as he turn he head and look steadfastly at he companion . " ah ! " say , in a tone of mild interest . he be a man with heavy waxen eyelid and high -arched eyebrow , look exactly the same under all circumstance . this immovability of face , and the habit of
of take a pinch of snuff before he give a answer , make he trebly oracular to . " it be a very particular thing , " he go on ; " it be about my boy . " at the sound of this name , , who be seat on a low stool close by the fire , with a large book open on she lap , shook she heavy hair back and look up eagerly . there be few sound that rouse when she be dream over she book , but 's name serve as well as the shrillest whistle ; in a instant she be on the watch , with gleam eye , like a terrier suspect mischief , or at all event determi to fly at any one who threaten it toward . " you see , I want to put he to a new school at , " say ; " he be comin ' away from the ' cademy at - day , an' I shall let he run loose for a quarter ; but after that I want to send he to a downright good school , where they will make a scholard of he . " " well , " say , " there be no greater advantage you can give he than a good education . not , " he add , with polite significance , --" not that a man can not be a excellent miller and farmer , and a shrewd , sensible fellow into the bargain , without much help from the schoolmaster . " " I believe you , " say Tulliver , wink , and turn he head on one side ; " but that be where it be . I do not _mean_ to be a miller and farmer . I see no fun I ' that . why , if I make he a miller a ' farmer , he would be expectin ' to take to the mill a ' the land , a ' a -hinting at I as it be time for I to lay by a ' think of ' my latter end . Nay , nay , I have see enough of ' that wi' son . I will never pull my coat off before I go to bed . I shall give a eddication a ' put he to a business , as he may make a nest for himself , a ' not want to push I out of ' mine . pretty well if he get it when I be dead a ' gone . I sha ' not be put off wi' spoon - meat afore I have lose my tooth . " this be evidently a point on which feel strongly ; and the impetus which have give unusual rapidity and emphasis to he speech show itself still unexhausted for some minute afterward in a defiant motion of the head from side to side , and a occasional " Nay , nay , " like a subsid growl . these angry symptom be keenly observ by , and cut she to the quick . , it appear , be suppose capable of turn he father out of door , and of make the future in some way tragic by he wickedness . this be not to be borne ; and jump up from she stool , forget all about she heavy book , which fall with a bang within the fender , and go up between she father 's knee , say , in a half - cry , half - indignant voice ,-- " , would not be naughty to you ever ; I know he would not . " be out of the room superintend a choice supper - dish , and 's heart be touch ; so be not scold about the book . quietly pick it up and look at it , while the father laugh , with a certain tenderness in he hard - line face , and pat he little girl on the back , and then hold she hand and keep she between he knee . " what ! they must not say any harm of ' , eh ? " say , look at with a twinkling eye . then , in a lower voice , turn to , as though could not hear , " she understand what one be talk about so as never be . and you should hear she read ,-- straight off , as if she know it all beforehand . and allay at she book ! but it be bad -- it be bad , " add sadly , check this blamable exultation . " a woman 's no business wig be so clever ; it will turn to trouble , I doubt . but bless you ! " -- here the exultation be clearly recover the mastery , --" she will read the book and understand th'ey better nor half the folk as be grow up . " 's cheek begin to flush with triumphant excitement . she think would have a respect for she now ; it have be evident that he think nothing of she before . be turn over the leaf of the book , and she could make nothing of he face , with its high - arch eyebrow ; but he presently look at she , and say ,-- " come , come and tell I something about this book ; here be some picture ,-- I want to know what they mean . " , with deepene color , go without hesitation to 's elbow and look over the book , eagerly seize one corner , and toss back she mane , while she say ,-- " oh , I will tell you what that mean . it be a dreadful picture , be not it ? but I can not help look at
at it . that old woman in the water be a witch , -- they have put she in to find out whether she be a witch or no ; and if she swim she be a witch , and if she be drown -- and kill , you know -- she be innocent , and not a witch , but only a poor silly old woman . but what good would it do she then , you know , when she be drown ? only , I suppose , she would go to heaven , and would make it up to she . and this dreadful blacksmith with he arm akimbo , laugh , -- oh , be not he ugly ? --I will tell you what he be . he be the _really " ( here 's become louder and more emphatic ) , " and not a right blacksmith ; for the take the shape of wicked man , and walk about and set people do wick thing , and he be oftener in the shape of a bad man than any other , because , you know , if people see he be the , and he roar at th'ey , they would run away , and he could not make them do what he please . " have listen to this exposition of 's with petrifying . " why , what book be it the wench have get hold on ? " he burst out at last . " the ' history of the , ' by , -- not quite the right book for a little girl , " say . " how come it among you book , ? " look hurt and discourage , while she father say ,-- " why , it be one of ' the book I buy at 's sale . they be all bound alike , -- it be a good binding , you see , -- and I think they would be all good book . there be 's ' and ' among th'ey . I read in it often of a " ( feel somehow a familiarity with that great writer , because he name be ) ; " and there be a lot more of th'ey , -- sermon mostly , I think , -- but they have all get the same cover , and I think they be all o' one sample , as you may say . but it seem one must not judge by th ' outside . this be a puzzlin ' world . " " well , " say , in a admonitory , patronize tone as he pat on the head , " I advise you to put by the ' History of the , ' and read some prettier book . have you no prettier book ? " " oh , yes , " say , revive a little in the desire to vindicate the variety of she reading . " I know the reading in this book be not pretty ; but I like the picture , and I make story to the picture out of my own head , you know . but I have get ' 's , ' and a book about Kangaroos and thing , and the ' 's . ' " " ah , a beautiful book , " say ; " you can not read a better . " " well , but there be a great deal about the in that , " say , triumphantly , " and I will show you the picture of he in he true shape , as he fight with . " run in a instant to the corner of the room , jump on a chair , and reach down from the small bookcase a shabby old copy of , which open at once , without the least trouble of search , at the picture she want . " here he be , " she say , run back to , " and color he for I with he paint when he be at home last holiday , -- the body all black , you know , and the eye red , like fire , because he be all fire inside , and it shine out at he eye . " " go , go ! " say , peremptorily , begin to feel rather uncomfortable at these free remark on the personal appearance of a be powerful enough to create lawyer ; " shut up the book , and let 's hear no more of ' such talk . it be as I think -- the child 's ull learn more mischief nor good wi' the book . go , go and see after you mother . " Maggie shut up the book at once , with a sense of disgrace , but not be inclin to see after she mother , she compromise the matter by go into a dark corner behind she father 's chair , and nurse she doll , toward which she have a occasional fit of fondness in 's absence , neglect its toilet , but lavish so many warm kiss on it that the waxen cheek have a wasted , unhealthy appearance . " do you ever hear the like o not ? " say , as retire . " it be a pity but what she have be the lad , -- she have ha ' be a match for the lawyer , _she would . it be the wonderful 'st thing " -- here he lowere he voice -- " as I pick the mother because she be not o 'er ' cute -- bein' a good - look woman too , a ' come of a rare family for managing ; but I pick she from she sister of ' purpose , ' cause she be a bit weak like ; for I
I be not agoin ' to be tell the rights of ' thing by my own fireside . but you see when a man 's get brain himself , there be no knowing where they will run to ; an' a pleasant sort of ' soft woman may go on breed you stupid lad and ' cute wench , till it be like as if the world be turn topsy - turvy . it be a uncommon puzzlin ' thing . " 's gravity give way , and he shook a little under the application of he pinch of snuff before he say ,-- " but you lad be not stupid , be he ? I see he , when I be here last , busy make fishing - tackle ; he seem quite up to it . " " well , he be not not to say stupid , -- he be get a notion of ' thing out of ' door , an' a sort of ' common sense , as he would lay hold of ' thing by the right handle . but he be slow with he tongue , you see , and he read but poorly , and can not abide the book , and spell all wrong , they tell I , a ' as shy as can be wi' stranger , a ' you never hear he say ' cute thing like the little wench . now , what I want be to send he to a school where they will make he a bit nimble with he tongue and he pen , and make a smart chap of he . I want my son to be even wi' these fellow as have get the start of ' I will have better schooling . not but what , if the world have be leave as make it , I could ' see my way , and hold my own wi' the best of th'ey ; but thing have get so twisted round and wrap up I ' unreasonable word , as be not a bit like 'em , as I be clean at fault , often a ' often . everything wind about so -- the more straightforrad you be , the more you be puzzl . " take a dratch , swallow it slowly , and shake he head in a melancholy manner , conscious of exemplify the truth that a perfectly sane intellect be hardly at home in this insane world . " you be quite in the right of it , , " observ . " better spend a extra hundred or two on you son 's education , than leave it he in you will . I know I should have try to do so by a son of mine , if I would have one , though , knows , I have not you ready money to play with , ; and I have a houseful of daughter into the bargain . " " I dare say , now , you know of a school as 'uld be just the thing for , " say , not diverte from he purpose by any sympathy with 's deficiency of ready cash . take a pinch of snuff , and keep in suspense by a silence that seem deliberative , before he say ,-- " I know of a very fine chance for any one that be get the necessary money and that be what you have , . the fact be , I would not recommend any friend of mine to send a boy to a regular school , if he could afford to do better . but if any one want he boy to get superior instruction and training , where he would be the companion of he master , and that master a first rate fellow , I know he man . I would not mention the chance to everybody , because I do not think everybody would succeed in get it , if he be to try ; but I mention it to you , , between ourselves . " the fix inquiring glance with which Tulliver have be watch he friend 's oracular face become quite eager . " ay , now , let 's hear , " he say , adjust himself in he chair with the complacency of a person who be think worthy of important communication . " he be a man , " say , sententiously , shut he mouth close , and look at to observe the effect of this stimulate information . " what ! a parson ? " say , rather doubtfully . " yes , and a M.a . the bishop , I understand , think very highly of he : why , it be the bishop who get he he present curacy . " " ah ? " say , to whom one thing be as wonderful as another concern these unfamiliar phenomena . " but what can he want , then ? " " why , the fact be , he be fond of teaching , and wish to keep up he study , and a clergyman have but little opportunity for that in he parochial duty . he be willing to take one or two boy as pupil to fill up he time profitably . the boy would be quite of the family , -- the finest thing in the world for they ; under 's eye continually . " " but do you think they would give the poor lad twice of ' pudding ? " say , who be now in she place again . " he be such a boy for pudding as never be ; an' a grow boy like that ,-- it be dreadful to think of ' they stintin ' he . " " and what money 'uld he want ? " say , whose instinct tell he that
that the service of this admirable would bear a high price . " why , I know of a clergyman who ask a hundred and fifty with he youngest pupil , and he be not to be mention with , the man I speak of . I know , on good authority , that one of the chief people at say , Stelling might get the highest honor if he choose . but he do not care about university honor ; he be a quiet man -- not noisy . " " ah , a deal better -- a deal better , " say ; " but a hundred and fifty be a uncommon price . I never think of ' pay so much as that . " " a good education , let I tell you , , -- a good education be cheap at the money . but be moderate in he term ; he be not a grasp man . I have no doubt he would take you boy at a hundred , and that be what you would not get many other clergyman to do . I will write to he about it , if you like . " rub he knee , and look at the carpet in a meditative manner . " but belike he be a bachelor , " observ , in the interval ; " an' I have no opinion o' housekeeper . there be my brother , as be dead an's go , have a housekeeper once , a ' she take half the feather out of ' the best bed , a ' pack th'ey up a ' send th'ey away . a ' it be unknown the linen she make away with -- she name be . it 'uld break my heart to send where there be a housekeeper , an' I hope you will not think of it , . " " you may set you mind at rest on that score , , " say , " for be marry to as nice a little woman as any man need wish for a wife . there be not a kinder little soul in the world ; I know she family well . she have very much you complexion , -- light curly hair . she come of a good Mudport family , and it be not every offer that would have be acceptable in that quarter . but be not a every - day man ; rather a particular fellow as to the people he choose to be connect with . but I _think_ he would have no objection to take you son ; I _think_ he would not , on my representation . " " I do not know what he could have _against_ the lad , " say , with a slight touch of motherly indignation ; " a nice fresh - skinned lad as anybody need wish to see . " " but there be one thing I be think on , " say , turn he head on one side and look at Riley , after a long perusal of the carpet . " would not a parson be almost too high - learn to bring up a lad to be a man of ' business ? my notion of ' the parson be as they would get a sort o ' learn as lay mostly out of ' sight . and that be not what I want for . I want he to know figure , and write like print , and see into thing quick , and know what folk mean , and how to wrap thing up in word as be not actionable . it be a uncommon fine thing , that be , " conclude , shak he head , " when you can let a man know what you think of he without pay for it . " " oh , my dear , " say , " you be quite under a mistake about the clergy ; all the best schoolmaster be of the clergy . the schoolmaster who be not clergyman be a very low set of man generally . " " ay , that be , at the ' cademy , " interpose . " to be sure , -- men who have fail in other trade , most likely . now , a clergyman be a gentleman by profession and education ; and besides that , he have the knowledge that will ground a boy , and prepare he for entering on any career with credit . there may be some clergyman who be mere bookman ; but you may depend upon it , be not one of they , -- a man that be wide awake , let I tell you . drop he a hint , and that be enough . you talk of figure , now ; you have only to say to , 'I want my son to be a thorough arithmetician , ' and you may leave the rest to he . " pause a moment , while , some - what reassure as to clerical tutorship , be inwardly rehearse to a imaginary Stell the statement , " I want my son to know ' rethmetic . " " you see , my dear , " continue , " when you get a thoroughly educated man , like , he be at no loss to take up any branch of instruction . when a workman know the use of he tool , he can make a door as well as a window . " " ay , that be true , " say , almost convinced now that the clergy must be the best of schoolmaster . " well , I will tell you what I will do for you , " say , " and I would not do it for everybody . I will see 's father
father - in - law , or drop he a line when I get back to , to say that you wish to place you boy with he son - in - law , and I dare say Stelling will write to you , and send you he term . " " but there be no hurry , be there ? " say ; " for I hope , , you will not let begin at he new school before . he begin at the ' cademy at the Lady - day quarter , and you see what good 's come of it . " " ay , ay , , never brew wi' bad malt upo ' - , else you will have a poor tap , " say , wink and smile at , with the natural pride of a man who have a buxom wife conspicuously he inferior in intellect . " but it be true there be no hurry ; you have hit it there , . " " it might be as well not to defer the arrangement too long , " say , quietly , " for may have proposition from other party , and I know he would not take more than two or three boarder , if so many . if I be you , I think I would enter on the subject with Stelling at once : there be no necessity for send the boy before , but I would be on the safe side , and make sure that nobody forestall you . " " ay , there be summat in that , " say . " Father , " break in , who have steal unperceived to she father 's elbow again , listen with part lip , while she hold she doll topsy - turvy , and crush it be nose against the wood of the chair , -- " father , be it a long way off where be to go ? ' not we ever go to see he ? " " I do not know , my wench , " say the father , tenderly . " ask ; he know . " come round promptly in front of , and say , " how far be it , please , sy ? " " oh , a long , long way off , " that gentleman answer , be of opinion that child , when they be not naughty , should always be speak to jocosely . " you must borrow the seven - leagu boot to get to he . " " that be nonsense ! " say , toss she head haughtily , and turn away , with the tear spring in she eye . she begin to dislike ; it be evident he think she silly and of no consequence . " Hush , ! for shame of you , ask question and chatter , " say she mother . " come and sit down on you little stool , and hold you tongue , do . but , " add , who have she own alarm awaken , " be it so far off as I could not wash he and mmend he ? " " about fifteen mile ; that be all , " say . " you can drive there and back in a day quite comfortably . or -- be a hospitable , pleasant man -- he would be glad to have you stay . " " but it be too far off for the linen , I doubt , " say , sadly . the entrance of supper opportunely adjourn this difficulty , and relieve from the labor of suggest some solution or compromise ,-- a labor which he would otherwise doubtless have undertake ; for , as you perceive , he be a man of very obliging manners . and he have really give himself the trouble of recommending to he friend Tulliver without any positive expectation of a solid , definite advantage result to himself , notwithstand the subtle indication to the contrary which might have misl a too -sagacious observer . for there be nothing more widely mislead than sagacity if it happen to get on a wrong scent ; and sagacity , persuade that man usually act and speak from distinct motive , with a consciously propose end in view , be certain to waste its energie on imaginary game . Plott covetousness and deliberate contrivance , in order to compass a selfish end , be nowhere abundant but in the world of the dramatist : they demand too intense a mental action for many of we fellow - parishioner to be guilty of they . it be easy enough to spoil the life of we neighbor without take so much trouble ; we can do it by lazy acquiescence and lazy omission , by trivial falsity for which we hardly know a reason , by small fraud neutralize by small extravagance , by maladroit flattery , and clumsily improvise insinuation . we live from hand to mouth , most of we , with a small family of immediate desire ; we do little else than snatch a morsel to satisfy the hungry brood , rarely think of seed - corn or the next year 's crop . be a man of business , and not cold toward he own interest , yet even he be more under the influence of small prompting than of far - sigh design . he have no private understanding with the ; on the contrary , he know very little of that and he acquirement , -- not quite enough , perhaps , to warrant so strong a recommendation of he as he have give to he friend . but he believe to be a excellent classic , for have say so , and 's first cousin be a tutor ; which be better ground for the
the belief even than he own immediate observation would have be , for though have receive a tincture of the classic at the great , and have a sense of understanding generally , he comprehension of any particular be not ready . there remain a subtle aroma from he juvenile contact with the " " and the fourth book of the " , " but it have cease to be distinctly recognizable as classical , and be only perceive in the higher finish and force of he auctioneering style . then , be a Oxford man , and the Oxford man be always -- no , no , it be the Cambridge man who be always good mathematician . but a man who have have a university education could teach anything he like ; especially a man like , who have make a speech at a dinner on a political occasion , and have acquit himself so well that it be generally remark , this son - in - law of 's be a sharp fellow . it be to be expect of a man , from the parish of , that he would not omit to do a good turn to a son - in - law of 's , for be one of the most useful and influential man in the parish , and have a good deal of business , which he know how to put into the right hand . like such man , quite apart from any money which might be divert , through they good judgment , from less worthy pocket into he own ; and it would be a satisfaction to he to say to on he return home , " I have secure a good pupil for you son - in - law . " have a large family of daughter ; felt for he ; besides , 's face , with its light curl , have be a familiar object to he over the pew wainscot on a for nearly fifteen year ; it be natural she husband should be a commendable tutor . moreover , know of no other schoolmaster whom he have any ground for recommend in preference ; why , then , should be not recommend ? he friend have ask he for a opinion ; it be always chill , in friendly intercourse , to say you have no opinion to give . and if you deliver a opinion at all , it be mere stupidity not to do it with a air of conviction and well - foun knowledge . you make it you own in utter it , and naturally get fond of it . thus , know no harm of Stelling to begin with , and wish he well , so far as he have any wish at all concern he , have no sooner recommend he than he begin to think with admiration of a man recommend on such high authority , and would soon have gather so warm a interest on the subject , that if have in the end decline to send to , would have think he " friend of the old school " a thoroughly pig - head fellow . if you blame very severely for give a recommendation on such slight grounds , I must say you be rather hard upon he . why should a auctioneer and appraiser thirty year ago , who have as good as forget he free - school , be expect to manifest a delicate scrupulosity which be not always exhibit by gentleman of the learn profession , even in we present advanced stage of morality ? besides , a man with the milk of human kindness in he can scarcely abstain from do a good - natured action , and one can not be good - nature all round . nature herself occasionally quarter a inconvenient parasite on a animal toward whom she have otherwise no ill will . what then ? we admire she care for the parasite . if have shrunk from give a recommendation that be not base on valid evidence , he would not have help Stell to a pay pupil , and that would not have be so well for the reverend gentleman . consider , too , that all the pleasant little dim idea and complacency -- of stand well with , of dispensing advice when he be ask for it , of impress he friend Tulliver with additional respect , of say something , and say it emphatically , with other inappreciably minute ingredient that go along with the warm hearth and the brandy - and - water to make up 's consciousness on this occasion -- would have be a mere blank . be expect it be a heavy disappointment to Maggie that she be not allow to go with she father in the gig when he go to fetch home from the academy ; but the morning be too wet , Tulliver say , for a little girl to go out in she best bonnet . take the opposite view very strongly , and it be a direct consequence of this difference of opinion that when she mother be in the act of brush out the reluctant black crop suddenly rush from under she hand and dip she head in a basin of water stand near , in the vindictive determination that there should be no more chance of curl that day . " , ! " exclaim , sit stout and helpless with the brush on she lap , " what be to become of you if you be so naughty ? I will tell you aunt and you aunt Pullet when they come next week , and they will never love you any more . oh dear , oh dear ! look at you clean pinafore , wet from top to bottom . folk ' ull think it be a judgment on
on I as I have get such a child , -- they will think I have do summat wick . " before this remonstrance be finish , be already out of hearing , make she way toward the great attic that run under the old high - pitch roof , shak the water from she black lock as she run , like a terrier escape from he bath . this attic be 's favorite retreat on a wet day , when the weather be not too cold ; here she fret out all she ill humor , and talk aloud to the worm -eaten floor and the worm -eaten shelf , and the dark rafter festoon with cobweb ; and here she keep a Fetish which she punish for all she misfortune . this be the trunk of a large wooden doll , which once star with the roundest of eye above the reddest of cheek ; but be now entirely deface by a long career of vicarious suffering . three nails drive into the head commemorate as many crisis in 's nine year of earthly struggle ; that luxury of vengeance have be suggest to she by the picture of destroy in the old . the last nail have be drive in with a fiercer stroke than usual , for the on that occasion represent aunt . but immediately afterward have reflecte that if she drive many nail in she would not be so well able to fancy that the head be hurt when she knock it against the wall , nor to comfort it , and make believe to poultice it , when she fury be abate ; for even aunt would be pitiable when she have be hurt very much , and thoroughly humiliate , so as to beg she niece 's pardon . since then she have drive no more nail in , but have soothe herself by alternately grind and beat the wooden head against the rough brick of the great chimney that make two square pillars support the roof . that be what she do this morning on reach the attic , sobb all the while with a passion that expel every other form of consciousness , -- even the memory of the grievance that have cause it . as at last the sob be get quieter , and the grinding less fierce , a sudden beam of sunshine , fall through the wire lattice across the worm -eaten shelf , make she throw away the and run to the window . the sun be really break out ; the sound of the mill seem cheerful again ; the granary door be open ; and there be Yap , the queer white - and - brown terrier , with one ear turn back , trot about and sniff vaguly , as if he be in search of a companion . it be irresistible . toss she hair back and run downstairs , seize she bonnet without put it on , pee , and then dash along the passage lest she should encounter she mother , and be quickly out in the yard , whir round like a Pythoness , and singe as she whir , " Yap , , 's come home ! " while dance and bark round she , as much as to say , if there be any noise want he be the dog for it . " Hegh , hegh , ! you will make yourself giddy , a ' tumble down I ' the dirt , " say , the head miller , a tall , broad - shouldere man of forty , black - eyed and black - hair , subdue by a general mealiness , like a auricula . pause in she whirling and say , stagger a little , " oh no , it do not make I giddy , Luke ; may I go into the mill with you ? " love to linger in the great spaces of the mill , and often come out with she black hair powder to a soft whiteness that make she dark eye flash out with new fire . the resolute din , the unresting motion of the great stone , give she a dim , delicious awe as at the presence of a uncontrollable force ; the meal forever pour , pour ; the fine white powder soften all surface , and make the very spidernet look like a faery lace - work ; the sweet , pure scent of the meal , -- all help to make feel that the mill be a little world apart from she outside every - day life . the spider be especially a subject of speculation with she . she wonder if they have any relative outside the mill , for in that case there must be a painful difficulty in they family intercourse , -- a fat and floury spider , accustom to take he fly well dust with meal , must suffer a little at a cousin 's table where the fly be _au naturel , and the lady spider must be mutually shocked at each other 's appearance . but the part of the mill she like best be the topmost story , -- the corn -hutch , where there be the great heap of grain , which she could sit on and slide down continually . she be in the habit of take this recreation as she converse with , to whom she be very communicative , wish he to think well of she understanding , as she father do . perhaps she feel it necessary to recover she position with he on the present occasion for , as she sit slide on the heap of grain near which he be busy himself , she say , at that shrill pitch which be requisite in mill - society ,-- " I think you never read any book
book but the , do you , ? " " Nay , , a ' not much of ' that , " say , with great frankness . " I be no reader , I be not . " " but if I lent you one of my book , Luke ? I have not get any _very pretty book that would be easy for you to read ; but there be ' 's of , ' -- that would tell you all about the different sort of people in the world , and if you do not understand the reading , the picture would help you ; they show the look and way of the people , and what they do . there be the , very fat , and smoke , you know , and one sit on a barrel . " " Nay , , I 'n no opinion o' . there be not much good I ' knowin ' about _they _. " " but they be we fellow - creature , Luke ; we ought to know about we fellow - creature . " " not much of ' fellow -creatur , I think , miss ; all I know -- my old master , as war a knowin ' man , use to say , say he , ' if e'er I sow my wheat wi'out brinin ' , I be a , ' say he ; a ' that war as much as to say as a war a fool , or next door . Nay , nay , I be not goin ' to bother mysen about . there be fools enoo , a ' rogue enoo , wi'out lookin ' I ' book for th'ey . " " oh , well , " say , rather foil by 's unexpectedly decide view about , " perhaps you would like ' animate 's better ; that be not Dutchmen , you know , but elephant and kangaroo , and the civet-cat , and the sunfish , and a bird sit on its tail , -- I forget its name . there be country full of those creature , instead of horse and cow , you know . should not you like to know about they , ? " " Nay , , I and get to keep count of ' the flour a ' corn ; I can not do wi' knowin ' so many thing besides my work . that be what bring folk to the gallow ,-- knowin ' everything but what they and get to get they bread by . a ' they be mostly lie , I think , what be print I ' the book : they print sheet be , anyhow , as the man cry I ' the street . " " why , you be like my brother , , " say , wish to turn the conversation agreeably ; " be not fond of reading . I love so dearly , Luke , -- better than anybody else in the world . when he grow up I shall keep he house , and we shall always live together . I can tell he everything he do not know . but I think 's clever , for all he do not like book ; he make beautiful whipcord and rabbit -pen . " " ah , " say , " but he will be fine a ' vex , as the rabbit be all dead . " " dead ! " scream , jump up from she slide seat on the corn . " oh dear , ! what ! the lop - eare one , and the spot doe that spend all he money to buy ? " " as dead as mole , " say , fetch he comparison from the unmistakable corpse nail to the stable wall . " oh dear , , " say , in a piteous tone , while the big tear roll down she cheek ; " tell I to take care of th'ey , and I forgot . what _shall I do ? " " well , you see , , they be in that far tool - house , a ' it be nobody 's business to see to th'ey . I reckon tell to feed th'ey , but there be no countin ' on ; _he be a offal creatur as iver come about the primise , he be . he remember nothing but he own inside -- an' I wish it 'uld gripe he . " " oh , , tell I to be sure and remember the rabbit every day ; but how could I , when they do not come into my head , you know ? oh , he will be so angry with I , I know he will , and so sorry about he rabbit , and so be I sorry . oh , what _shall_ I do ? " " do not you fret , , " say , soothingly ; " they be nash thing , they lop - eare rabbit ; they would happen ha ' die , if they have be feed . thing out of ' natur niver thrive : do not like th'ey . he make the rabbit 's ears to lie back , a ' it be nothin ' but contrairiness to make them he down like a mastiff dog 's . master Tom 's ull know better nor buy such thing another time . do not you fret , . will you come along home wi' I , and see my wife ? I be a - goin ' this minute . " the invitation offer a agreeable distraction to 's grief , and she tear gradually subsid as she trot along by 's side to he pleasant cottage , which stand with its apple and pear tree , and with
with the add dignity of a lean - to pigsty , at the other end of the field . , 's wife , be a decidely agreeable acquaintance . she exhibit she hospitality in bread and treacle , and possess various work of art . actually forget that she have any special cause of sadness this morning , as she stand on a chair to look at a remarkable series of picture represent the in the costume of , except that , as might have be expect from he defective moral character , he have not , like that accomplished hero , the taste and strength of mind to dispense with a wig . but the indefinable weight the dead rabbit have leave on she mind cause she to feel more than usual pity for the career of this weak young man , particularly when she look at the picture where he lean against a tree with a flaccid appearance , he knee - breech unbuttoned and he wig awry , while the swine apparently of some foreign breed , seem to insult he by they good spirit over they feast of husk . " I be very glad he father take he back again , be not you , ? " she say . " for he be very sorry , you know , and would not do wrong again . " " Eh , , " say , " he would be no great shakes , I doubt , let 's feyther do what he would for he . " that be a painful thought to , and she wish much that the subsequent history of the young man have not be leave a blank . be to arrive early in the afternoon , and there be another flutter heart besides 's when it be late enough for the sound of the gig - wheel to be expect ; for if have a strong feeling , it be fondness for she boy . at last the sound come , -- that quick light bowling of the gig - wheel , -- and in spite of the wind , which be blow the cloud about , and be not likely to respect 's curl and cap - string , she come outside the door , and even hold she hand on 's offending head , forget all the grief of the morning . " there he be , my sweet lad ! but , ha ' mercy ! he be get never a collar on ; it be be lose on the road , I will be bound , and spoil the set . " stand with she arm open ; jump first on one leg and then on the other ; while descend from the gig , and say , with masculine reticence as to the tender emotion , " Hallo ! Yap -- what ! be you there ? " nevertheless he submit to be kiss willingly enough , though hang on he neck in rather a strangling fashion , while he blue - gray eye wander toward the croft and the lambs and the river , where he promise himself that he would begin to fish the first thing to - morrow morning . he be one of those lad that grow everywhere in , and at twelve or thirteen year of age look as much alike as gosling , -- a lad with light - brown hair , cheek of cream and rose , full lip , indeterminate nose and eyebrow ,-- a physiognomy in which it seem impossible to discern anything but the generic character to boyhood ; as different as possible from poor 's phiz , which seem to have mould and color with the most decided intention . but that same nature have the deep cunning which hide itself under the appearance of openness , so that simple people think they can see through she quite well , and all the while she be secretly prepare a refutation of they confident prophecy . under these average boyish physiognomy that she seem to turn off by the gross , she conceal some of she most rigid , inflexible purpose , some of she most unmodifiable character ; and the dark - eyed , demonstrative , rebellious girl may after all turn out to be a passive be compare with this pink - and - white bit of masculinity with the indeterminate featur . " , " say , confidentially , take she into a corner , as soon as he mother be go out to examine he box and the warm parlor have take off the chill he have feel from the long drive , " you do not know what I have get in _my pocket , " nodd he head up and down as a means of rouse she sense of mystery . " no , " say . " how stodgy they look , ! be it marl ( marble ) or cobnut ? " 's heart sank a little , because always say it be " no good " play with _her_ at those game , she play so badly . " ! no ; I have swop all my marl with the little fellow , and cobnut be no fun , you silly , only when the nut be green . but see here ! " he draw something half out of he right - hand pocket . " what be it ? " say , in a whisper . " I can see nothing but a bit of yellow . " " why , it be -- a -- new -- guess , ! " " oh , I _can not guess , , " say , impatiently . " do not be a spitfire , else I will not tell you , " say , thrust he hand back into he pocket and look determined . "
" no , , " say , imploringly , lay hold of the arm that be hold stifinitely in the pocket . " I be not cross , ; it be only because I can not bear guess . _Please be good to I . " 's arm slowly relaxed , and he say , " well , then , it be a new fish - line -- two new un , -- one for you , , all to yourself . I would not go halve in the toffee and gingerbread on purpose to save the money ; and and fight with I because I would not . and here 's hook ; see here -- I say , _will not we go and fish to - morrow down by the ? and you shall catch you own fish , and put the worm on , and everything ; will not it be fun ? " 's answer be to throw she arm round 's neck and hug he , and hold she cheek against he without speaking , while he slowly unwound some of the line , say , after a pause ,-- " be not I a good brother , now , to buy you a line all to yourself ? you know , I need not have buy it , if I have not like . " " yes , very , very good -- I _do_ love you , . " have put the line back in he pocket , and be look at the hook one by one , before he speak again . " and the fellow fight I , because I would not give in about the toffee . " " oh , dear ! I wish they would not fight at you school , . do not it hurt you ? " " hurt I ? no , " say , put up the hook again , take out a large pocket - knife , and slowly open the largest blade , which he look at meditatively as he rub he finger along it . then he add ,-- " I give a black eye , I know ; that be what he get by want to leather _me ;_ I be not go to go halve because anybody leather I . " " oh , how brave you be , ! I think you be like . if there come a lion roaring at I , I think you would fight he , would not you , ? " " how can a lion come roar at you , you silly thing ? there be no lion , only in the show . " " no ; but if we be in the lion country -- I mean in , where it be very hot ; the lion eat people there . I can show it you in the book where I read it . " " well , I should get a gun and shoot he . " " but if you have not get a gun , -- we might have go out , you know , not think , just as we go fishing ; and then a great lion might run toward we roaring , and we could not get away from he . what should you do , ? " pause , and at last turn away contemptuously , say , " but the lion _is not come . what be the use of talk ? " " but I like to fancy how it would be , " say , follow he . " just think what you would do , . " " oh , do not bother , ! you be such a silly . I shall go and see my rabbit . " 's heart begin to flutter with fear . she da not tell the sad truth at once , but she walk after in trembl silence as he go out , think how she could tell he the news so as to soften at once he sorrow and he anger ; for dread 's anger of all thing ; it be quite a different anger from she own . " , " she say , timidly , when they be out of door , " how much money do you give for you rabbit ? " " two half - crown and a sixpence , " say , promptly . " I think I have get a great deal more than that in my steel purse upstairs . I will ask mother to give it you . " " what for ? " say . " I do not want _your_ money , you silly thing . I have get a great deal more money than you , because I be a boy . I always have half - sovereign and sovereign for my box because I shall be a man , and you only have five - shilling piece , because you be only a girl . " " well , but , -- if mother would let I give you two half - crown and a sixpence out of my purse to put into you pocket and spend , you know , and buy some more rabbit with it ? " " more rabbit ? I do not want any more . " " oh , but , , they be all dead . " stop immediately in he walk and turn round toward . " you forget to feed th'ey , then , and forgot ? " he say , he color heighten for a moment , but soon subside . " I will pitch into . I will have he turn away . and I do not love you , . you sha ' not go fish with I to - morrow . I tell you to go and see the rabbit every day . "
" he walk on again . " yes , but I forget -- and I could not help it , indeed , . I be so very sorry , " say , while the tear rush fast . " you be a naughty girl , " say , severely , " and I be sorry I buy you the fish - line . I do not love you . " " oh , , it be very cruel , " sob . " I would forgive you , if _you forget anything -- I would not mind what you do -- I would forgive you and love you . " " yes , you be silly ; but I never _do_ forget thing , _I_ do not . " " oh , please forgive I , ; my heart will break , " say , shak with sob , cling to 's arm , and lay she wet cheek on he shoulder . shook she off , and stop again , say in a peremptory tone , " now , , you just listen . be not I a good brother to you ? " " ye - ye - es , " sob , she ching rise and fall convulsedly . " do not I think about you fish - line all this quarter , and mean to buy it , and save my money of ' purpose , and would not go halve in the toffee , and fight I because I would not ? " " ye -ye - es -- and I -- lo -lo - love you so , . " " but you be a naughty girl . last holiday you lick the paint off my lozenge - box , and the holiday before that you let the boat drag my fish - line down when I would set you to watch it , and you push you head through my kite , all for nothing . " " but I do not mean , " say ; " I could not help it . " " yes , you could , " say , " if you would mind what you be do . and you be a naughty girl , and you sha ' not go fish with I to - morrow . " with this terrible conclusion , run away from toward the mill , mean to greet Luke there , and complain to he of . stand motionless , except from she sob , for a minute or two ; then she turn round and run into the house , and up to she attic , where she sit on the floor and lay she head against the worm -eaten shelf , with a crush sense of misery . be come home , and she have think how happy she should be ; and now he be cruel to she . what use be anything if do not love she ? oh , he be very cruel ! have not she want to give he the money , and say how very sorry she be ? she know she be naughty to she mother , but she have never be naughty to -- have never _mean to be naughty to he . " oh , he be cruel ! " sob aloud , find a wretched pleasure in the hollow resonance that come through the long empty space of the attic . she never think of beating or grind she Fetish ; she be too miserable to be angry . these bitter sorrow of childhood ! when sorrow be all new and strange , when hope have not yet get wing to fly beyond the day and week , and the space from summer to summer seem measureless . soon think she have be hour in the attic , and it must be tea - time , and they be all have they tea , and not think of she . well , then , she would stay up there and starve herself , -- hide herself behind the tub , and stay there all night , -- and then they would all be frightened , and would be sorry . thus think in the pride of she heart , as she crept behind the tub ; but presently she begin to cry again at the idea that they do not mind she be there . if she go down again to now -- would he forgive she ? perhaps she father would be there , and he would take she part . but then she want to forgive she because he love she , not because he father tell he . no , she would never go down if do not come to fetch she . this resolution last in great intensity for five dark minute behind the tub ; but then the need of be love -- the strongest need in poor 's nature -- begin to wrestle with she pride , and soon throw it . she crept from behind she tub into the twilight of the long attic , but just then she hear a quick foot - step on the stair . have be too much interested in he talk with , in go the round of the premise , walk in and out where he please , and whittl stick without any particular reason ,-- except that he do not whitle stick at school , -- to think of and the effect he anger have produce on she . he mean to punish she , and that business have be perform , he occupy himself with other matter , like a practical person . but when he have be call in to tea , he father say , " why , where be the little wench ? " and , almost at the same moment , say , " where be you little sister ?
? " -- both of they have suppose that and have be together all the afternoon . " I do not know , " say . he do not want to " tell " of , though he be angry with she ; for be a lad of honor . " what ! have not she be play with you all this while ? " say the father . " she have be think o' nothing but you come home . " " I have not see she this two hour , " say , commence on the plumcake . " goodness heart ; she have get drownded ! " exclaim , rise from she seat and run to the window . " how could you let she do so ? " she add , as become a fearful woman , accuse she do not know whom of she do not know what . " Nay , nay , she be none drownd , " say . " you have be naughty to she , I doubt , ? " " I be sure I have not , father , " say , indignantly . " I think she be in the house . " " perhaps up in that attic , " say , " a -singing and talk to herself , and forget all about meal - time . " " you go and fetch she down , , " say , rather sharply , -- he perspicacity or he fatherly fondness for make he suspect that the lad have be hard upon " the little un , " else she would never have leave he side . " and be good to she , do you hear ? else I will let you know better . " never disobey he father , for be a peremptory man , and , as he say , would never let anybody get hold of he whip - hand ; but he go out rather sullenly , carry he piece of plumcake , and not intend to reprieve 's punishment , which be no more than she deserv . be only thirteen , and have no decided view in grammar and arithmetic , regard they for the most part as open question , but he be particularly clear and positive on one point , -- namely , that he would punish everybody who deserv it . why , he would not have minde be punish himself if he deserv it ; but , then , he never _did_ deserve it . it be 's step , then , that hear on the stair , when she need of love have triumph over she pride , and she be go down with she swollen eye and dishevell hair to beg for pity . at least she father would streak she head and say , " never mind , my wench . " it be a wonderful subduer , this need of love , -- this hunger of the heart , -- as peremptory as that other hunger by which force we to submit to the yoke , and change the face of the world . but she know 's step , and she heart begin to beat violently with the sudden shock of hope . he only stand still at the top of the stair and say , " , you be to come down . " but she rush to he and cling round he neck , sobb , " oh , , please forgive I -- I can not bear it -- I will always be good -- always remember thing -- do love I -- please , dear ! " we learn to restrain ourselves as we get older . we keep apart when we have quarrell , express ourselves in well - breed phrase , and in this way preserve a dignified alienation , show much firmness on one side , and swallow much grief on the other . we no longer approximate in we behavior to the mere impulsiveness of the lower animal , but conduct ourselves in every respect like member of a highly civilized society . and be still very much like young animal , and so she could rub she cheek against he , and kiss he ear in a random sobb way ; and there be tender fibre in the lad that have be use to answer to 's fondling , so that he behave with a weakness quite inconsistent with he resolution to punish she as much as she deserv . he actually begin to kiss she in return , and say ,-- " do not cry , then , ; here , eat a bit of ' cake . " 's sob begin to subside , and she put out she mouth for the cake and bit a piece ; and then bit a piece , just for company , and they eat together and rub each other 's cheek and brows and nos together , while they eat , with a humiliate resemblance to two friendly pony . " come along , , and have tea , " say at last , when there be no more cake except what be down - stair . so end the sorrow of this day , and the next morning be trot with she own fishing - rod in one hand and a handle of the basket in the other , step always , by a peculiar gift , in the muddiest place , and look darkly radiant from under she beaver - bonnet because be good to she . she have tell , however , that she should like he to put the worm on the hook for she , although she accept he word when he assure she that worm could not feel ( it be 's private opinion that it do not much matter if they do ) . he know
know all about worm , and fish , and those thing ; and what bird be mischievous , and how padlock open , and which way the handle of the gate be to be lift . think this sort of knowledge be very wonderful , -- much more difficult than remember what be in the book ; and she be rather in awe of 's superiority , for he be the only person who call she knowledge " stuff , " and do not feel surprised at she cleverness . , indeed , be of opinion that be a silly little thing ; all girl be silly , -- they could not throw a stone so as to hit anything , could not do anything with a pocket - knife , and be frightened at frog . , he be very fond of he sister , and mean always to take care of she , make she he housekeeper , and punish she when she do wrong . they be on they way to the , -- that wonderful pool , which the flood have make a long while ago . no one know how deep it be ; and it be mysterious , too , that it should be almost a perfect round , fram in with willows and tall reed , so that the water be only to be see when you get close to the brink . the sight of the old favorite spot always heighten 's good humor , and he speak to in the most amicable whisper , as he open the precious basket and prepare they tackle . he throw she line for she , and put the rod into she hand . think it probable that the small fish would come to she hook , and the large one to 's . but she have forget all about the fish , and be look dreamily at the glassy water , when say , in a loud whisper , " look , look , ! " and come run to prevent she from snatch she line away . be frightene lest she have be do something wrong , as usual , but presently draw out she line and bring a large tench bounce on the grass . be excited . " of , you little duck ! the basket . " be not conscious of unusual merit , but it be enough that call she Magsie , and be pleased with she . there be nothing to mar she delight in the whisper and the dreamy silence , when she listen to the light dripp sound of the rise fish , and the gentle rustling , as if the willows and the reed and the water have they happy whispering also . think it would make a very nice heaven to sit by the pool in that way , and never be scold . she never know she have a bite till tell she ; but she like fishing very much . it be one of they happy morning . they trott along and sit down together , with no thought that life would ever change much for they ; they would only get bigger and not go to school , and it would always be like the holiday ; they would always live together and be fond of each other . and the mill with its booming ; the great chestnut - tree under which they play at house ; they own little river , the , where the bank seem like home , and be always see the water - rat , while gather the purple plumy top of the reed , which she forget and drop afterward ; above all , the great Floss , along which they wander with a sense of travel , to see the rushing spring - tide , the awful eagle , come up like a hungry monster , or to see the great Ash which have once wail and groan like a man , these thing would always be just the same to they . think people be at a disadvantage who live on any other spot of the globe ; and , when she read about pass " the river over which there be no bridge , " always see the Floss between the green pasture by the great Ash . life do change for and ; and yet they be not wrong in believe that the thought and love of these first year would always make part of they life . we could never have love the earth so well if we have have no childhood in it , -- if it be not the earth where the same flower come up again every spring that we use to gather with we tiny finger as we sit lispe to ourselves on the grass ; the same hip and haw on the autumn 's hedgerow ; the same redbreast that we use to call " 's bird , " because they do no harm to the precious crop . what novelty be worth that sweet monotony where everything be know , and _loved_ because it be know ? the wood I walk in on this mild day , with the young yellow - brown foliage of the oak between I and the blue sky , the white star-flower and the blue - eye speedwell and the ground ivy at my foot , what grove of tropic palm , what strange fern or splendo broad - petall blossom , could ever thrill such deep and delicate fibre within I as this home scene ? these familiar flower , these well - remembe bird - note , this sky , with its fitful brightness , these furrowed and grassy field , each with a sort of personality give to it by the capricious hedgerow , -- such thing as these be the mother - tongue of we
we imagination , the language that be laden with all the subtle , inextricable associations the fleeting hour of we childhood leave behind they . we delight in the sunshine on the deep - blad grass to - day might be no more than the faint perception of wearied soul , if it be not for the sunshine and the grass in the far - off year which still live in we , and transform we perception into love . the and be come it be week , and 's cheesecake be more exquisitely light than usual . " a puff of ' wind 'uld make them blow about like feather , " the housemaid say , feel proud to live under a mistress who could make such pastry ; so that no season or circumstance could have be more propitious for a family party , even if it have not be advisable to consult sister Glegg and sister Pullet about 's go to school . " I ' as lief not invite sister Deane this time , " say , " for she be as jealous and have as can be , and be allays try to make the worst of ' my poor child to they aunt and uncles . " " yes , yes , " say , " ask she to come . I never hardly get a bit of ' talk with now ; we have not have he this six month . what be it matter what she say ? my child need be behold to nobody . " " that be what you allay say , ; but I be sure there 's nobody of ' you side , neither aunt nor uncle , to leave th'ey so much as a five - pound note for a leggicy . and there be sister , and sister Pullet too , save money unknown , for they put by all they own interest and butter - money too ; they husband buy them everything . " be a mild woman , but even a sheep will face about a little when she have lamb . " Tchuh ! " say . " it take a big loaf when there be many to breakfast . what signify you sister 's bit of ' money when they have get half - a - dozen nevvie and niece to divide it among ? and you sister will not get them to leave all to one , I reckon , and make the country cry shame on th'ey when they be dead ? " " I do not know what she will not get them to do , " say , " for my child be so awk'ard wi' they aunt and uncles . 's ten time naughtier when they come than she be other day , and do not like th'ey , bless he !-- though it be more nat'ral in a boy than a gell . and there be 's such a good child , -- you may set she on a stool , and there she'llsit for a hour together , and never offer to get off . I can not help love the child as if she be my own ; and I be sure she be more like _my child than 's , for she would allay a very poor color for one of we family , sister have . " " well , well , if you be fond of ' the child , ask she father and mother to bring she with 'em . and will not you ask they aunt and uncle Moss too , and some og _their_ child ? " " oh , dear , , why , there would be eight people besides the child , and I must put two more leave I ' the table , besides reach down more of ' the dinner - service ; and you know as well as I do as _my sister and _your_ sister do not suit well together . " " well , well , do as you like , , " say , take up he hat and walk out to the mill . few wife be more submissive than on all point unconnecte with she family relation ; but she have be a , and the Dodson be a very respectable family indeed , -- as much look up to as any in they own parish , or the next to it . the have always be think to hold up they head very high , and no one be surprise the two eldest have marry so well , -- not at a early age , for that be not the practice of the family . there be particular way of do everything in that family : particular way of bleach the linen , of make the cowslip wine , cure the ham , and keep the bottled gooseberry ; so that no daughter of that house could be indifferent to the privilege of have be bear a Dodson , rather than a or a Watson . funeral be always conduct with peculiar propriety in the family : the hat - band be never of a blue shade , the glove never split at the thumb , everybody be a mourner who ought to be , and there be always scarfs for the bearer . when one of the family be in trouble or sickness , all the rest go to visit the unfortunate member , usually at the same time , and do not shrink from utter the most disagreeable truth that correct family fee dictate ; if the illness or trouble be the sufferer 's own fault , it be not in the practice of the family to shrink from say so . in short , there be in this family a peculiar tradition as to what be the right thing in household management and
and social demeanor , and the only bitter circumstance attend this superiority be a painful inability to approve the condiment or the conduct of family ungoverned by the tradition . a female , when in " strange house , " always eat dry bread with she tea , and decline any sort of preserve , have no confidence in the butter , and think that the preserve have probably begin to ferment from want of due sugar and boiling . there be some Dodson less like the family than other , that be admit ; but in so far as they be " kin , " they be of necessity better than those who be " no kin . " and it be remarkable that while no individual be satisfied with any other individual Dodson , each be satisfied , not only with he or she self , but with the collectively . the feeblest member of a family -- the one who have the least character -- be often the merest epitome of the family habit and tradition ; and be a thorough Dodson , though a mild one , as small - beer , so long as it be anything , be only describable as very weak ale : and though she have groane a little in she youth under the yoke of she elder sister , and still she occasional tear at they sisterly reproach , it be not in to be a innovator on the family idea . she be thankful to have be a Dodson , and to have one child who take after she own family , at least in he feature and complexion , in liking salt and in eat bean , which a never do . in other respects the true be partly latent in , and he be as far from appreciate he " kin " on the mother 's side as herself , generally abscond for the day with a large supply of the most portable food , when he receive timely warning that he aunt and uncle be come , -- a moral symptom from which he aunt deduce the gloomiest view of he future . it be rather hard on that always abscond without let she into the secret , but the weaker sex be acknowledge to be serious _impedimenta_ in casis of flight . on , the day before the aunt and uncle be come , there be such various and suggestive scent , as of plumcake in the oven and jelly in the hot state , mingl with the aroma of gravy , that it be impossible to feel altogether gloomy : there be hope in the air . and make several inroad into the kitchen , and , like other marauder , be induce to keep aloon for a time only by be allow to carry away a sufficient load of booty . " , " say , as they sit on the bough of the elder - tree , eat they jam - puffs , " shall you run away to - morrow ? " " no , " say , slowly , when he have finish he puff , and be ey the third , which be to be divide between they , -- " no , I sha ' not . " " why , ? because 's come ? " " no , " say , open he pocket - knife and hold it over the puff , with he head on one side in a dubitative manner . ( it be a difficult problem to divide that very irregular polygon into two equal part . ) " what do _I_ care about ? she be only a girl ,-- _she can not play at bandy . " " be it the tipsy - cake , then ? " say , exert she hypothetic power , while she lean forward toward with she eye fix on the hovering knife . " no , you silly , that will be good the day after . it be the pudden . I know what the pudden 's to be ,-- apricot roll - up -- of my button ! " with this interjection , the knife descend on the puff , and it be in two , but the result be not satisfactory to , for he still eye the halve doubtfully . at last he say ,-- " shut you eye , . " " what for ? " " you never mind what for . shut th'ey when I tell you . " obey . " now , which will you have , , -- right hand or leave ? " " I will have that with the jam run out , " say , keep she eye shut to please . " why , you do not like that , you silly . you may have it if it come to you fair , but I sha ' not give it you without . right or leave , -- you choose , now . - a - a ! " say , in a tone of exasperation , as pee . " you keep you eye shut , now , else you sha ' not have any . " 's power of sacrifice do not extend so far ; indeed , I fear she car less that should enjoy the utmost possible amount of puff , than that he should be pleased with she for give he the best bit . so she shut she eye quite close , till tell she to " say which , " and then she say , " leave hand . " " you have get it , " say , in rather a bitter tone . " what ! the bit with the jam run out ? " " no ; here , take it , " say , firmly , hand , decidedly
decidedly the best piece to . " oh , please , , have it ; I do not mind -- I like the other ; please take this . " " no , I sha ' not , " say , almost crossly , begin on he own inferior piece . , think it be no use to contmend further , begin too , and eat up she half puff with considerable relish as well as rapidity . but have finish first , and have to look on while eat she last morsel or two , feel in himself a capacity for more . do not know be look at she ; she be seesaw on the elder - bough , lose to almost everything but a vague sense of jam and idleness . " oh , you greedy thing ! " say , when she have swallow the last morsel . he be conscious of have act very fairly , and think she ought to have consider this , and make up to he for it . he would have refuse a bit of hers beforehand , but one be naturally at a different point of view before and after one be own share of puff be swallow . turn quite pale . " oh , , why do not you ask I ? " " I be not go to ask you for a bit , you greedy . you might have think of it without , when you know I give you the best bit . " " but I want you to have it ; you know I do , " say , in a injured tone . " yes , but I be not go to do what be not fair , like Spouncer . he always take the best bit , if you do not punch he for it ; and if you choose the best with you eye shut , he change he hand . but if I go halve , I will go th'ey fair ; only I would not be a greedy . " with this cutting innuendo , jump down from he bough , and throw a stone with a " hoigh ! " as a friendly attention to , who have also be look on while the eatables vanish , with a agitation of he ear and feeling which could hardly have be without bitterness . yet the excellent dog accept 's attention with as much alacrity as if he have be treat quite generously . but , gift with that superior power of misery which distinguish the human being , and place he at a proud distance from the most melancholy chimpanzee , sit still on she bough , and give herself up to the keen sense of unmerited reproach . she would have give the world not to have eat all she puff , and to have save some of it for . not but that the puff be very nice , for 's palate be not at all obtuse , but she would have go without it many time over , sooner than should call she greedy and be cross with she . and he have say he would not have it , and she eat it without think ; how could she help it ? the tear flow so plentifully that see nothing around she for the next ten minute ; but by that time resentment begin to give way to the desire of reconciliation , and she jump from she bough to look for . he be no longer in the paddock behind the rickyard ; where be he likely to be gone , and with he ? run to the high bank against the great holly - tree , where she could see far away toward the Floss . there be ; but she heart sank again as she see how far off he be on he way to the great river , and that he have another companion besides Yap ,-- naughty , whose official , if not natural , function of frightening the bird be just now at a standstill . feel sure that be wick , without very distinctly know why ; unless it be because 's mother be a dreadfully large fat woman , who live at a queer round house down the river ; and once , when and have wander thither , there rush out a brindle dog that would not stop barking ; and when 's mother come out after it , and scream above the barking to tell they not to be frightene , think she be scold they fiercely , and she heart beat with terror . think it very likely that the round house have snake on the floor , and bat in the bedroom ; for she have see take off he cap to show a little snake that be inside it , and another time he have a handful of young bat : altogether , he be a irregular character , perhaps even slightly diabolical , judge from he intimacy with snake and bat ; and to cry all , when have for a companion , he do not mind about , and would never let she go with he . it must be own that be fond of 's company . how could it be otherwise ? know , directly he see a bird 's egg , whether it be a swallow 's , or a tomtit 's , or a yellow - hammer 's ; he find out all the wasp ' nests , and could set all sort of trap ; he could climb the tree like a squirrel , and have quite a magical power of detecting hedgehog and stoat ; and he have courage to do thing that be rather naughty , such as make gap in the hedgerow , throw stone after the sheep , and
and kill a cat that be wander _incognito _. such quality in a inferior , who could always be treat with authority in spite of he superior knowingness , have necessarily a fatal fascination for ; and every holiday - time Maggie be sure to have day of grief because he have go off with well ! there be no hope for it ; he be go now , and could think of no comfort but to sit down by the hollow , or wander by the hedgerow , and fancy it be all different , refashion she little world into just what she should like it to be . 's be a troublous life , and this be the form in which she take she opium . meanwhile , forget all about and the sting of reproach which he have leave in she heart , be hurrie along with , whom he have meet accidentally , to the scene of a great rat - catch in a neighbor barn . know all about this particular affair , and speak of the sport with a enthusiasm which no one who be not either divest of all manly feeling , or pitiably ignorant of rat - catching , can fail to imagine . for a person suspect of preternatural wickedness , be really not so very villanous - look ; there be even something agreeable in he snub -nose face , with its close - curled border of red hair . but then he trousers be always roll up at the knee , for the convenience of wading on the slightest notice ; and he virtue , suppose it to exist , be undeniably " virtue in rag , " which , on the authority even of bilious philosopher , who think all well - dress merit overpaid , be notoriously likely to remain unrecognized ( perhaps because it be see so seldom ) . " I know the chap as own the ferret , " say , in a hoarse treble voice , as he shuffle along , keep he blue eye fix on the river , like a amphibious animal who foresee occasion for darting in . " he live up the at 's , he do . he be the biggest rot - catcher anywhere , he be . I would sooner , be a rot - catcher nor anything , I would . the mole be nothing to the rot . but Lors ! you mun ha ' ferret . dog be no good . why , there be that dog , now ! " continue , point with a air of disgust toward , " he be no more good wi' a rot nor nothin ' . I see it myself , I do , at the rot -catchin ' I ' you feyther 's barn . " Yap , feel the withering influence of this scorn , tuck he tail in and shrank close to 's leg , who feel a little hurt for he , but have not the superhuman courage to seem behindhand with in contempt for a dog who make so poor a figure . " no , no , " he say , " Yap 's no good at sport . I will have regular good dog for rat and everything , when I have do school . " " Hev ferret , , " say , eagerly , -- " they white ferret wi's pink eye ; Lor , you might catch you own rot , a ' you might put a rot in a cage wi' a ferret , a ' see 'em fight , you might . that be what I would do , I know , a ' it 'uld be better fun a'most nor seein ' two chap fight , -- if it be not them chaps as sell cake a ' orang at the fair , as the thing fly out of ' they basket , a ' some of ' the cake be smashed -- but they taste just as good , " add , by way of note or addendum , after a moment 's pause . " but , I say , , " say , in a tone of deliberation , " ferret be nasty bite thing , -- they will bite a fellow without be set on . " " Lor ! why that be the beauty on th'ey . if a chap lay hold of ' you ferret , he will not be long before he hollow out a good un , _he will not . " at this moment a strik incident make the boy pause suddenly in they walk . it be the plunging of some small body in the water from among the neighbor bulrush ; if it be not a water-rat , intimate that he be ready to undergo the most unpleasant consequence . " Hoigh ! Yap ,-- hoigh ! there he be , " say , clapp he hand , as the little black snout make its arrowy course to the opposite bank . " seize he , lad ! seize he ! " agitate he ear and wrinkle he brows , but decline to plunge , try whether bark would not answer the purpose just as well . " ugh ! you coward ! " say , and kick he over , feel humiliate as a sportsman to possess so poor -spirit a animal . abstain from remark and pass on , choose , however , to walk in the shallow edge of the overflow river by way of change . " he be none so full now , the Floss be not , " say , as he kick the water up before he , with a agreeable sense of be insolent to it . " why , last ' ear , the meadow be all one shoot of ' water ,
, they be . " " ay , but , " say , whose mind be prone to see a opposition between statements that be really accordant , -- " but there be a big flood once , when the be make . _I_ know there be , ' cause father say so . and the sheep and cow all drown , and the boat go all over the field ever such a way . " " _I do not care about a flood comin ' , " say ; " I do not mind the water , no more nor the land . I would swim , _I_ would . " " ah , but if you get nothing to eat for ever so long ? " say , he imagination become quite active under the stimulus of that dread . " when I be a man , I shall make a boat with a wooden house on the top of it , like 's ark , and keep plenty to eat in it , -- rabbit and thing , -- all ready . and then if the flood come , you know , , I should not mind . and I would take you in , if I see you swimm , " he add , in the tone of a benevolent patron . " I be not fright , " say , to whom hunger do not appear so appalling . " but I would get in a ' knock the rabbit on th 's head when you want to eat th'ey . " " ah , and I should have halfpence , and we would play at head - and - tail , " say , not contemplate the possibility that this recreation might have fewer charms for he mature age . " I would divide fair to begin with , and then we would see who have win . " " I have get a halfpenny of ' my own , " say , proudly , come out of the water and toss he halfpenny in the air . " Yead or tails ? " " tails , " say , instantly fire with the desire to win . " it be yead , " say , hastily , snatch up the halfpenny as it fall . " it be not , " say , loudly and peremptorily . " you give I the halfpenny ; I have win it fair . " " I sha ' not , " say , hold it tight in he pocket . " then I will make you ; see if I do not , " say . " yes , I can . " " you can not make I do nothing , you can not , " say . " no , you can not . " " I be master . " " I do not care for you . " " but I will make you care , you cheat , " say , collar and shake he . " you get out wi' you , " say , give a kick . 's blood be thoroughly up : he go at with a lunge and throw he down , but seize hold and keep it like a cat , and pull down after he . they struggle fiercely on the ground for a moment or two , till , pin down by the shoulders , think he have the mastery . " you , say you will give I the halfpenny now , " he say , with difficulty , while he exert himself to keep the command of 's arm . but at this moment Yap , who have be run on before , return barking to the scene of action , and see a favorable opportunity for bite 's bare leg not only with inpunity but with honor . the pain from 's tooth , instead of surprising into a relaxation of he hold , give it a fiercer tenacity , and with a new exertion of he force he push backward and get uppermost . but now , who could get no sufficient purchase before , set he tooth in a new place , so that , harass in this way , let go he hold of , and , almost throttl , fling he into the river . by this time Tom be up again , and before have quite recover he balance after the act of swing , fall upon he , throw he down , and get he knee firmly on 's chest . " you give I the halfpenny now , " say . " take it , " say , sulkily . " no , I sha ' not take it ; you give it I . " take the halfpenny out of he pocket , and throw it away from he on the ground . loose he hold , and leave to rise . " there the halfpenny lie , " he say . " I do not want you halfpenny ; I would not have keep it . but you want to cheat ; I hate a cheat . I sha ' not go along with you any more , " he add , turn round homeward , not without cast a regret toward the rat - catching and other pleasure which he must relinquish along with 's society . " you may let it alone , then , " call out after he . " I shall cheat if I like ; there be no fun I ' play else ; and I know where there be a goldfinch 's nest , but I will take care _you_ do not . a ' you be a nasty fightin ' turkey - cock , you be -- -- " walk on without look around , and follow he example , the cold bath have
have moderate he passion . " go along wi' you , then , wi' you drown dog ; I would not own such a dog -- _i_ would not , " say , get louder , in a last effort to sustain he defiance . but be not to be provoke into turn round , and 's voice begin to falter a little as he say , -- " An' I 'n gi 'en you everything , a ' show you everything , a ' niver wante nothin ' from you . a ' there be you horn - hand knife , then as you gi'en I . " here flng the knife as far as he could after 's retreat footstep . but it produce no effect , except the sense in 's mind that there be a terrible void in he lot , now that knife be go . he stand still till have pass through the gate and disappear behind the hedge . the knife would do not good on the ground there ; it would not vex ; and pride or resentment be a feeble passion in 's mind compare with the love of a pocket - knife . he very finger send entreat thrill that he would go and clutch that familiar rough buck 's - horn handle , which they have so often grasp for mere affection , as it lay idle in he pocket . and there be two blade , and they have just be sharpen ! what be life without a pocket - knife to he who have once taste a higher existence ? no ; to throw the handle after the hatchet be a comprehensible act of desperation , but to throw one 's pocket - knife after a implacable friend be clearly in every sense a hyperbole , or throw beyond the mark . so shuffle back to the spot where the beloved knife lay in the dirt , and feel quite a new pleasure in clutch it again after the temporary separation , in open one blade after the other , and feel they edge with he well - harden thumb . poor ! he be not sensitive on the point of honor , not a chivalrous character . that fine moral aroma would not have be think much of by the public opinion of , which be the very focus or heart of 's world , even if it could have make itself perceptible there ; yet , for all that , he be not utterly a sneak and a thief as we friend have hastily decide . but , you perceive , be rather a personage , have more than the usual share of boy 's justice in he , -- the justice that desire to hurt culprit as much as they deserve to be hurt , and be trouble with no doubt concern the exact amount of they desert . see a cloud on he brow when he come home , which check she joy at he come so much sooner than she have expect , and she da hardly speak to he as he stand silently throw the small gravel - stone into the mill - dam . it be not pleasant to give up a rat - catche when you have set you mind on it . but if have tell he strongest feeling at that moment , he would have say , " I would do just the same again . " that be he usual mode of viewe he past action ; whereas be always wish she have do something different . the Aunts and Uncles the Dodson be certainly a handsome family , and be not the least handsome of the sister . as she sit in 's arm -chair , no impartial observer could have deny that for a woman of fifty she have a very comely face and figure , though and consider they aunt as the type of ugliness . it be true she despise the advantages of costume , for though , as she often observe , no woman have better clothes , it be not she way to wear she new thing out before she old one . other woman , if they like , might have they best thread - lace in every wash ; but when . die , it would be find that she have better lace lay by in the right - hand drawer of she wardrobe in the than ever of 's have buy in she life , although Mrs . Wooll wear she lace before it be pay for . so of she curled fronts : have doubtless the glossiest and crispest brown curl in she drawer , as well as curl in various degree of fuzzy laxness ; but to look out on the week - day world from under a crisp and glossy front would be to introduce a most dreamlike and unpleasant confusion between the sacred and the secular . occasionally , indeed , . wear one of she third - best fronts on a week - day visit , but not at a sister 's house ; especially not at 's , who , since she marriage , have hurt she sister 's feeling greatly by wear she own hair , though , as observ to , a mother of a family , like , with a husband always go to law , might have be expect to know better . but be always weak ! so if . 's front to - day be more fuzzy and lax than usual , she have a design under it : she intend the most point and cut allusion to 's bunch of blond curl , separate from each other by a due wave of smoothness on each side of the parting . have she tear several time at sister 's unkindness on the subject of these unmatronly
unmatronly curl , but the consciousness of look the handsomer for they naturally administer support . choose to wear she bonnet in the house to - day , -- unite and tilt slightly , of course -- a frequent practice of hers when she be on a visit , and happen to be in a severe humor : she do not know what draught there might be in strange house . for the same reason she wear a small sable tippet , which reach just to she shoulders , and be very far from meet across she well - form chest , while she long neck be protect by a _chevaux - de - frise_ of miscellaneous frilling . one would need to be learn in the fashions of those time to know how far in the rear of they Mrs . 's slate - color silk gown must have be ; but from certain constellation of small yellow spot upon it , and a mouldy odor about it suggestive of a damp clothes - chest , it be probable that it belong to a stratum of garment just old enough to have come recently into wear . hold she large gold watch in she hand with the many - double chain round she finger , and observe to , who have just return from a visit to the kitchen , that whatever it might be by other people 's clock and watch , it be go half - past twelve by hers . " I do not know what ail sister Pullet , " she continue . " it use to be the way in we family for one to be as early as another ,-- I be sure it be so in my poor father 's time , -- and not for one sister to sit half a hour before the other come . but if the way of ' the family be alter , it sha ' not be _my fault ; _I'll_ never be the one to come into a house when all the rest be go away . I wonder _at_ sister Deane , -- she use to be more like I . but if you will take my advice , Bessy , you will put the dinner forrard a bit , sooner than put it back , because folk be late as ought to ha ' know better . " " oh dear , there be no fear but what they will be all here in time , sister , " say , in she mild - peevish tone . " the dinner will not be ready till half - past one . but if it be long for you to wait , let I fetch you a cheesecake and a glass of ' wine . " " well , ! " say , with a bitter smile and a scarcely perceptible toss of she head , " I should ha ' think you would know you own sister better . I never _did_ eat between meal , and I be not go to begin . not but what I hate that nonsense of have you dinner at half - past one , when you might have it at one . you be never bring up in that way , . " " why , , what can I do ? do not like he dinner before two o'clock , but I put it half a hour earlier because o ' you . " " yes , yes , I know how it be with husband , -- they be for put everything off ; they will put the dinner off till after tea , if they have get wife as be weak enough to give in to such work ; but it be a pity for you , , as you have not get more strength of ' mind . it will be well if you child do not suffer for it . and I hope you have not go and get a great dinner for we , -- go to expense for you sister , as 'uld sooner eat a crust of ' dry bread nor help to ruin you with extravagance . I wonder you do not take pattern by you sister ; she be far more sensible . and here you have get two child to provide for , and you husband 's spend you fortin I ' go to law , and be likely to spend he own too . a boiled joint , as you could make broth of for the kitchen , " add , in a tone of emphatic protest , " and a plain pudding , with a spoonful of ' sugar , and no spice , 'uld be far more become . " with sister Glegg in this humor , there be a cheerful prospect for the day . never go the length of quarrelling with she , any more than a water - fowl that put out its leg in a deprecating manner can be say to quarrel with a boy who throw stone . but this point of the dinner be a tender one , and not at all new , so that Tulliver could make the same answer she have often make before . " say he always _will have a good dinner for he friend while he can pay for it , " she say ; " and he be a right to do as he like in he own house , sister . " " well , , _I_ can not leave you child enough out o' my savings to keep them from ruin . and you must not look to have any of ' 's money , for it be well if I do not go first , -- he come of a long - liv family ; and if he be to die and leave I well for
for my life , he would tie all the money up to go back to he own kin . " the sound of wheel while . be speak be a interruption highly welcome to , who hasten out to receive sister Pullet ; it must be sister Pullet , because the sound be that of a four-wheel . toss she head and look rather sour about the mouth at the thought of the " four - wheel . " she have a strong opinion on that subject . be in tear when the one - horse chaise stoppe before 's door , and it be apparently requisite that she should she a few more before get out ; for though she husband and stood ready to support she , she sit still and shook she head sadly , as she look through she tear at the vague distance . " why , whativer be the matter , sister ? " say . she be not a imaginative woman , but it occur to she that the large toilet - glass in sister Pullet 's best bedroom be possibly break for the second time . there be no reply but a further shake of the head , as Pullet slowly rise and get down from the chaise , not without cast a glance at to see that he be guard she handsome silk dress from injury . be a small man , with a high nose , small twinkling eye , and thin lip , in a fresh - look suit of black and a white cravat , that seem to have be tie very tight on some higher principle than that of mere personal ease . he bear about the same relation to he tall , good - look wife , with she balloon sleeve , abundant mantle , and a large befeathered and beribbon bonnet , as a small fishing - smack bear to a brig with all its sail spread . it be a pathetic sight and a striking example of the complexity introduce into the emotion by a high state of civilization , the sight of a fashionably dress female in grief . from the sorrow of a Hottentot to that of a woman in large buckram sleeve , with several bracelet on each arm , a architectural bonnet , and delicate ribbon string , what a long series of gradation ! in the enlightened child of civilization the abandonment characteristic of grief be check and vari in the subtlest manner , so as to present a interesting problem to the analytic mind . if , with a crush heart and eye half blind by the mist of tear , she be to walk with a too -devious step through a door - place , she might crush she buckram sleeve too , and the deep consciousness of this possibility produce a composition of force by which she take a line that just clear the door - post . perceive that the tear be hurrie fast , she unpin she string and throw they languidly backward , a touching gesture , indicative , even in the deepest gloom , of the hope in future dry moment when cap - string will once more have a charm . as the tear subside a little , and with she head lean backward at the angle that will not injure she bonnet , she endure that terrible moment when grief , which have make all thing else a weariness , have itself become weary ; she look down pensively at she bracelet , and adjust they clasp with that pretty study fortuity which would be gratify to she mind if it be once more in a calm and healthy state . brush each door - post with great nicety , about the latitude of she shoulders ( at that period a woman be truly ridiculous to a instruct eye if she do not measure a yard and a half across the shoulders ) , and have do that send the muscle of she face in quest of fresh tear as she advanc into the parlor where be seat . " well , sister , you be late ; what be the matter ? " say , rather sharply , as they shook hand . sit down , lift up she mantle carefully behind , before she answer ,-- " she be gone , " unconsciously use a impressive figure of rhetoric . " it be not the glass this time , then , " think . " die the day before yesterday , " continue ; " an' she leg be as thick as my body , " ' she add , with deep sadness , after a pause . " they would tap she no end of ' time , and the water -- they say you might ha ' swum in it , if you would like . " " well , , it be a mercy she have go , then , whoever she may be , " say , with the promptitude and emphasis of a mind naturally clear and decide ; " but I can not think who you be talk of , for my part . " " but _i_ know , " say , sigh and shake she head ; " and there be not another such a dropsy in the parish . _I_ know as it be old of ' the Twentyland . " " well , she be no kin of ' yours , nor much acquaintance as I have ever hear of , " say , who always cry just as much as be proper when anything happen to she own " kin , " but not on other occasion . " she be so much acquaintance as I have see she leg when they be like bladder . and a old lady as have double she money over and over
over again , and keep it all in she own management to the last , and have she pocket with she key in under she pillow constant . there be not many old _par_ish'ner like she , I doubt . " " and they say she would take as much physic as 'uld fill a wagon , " observe . " ah ! " sigh , " she ' another complaint ever so many year before she have the dropsy , and the doctor could not make out what it be . and she say to I , when I go to see she last , she say , ' . Pullet , if ever you have the dropsy , you will think of ' I . ' she _did_ say so , " add Pullet , begin to cry bitterly again ; " those be she very word . and she be to be bury o' , and 's bid to the funeral . " " , " say , unable any longer to contain she spirit of rational remonstrance , -- " , I wonder _at_ you , frett and injure you health about people as do not belong to you . you poor father never do so , nor you aunt France neither , nor any of ' the family as I ever hear of . you could not fret no more than this , if we would hear as we cousin have die sudden without make he will . " be silent , have to finish she cry , and rather flatter than indignant at be upbraided for cry too much . it be not everybody who could afford to cry so much about they neighbor who have leave they nothing ; but Pullet have marry a gentleman farmer , and have leisure and money to carry she crying and everything else to the highest pitch of respectability . " . do not die without make she will , though , " say , with a confused sense that he be say something to sanction he wife 's tear ; " ours be a rich parish , but they say there be nobody else to leave as many thousand behind 'em as . and she be leave no leggicy to speak on , -- leave it all in a lump to she husband 's nevvy . " " there be not much good I ' be so rich , then , " say , " if she would get none but husband 's kin to leave it to . it be poor work when that be all you have get to pinch yourself for . not as I be one of ' those as 'uld like to die without leave more money out at interest than other folk have reckon ; but it be a poor tale when it must go out of ' you own family . " " I be sure , sister , " say . , who have recover sufficiently to take off she veil and fold it carefully , " it be a nice sort of ' man as have leave she money to , for he be trouble with the asthmy , and go to be every night at eight o'clock . he tell I about it himself -- as free as could be -- one when he come to we church . he wear a hareskin on he chest , and have a trembling in he talk , -- quite a gentleman sort of ' man . I tell he there be not many month in the year as I be not under the doctor 's hand . and he say , ' . Pullet , I can feel for you . ' that be what he say , -- the very word . ah ! " sigh , shak she head at the idea that there be but few who could enter fully into she experience in pink mixture and white mixture , strong stuff in small bottle , and weak stuff in large bottle , damp boluse at a shilling , and draught at eighteenpence . " sister , I may as well go and take my bonnet off now . do you see as the cap - box be put out ? " she add , turn to she husband . , by a unaccountable lapse of memory , have forget it , and hasten out , with a stricken conscience , to remedy the omission . " they will bring it upstairs , sister , " say , wish to go at once , lest Mr . Glegg should begin to explain she feeling about 's be the first Dodson who ever ruin she constitution with doctor 's stuff . be fond of go upstairs with she sister Pullet , and look thoroughly at she cap before she put it on she head , and discuss millinery in general . this be part of 's weakness that stir 's sisterly compassion : go far too well dress , consider ; and she be too proud to dress she child in the good clothing she sister give she from the primeval strata of she wardrobe ; it be a sin and a shame to buy anything to dress that child , if it be not a pair of shoe . in this particular , however , do she sister Bessy some injustice , for have really make great effort to induce to wear a leghorn bonnet and a dyed silk frock make out of she aunt 's , but the result have be such that be oblige to bury they in she maternal bosom ; for , declare that the frock smelt of nasty dye , have take a opportunity of bast it together with the roast beef the first she wear it , and find this scheme answer , she have subsequently pump on the bonnet
bonnet with it be green ribbon , so as to give it a general resemblance to a sage cheese garnished with withered lettuces . I must urge in excuse for , that have laugh at she in the bonnet , and say she look like a old . aunt Pullet , too , make present of clothes , but these be always pretty enough to please as well as she mother . of all her sister , certainly prefer she sister Pullet , not without a return of preference ; but Pullet be sorry have those naughty , awkward child ; she would do the best she could by they , but it be a pity they be not as good and as pretty as sister 's child . and , on they part , think they aunt Pullet tolerable , chiefly because she be not they aunt . always decline to go more than once during he holiday to see either of they . both he uncle tipp he that once , of course ; but at he aunt Pullet 's there be a great many toad to pelt in the cellar - area , so that he preferre the visit to she . shudder at the toad , and dream of they horribly , but she like she uncle Pullet 's musical snuff - box . , it be agree by the sister , in 's absence , that the blood do not mix well with the blood ; that , in fact , poor 's child be Tullivers , and that Tom , notwithstand he have the complexion , be likely to be as " contrairy " as he father . as for , she be the picture of she aunt , 's sister , -- a large - boned woman , who have marry as poorly as could be ; have no china , and have a husband who have much ado to pay he rent . but when be alone with upstairs , the remark be naturally to the disadvantage of , and they agree , in confidence , that there be no know what sort of fright sister would come out next . but they _tete - a - tete_ be curtail by the appearance of . Deane with little Lucy ; and have to look on with a silent pang while 's blond curl be adjust . it be quite unaccountable that , the thinnest and sallowest of all the , should have have this child , who might have be take for 's any day . and always look twice as dark as usual when she be by the side of . she do to -day , when she and come in from the garden with they father and they uncle . have throw she bonnet off very carelessly , and come in with she hair rough as well as out of curl , rush at once to , who be stand by she mother 's knee . certainly the contrast between the cousin be conspicuous , and to superficial eye be very much to the disadvantage of though a connoisseur might have see " point " in she which have a higher promise for maturity than 's natty completeness . it be like the contrast between a rough , dark , overgrown puppy and a white kitten . Lucy put up the neatest little rosebud mouth to be kiss ; everything about she be neat , -- she little round neck , with the row of coral bead ; she little straight nose , not at all snubby ; she little clear eyebrow , rather darker than she curl , to match hazel eye , which look up with shy pleasure at , taller by the head , though scarcely a year older . always look at with delight . she be fond of fancie a world where the people never get any larger than child of they own age , and she make the queen of it just like , with a little crown on she head , and a little sceptre in she hand -- only the queen be herself in 's form . " oh , , " she burst out , after kiss she , " you will stay with and I , will not you ? oh , kiss she , . " , too , have come up to , but he be not go to kiss she -- no ; he come up to she with , because it see easier , on the whole , than say , " how do you do ? " to all those aunt and uncles . he stand look at nothing in particular , with the blushing , awkward air and semi-smile which be common to shy boy when in company , -- very much as if they have come into the world by mistake , and find it in a degree of undress that be quite embarrassing . " ! " say aunt , with loud emphasis . " do little boy and gell come into a room without take notice of they uncle and aunt ? that be not the way when _I_ be a little gell . " " go and speak to you aunt and uncle , my dear , " say , look anxious and melancholy . she want to whisper to Maggie a command to go and have she hair brush . " well , and how do you do ? and I hope you be good child , be you ? " say , in the same loud , emphatic way , as she take they hand , hurte they with she large ring , and kiss they cheek much against they desire . " look up , , look up . boy as go to boar - school should hold they head up . look at I now . "
" decline that pleasure apparently , for he try to draw he hand away . " put you hair behind you ear , , and keep you frock on you shoulder . " always speak to they in this loud , emphatic way , as if she consider they deaf , or perhaps rather idiotic ; it be a means , she think , of make they feel that they be accountable creature , and might be a salutary check on naughty tendency . 's child be so spoiled -- they would need have somebody to make they feel they duty . " well , my dear , " say aunt Pullet , in a compassionate voice , " you grow wonderful fast . I doubt they will outgrow they strength , " she add , look over they head , with a melancholy expression , at they mother . " I think the gell have too much hair . I would have it thin and cut shorter , sister , if I be you ; it be not good for she health . it be that as make she skin so brown , I should not wonder . do not you think so , sister ? " " I can not say , I be sure , sister , " say , shutt she lip close again , and look at with a critical eye . " no , no , " say , " the child 's healthy enough ; there be nothing ail she . there be red wheat as well as white , for that matter , and some like the dark grain best . but it 'uld be as well if 'uld have the child 's hair cut , so as it 'uld lie smooth . " a dreadful resolve be gather in 's breast , but it be arrest by the desire to know from she aunt whether she would leave behind . aunt Deane would hardly ever let come to see they . after various reason for refusal , . appeal to Lucy herself . " you would not like to stay behind without mother , should you , ? " " yes , please , mother , " say , timidly , blush very pink all over she little neck . " well do , ! let she stay , , let she stay , " say , a large but alert - look man , with a type of _physique to be see in all rank of English society , -- bald cry , red whisker , full forehead , and general solidity without heaviness . you may see nobleman like , and you may see grocer or day - laborer like he ; but the keenness of he brown eye be less common than he contour . he hold a silver snuff - box very tightly in he hand , and now and then exchange a pinch with , whose box be only silver - mount , so that it be naturally a joke between they that want to exchange snuff - boxe also . 's box have be give he by the superior partner in the firm to which he belong , at the same time that they give he a share in the business , in acknowledgment of he valuable service as manager . no man be think more highly of in 's than ; and some person be even of opinion that , who be once hold to have make the worst match of all the sister , might one day ride in a better carriage , and live in a better house , even than she sister Pullet . there be no know where a man would stop , who have get he foot into a great mill - own , shipown business like that of & , with a banking concern attach . and , as she intimate female friend observe , be proud and " have " enough ; _she would not let she husband stand still in the world for want of spurring . " , " say , beckon to she , and whisper in she ear , as soon as this point of 's staying be settle , " go and get you hair brush , do , for shame . I tell you not to come in without go to first , you know I do . " " come out with I , " whisper , pull he sleeve as she pass he ; and follow willingly enough . " come upstairs with I , , " she whisper , when they be outside the door . " there be something I want to do before dinner . " " there be no time to play at anything before dinner , " say , whose imagination be impatient of any intermediate prospect . " oh yes , there be time for this ; _do_ come , . " follow upstairs into she mother 's room , and see she go at once to a drawer , from which she take out a large pair of scissors . " what be they for , ? " say , feel he curiosity awaken . answer by seize she front lock and cut they straight across the middle of she forehead . " oh , my button ! , you will catch it ! " exclaim ; " you would better not cut any more off . " Snip ! go the great scissors again while be speak , and he could not help feel it be rather good fun ; would look so queer . " here , , cut it behind for I , " say , excit by she own daring , and anxious to finish the deed . " you will catch it , you know , " say , nodd he head in a admonitory manner , and
and hesitat a little as he take the scissors . " never mind , make haste ! " say , give a little stamp with she foot . she cheek be quite flushed . the black lock be so thick , nothing could be more tempt to a lad who have already taste the forbidden pleasure of cut the pony 's mane . I speak to those who know the satisfaction of make a pair of scissors meet through a duly resisting mass of hair . one delicious grinding snip , and then another and another , and the hinder - lock fall heavily on the floor , and stood crop in a jagged , uneven manner , but with a sense of clearness and freedom , as if she have emerge from a wood into the open plain . " oh , , " say , jump round she , and slapp he knee as he laugh , " oh , my button ! what a queer thing you look ! look at yourself in the glass ; you look like the idiot we throw out nutshell to at school . " feel a unexpected pang . she have think beforehand chiefly at she own deliverance from she teasing hair and teasing remark about it , and something also of the triumph she should have over she mother and she aunt by this very decided course of action ; she do not want she hair to look pretty , -- that be out of the question , -- she only want people to think she a clever little girl , and not to find fault with she . but now , when begin to laugh at she , and say she be like a idiot , the affair have quite a new aspect . she look in the glass , and still laugh and clap he hand , and 's cheek begin to pale , and she lip to tremble a little . " oh , , you will have to go down to dinner directly , " say . " oh , my ! " " do not laugh at I , , " say , in a passionate tone , with a outburst of angry tear , stamp , and give he a push . " now , then , spitfire ! " say . " what do you cut it off for , then ? I shall go down : I can smell the dinner go in . " he hurry downstairs and leave poor to that bitter sense of the irrevocable which be almost a every - day experience of she small soul . she could see clearly enough , now the thing be do , that it be very foolish , and that she should have to hear and think more about she hair than ever ; for rush to she deed with passionate impulse , and then see not only they consequence , but what would have happene if they have not be do , with all the detail and exaggerate circumstance of a active imagination . never do the same sort of foolish thing as , have a wonderful instinctive discernment of what would turn to he advantage or disadvantage ; and so it happen , that though he be much more wilful and inflexible than , he mother hardly ever call he naughty . but if do make a mistake of that sort , he espouse it , and stand by it : he " do not mind . " if he break the lash of he father 's gigwhip by lash the gate , he could not help it , -- the whip should not have get catch in the hinge . if whip a gate , he be convinced , not that the whipping of gate by all boy be a justifiable act , but that he , , be justifiable in whipping that particular gate , and he be not go to be sorry . but , as she stand cry before the glass , feel it impossible that she should go down to dinner and endure the severe eye and severe word of she aunt , while and , and , who wait at table , and perhaps she father and she uncle , would laugh at she ; for if have laugh at she , of course every one else would ; and if she have only let she hair alone , she could have sit with and , and have the apricot pudding and the custard ! what could she do but sob ? she sit as helpless and despaire among she black lock as among the slaughtered sheep . very trivial , perhaps , this anguish seem to weather - worn mortal who have to think of bill , dead love , and break friendship ; but it be not less bitter to -- perhaps it be even more bitter -- than what we be fond of call antithetically the real trouble of mature life . " ah , my child , you will have real trouble to fret about by and by , " be the consolation we have almost all of we have administer to we in we childhood , and have repeat to other child since we have be grow up . we have all of we sob so piteously , stand with tiny bare leg above we little sock , when we lose sight of we mother or nurse in some strange place ; but we can no longer recall the poignancy of that moment and weep over it , as we do over the remember suffering of five or ten year ago . every one of those keen moments have leave it be trace , and live in we still , but such trace have blend themselves irrecoverably with the firmer texture of we youth and manhood ; and so
so it come that we can look on at the trouble of we child with a smiling disbelief in the reality of they pain . be there any one who can recover the experience of he childhood , not merely with a memory _of_ what he do and what happen to he , of what he like and dislike when he be in frock and trousers , but with a intimate penetration , a revive consciousness of what he feel then , when it be so long from one to another ; what he feel when he school fellow shut he out of they game because he would pitch the ball wrong out of mere wilfulness ; or on a rainy day in the holiday , when he do not know how to amuse himself , and fall from idleness into mischief , from mischief into defiance , and from defiance into sulkiness ; or when he mother absolutely refuse to let he have a tailed coat that " half , " although every other boy of he age have go into tails already ? surely if we could recall that early bitterness , and the dim guess , the strangely perspectiveless conception of life , that give the bitterness its intensity , we should not pooh - pooh the grief of we child . " , you be to come down this minute , " say , enter the room hurriedly . " Lawks ! what have you be a - do ? I never _see_ such a fright ! " " do not , , " say , angrily . " go away ! " " but I tell you you be to come down , , this minute ; you mother say so , " say , go up to and take she by the hand to raise she from the floor . " get away , ; I do not want any dinner , " say , resist 's arm . " I sha ' not come . " " oh , well , I can not stay . I have get to wait at dinner , " say , go out again . " Maggie , you little silly , " say , pee into the room ten minute after , " why do not you come and have you dinner ? there be lot of ' goody , and mother say you be to come . what be you cry for , you little spooney ? " oh , it be dreadful ! be so hard and unconcerned ; if _he have be cry on the floor , would have cry too . and there be the dinner , so nice ; and she be _so_ hungry . it be very bitter . but be not altogether hard . he be not inclin to cry , and do not feel that 's grief spoil he prospect of the sweet ; but he go and put he head near she , and say in a lower , comforting tone ,-- " will not you come , then , ? shall I bring you a bit of ' pudd when I have have mine , and a custard and thing ? " " ye - e - es , " say , begin to feel life a little more tolerable . " very well , " say , go away . but he turn again at the door and say , " but you would better come , you know . there be the dessert , -- nut , you know , and cowslip wine . " 's tear have cease , and she look reflective as leave she . he good nature have take off the keenest edge of she suffering , and nut with cowslip wine begin to assert they legitimate influence . slowly she rise from amongst she scatter lock , and slowly she make she way downstairs . then she stand lean with one shoulder against the frame of the dining - parlour door , pee in when it be ajar . she see and with a empty chair between they , and there be the custard on a side - table ; it be too much . she slip in and go toward the empty chair . but she have no sooner sit down than she repent and wish herself back again . give a little scream as she see she , and feel such a " turn " that she drop the large gravy - spoon into the dish , with the most serious result to the table - cloth . for have not betraye the reason of 's refusal to come down , not like to give she mistress a shock in the moment of carving , and think there be nothing worse in question than a fit of perverseness , which be inflict its own punishment by deprive of half she dinner . 's scream make all eye turn towards the same point as she own , and 's cheek and ears begin to burn , while uncle , a kind - look , white - hair old gentleman , say ,-- " ! what little gell 's this ? why , I do not know she . be it some little gell you have pick up in the road , ? " " why , she have go and cut she hair herself , " say Tulliver in a undertone to , laugh with much enjoyment . " do you ever know such a little hussy as it be ? " " why , little miss , you have make yourself look very funny , " say uncle Pullet , and perhaps he never in he life make a observation which be feel to be so lacerating . " , for shame ! " say aunt , in she loudest , severest tone of reproof . " gell
gell as cut they own hair should be whip and feed on bread and water , -- not come and sit down with they aunt and uncles . " " ay , ay , " say uncle , mean to give a playful turn to this denunciation , " she must be send to jail , I think , and they will cut the rest of she hair off there , and make it all even . " " she be more like a gypsy nor ever , " say aunt Pullet , in a pitying tone ; " it be very bad luck , sister , as the gell should be so brown ; the boy 's fair enough . I doubt it will stand in she way i ' life to be so brown . " " she be a naughty child , as will break she mother 's heart , " say , with the tear in she eye . seem to be listen to a chorus of reproach and derision . she first flush come from anger , which give she a transient power of defiance , and think she be brave it out , support by the recent appearance of the pudding and custard . under this impression , he whisper , " oh , my ! , I tell you you would catch it . " he mean to be friendly , but feel convinced that be rejoice in she ignominy . she feeble power of defiance leave she in a instant , she heart swell , and get up from she chair , she run to she father , hide she face on he shoulder , and burst out into loud sobbing . " come , come , my wench , " say she father , soothingly , put he arm round she , " never mind ; you be I ' the right to cut it off if it plague you ; give over crying ; father will take you part . " delicious word of tenderness ! never forget any of these moment when she father " take she part " ; she keep they in she heart , and think of they long year after , when every one else say that she father have do very ill by he child . " how you husband do spoil that child , ! " say , in a loud " aside , " to . " it will be the ruin of she , if you do not take care . my father never bring he child up so , else we should ha ' be a different sort of ' family to what we be . " 's domestic sorrow seem at this moment to have reach the point at which insensibility begin . she take no notice of she sister 's remark , but throw back she capstring and dispense the pudding , in mute resignation . with the dessert there come entire deliverance for , for the child be tell they might have they nut and wine in the summer - house , since the day be so mild ; and they scamper out among the budding bushes of the garden with the alacrity of small animal get from under a burn glass . have she special reason for this permission : now the dinner be despatch , and every one 's mind disengage , it be the right moment to communicate 's intention concern , and it would be as well for himself to be absent . the child be use to hear themselves talk of as freely as if they be bird , and could understand nothing , however they might stretch they neck and listen ; but on this occasion manifest a unusual discretion , because she have recently have evidence that the go to school to a clergyman be a sore point with , who look at it as very much on a par with go to school to a constable . have a sighing sense that she husband would do as he like , whatever sister say , or sister Pullet either ; but at least they would not be able to say , if the thing turn out ill , that have fall in with she husband 's folly without let she own friend know a word about it . " , " she say , interrupt she husband in he talk with , " it be time now to tell the child 's aunt and uncle what you be think of do with , be not it ? " " very well , " say , rather sharply , " I 've no objection to tell anybody what I mean to do with he . I have settle , " he add , look toward and ,-- " I have settle to send he to a , a parson , down at 's , there , -- a uncommon clever fellow , I understand , as will put he up to most thing . " there be a rust demonstration of surprise in the company , such as you may have observe in a country congregation when they hear a allusion to they week - day affair from the pulpit . it be equally astonish to the aunt and uncle to find a parson introduce into 's family arrangement . as for uncle Pullet , he could hardly have be more thoroughly obfuscate if have say that he be go to send to the ; for uncle Pullet belong to that extinct class of british yeoman who , dress in good broadcloth , pay high rate and tax , go to church , and eat a particularly good dinner on , without dream that the british constitution in and have a traceable origin any more than the solar system and the fix star . it be melancholy , but true , that
that have the most confused idea of a bishop as a sort of a baronet , who might or might not be a clergyman ; and as the rector of he own parish be a man of high family and fortune , the idea that a clergyman could be a schoolmaster be too remote from 's experience to be readily conceivable . I know it be difficult for people in these instruct time to believe in uncle Pullet 's ignorance ; but let they reflect on the remarkable result of a great natural faculty under favoring circumstance . and uncle Pullet have a great natural faculty for ignorance . he be the first to give utterance to he astonishment . " why , what can you be go to send he to a parson for ? " he say , with a amaze twinkling in he eye , look at and , to see if they show any sign of comprehension . " why , because the parson be the best schoolmaster , by what I can make out , " say poor , who , in the maze of this puzzling world , laid hold of any clue with great readiness and tenacity . " Jacob at thg academy be no parson , and he be do very bad by the boy ; and I make up my mind , if I send he to school again , it should be to somebody different to . and this , by what I can make out , be the sort of ' man I want . and I mean my boy to go to he at , " he conclude , in a tone of decision , tap he snuff - box and take a pinch . " you will have to pay a swing half - yearly bill , then , eh , ? the clergyman have highish notion , in general , " say , take snuff vigorously , as he always do when wish to maintain a neutral position . " what ! do you think the parson will teach he to know a good sample of ' wheat when he see it , neighbor ? " say , who be fond of he jest , and have retire from business , feel that it be not only allowable but become in he to take a playful view of thing . " why , you see , I have get a plan I ' my head about , " say , pause after that statement and lifte up he glass . " well , if I may be allow to speak , and it be seldom as I be , " say , with a tone of bitter meaning , " I should like to know what good be to come to the boy by bringin ' he up above he fortin . " " why , " say , not look at , but at the male part of he audience , " you see , I have make up my mind not to bring up to my own business . I have have my thought about it all along , and I make up my mind by what I see with and _his_ son . I mean to put he to some business as he can go into without capital , and I want to give he a eddication as he will be even wi' the lawyer and folk , and put I up to a notion now a ' then . " emit a long sort of guttural sound with close lip , that smile in mingled pity and scorn . " it 'uld be a fine deal better for some people , " she say , after that introductory note , " if they would let the lawyer alone . " " be he at the head of a grammar school , then , this clergyman , such as that at ? " say . " no , nothing of that , " say . " he will not take more than two or three pupil , and so he will have the more time to attend to th'ey , you know . " " ah , and get he eddication do the sooner ; they can not learn much at a time when there be so many of th'ey , " say uncle Pullet , feel that he be get quite a insight into this difficult matter . " but he will want the more pay , I doubt , " say . " ay , ay , a cool hundr a year , that be all , " say , with some pride at he own spirited course . " but then , you know , it be a investment ; 's eddication ' ull be so much capital to he . " " ay , there be something in that , " say . " well well , neighbor , you may be right , you may be right : ' when land be gone and money have spend , then learn be most excellent . ' " I remember see those two line write on a window at . but we that have get no learning have better keep we money , eh , neighbor Pullet ? " rub he knee , and look very pleasant . " , I wonder _at_ you , " say he wife . " it be very unbecoming in a man of ' you age and belonging . " " what be unbecoming , . G.? " say , wink pleasantly at the company . " my new blue coat as I have get on ? " " I pity you weakness , . I say it be unbecoming to be make a joke when you see you own kin go headlong to ruin . " " if you mean I by that ,
, " say , considerably nettle , " you need not trouble yourself to fret about I . I can manage my own affair without troubling other folk . " " bless I ! " say , judiciously introduce a new idea , " why , now I come to think of it , somebody say be go to send _he son -- the deform lad -- to a clergyman , do not they , ? " ( appeal to he wife ) . " I can give no account of it , I be sure , " say , close she lip very tightly again . be not a woman to take part in a scene where missile be fly . " well , " say , speak all the more cheerfully , that . Glegg might see he do not mind she , " if thWakey think of ' send he son to a clergyman , depend on it I shall make no mistake I ' send to one . thWakey be as big a scoundrel as ever make , but he know the length of every man 's foot he be get to deal with . ay , ay , tell I who be 's butcher , and I will tell you where to get you meat . " " but 's son have get a hump - back , " say . , who feel as if the whole business have a funereal aspect ; " it be more nat'ral to send _him_ to a clergyman . " " yes , " say , interpret 's observation with erroneous plausibility , " you must consider that , neighbor ; 's son be not likely to follow any business . thWakey ' ull make a gentleman of he , poor fellow . " " , " say , in a tone which imply that she indignation would fizz and ooze a little , though she be determined to keep it corke up , " you would far better hold you tongue . do not want to know you opinion nor mine either . there be folk in the world as know better than everybody else . " " why , I should think that be you , if we be to trust you own tale , " say , begin to boil up again . " oh , _I_ say nothing , " say , sarcastically . " my advice have never be ask , and I do not give it . " " it will be the first time , then , " say . " it be the only thing you be over -ready at give . " " I have be over -ready at lending , then , if I have not be over -ready at give , " say . " there be folk I 've lent money to , as perhaps I shall repent o's lend money to kin . " " come , come , come , " say , soothingly . but be not to be hinder of he retort . " you have get a bond for it , I reckon , " he say ; " and you have have you five per cent , kin or no kin . " " sister , " say , pleadingly , " drink you wine , and let I give you some almonds and raisin . " " Bessy , I be sorry for you , " say . , very much with the feeling of a cur that seize the opportunity of divert he bark toward the man who carry no stick . " it be poor work talk of ' almonds and raisin . " " Lor , sister , do not be so quarrelsome , " say , begin to cry a little . " you may be strike with a fit , get so red in the face after dinner , and we be but just out of ' mourning , all of we , -- and all wig gowns crape alike and just put by ; it be very bad among sister . " " I should think it _is bad , " say . " thing be come to a fine pass when one sister invite the other to she house of ' purpose to quarrel with she and abuse she . " " Softly , softly , ; be reasonable , be reasonable , " say . but while he be speak , , who have by no means say enough to satisfy he anger , burst out again . " who want to quarrel with you ? " he say . " it be you as can not let people alone , but must be gnaw at 'em forever . _I_ should never want to quarrel with any woman if she keep she place . " " my place , indeed ! " say , get rather more shrill . " there be you betters , , as be dead and in they grave , treat I with a different sort of ' respect to what you do ; _though I have get a husband as will sit by and see I abuse by they as 'uld never ha ' have the chance if there have not be they in we family as marry worse than they might ' done . " " if you talk of ' that , " say , " my family 's as good as yours , and better , for it have not get a damned ill - tempered woman in it ! " " well , " say , rise from she chair , " I do not know whether you think it be a fine thing to sit by and hear I swore at , ; but I be not go to stay a minute longer in this house . you can stay behind ,
, and come home with the gig , and I will walk home . " " dear heart , dear heart ! " say in a melancholy tone , as he follow he wife out of the room . " , how could you talk so ? " say , with the tear in she eye . " let she go , " say , too hot to be damp by any amount of tear . " let she go , and the sooner the better ; she will not be try to domineer over _me_ again in a hurry . " " , " say , helplessly , " do you think it 'uld be any use for you to go after she and try to pacify she ? " " better not , better not , " say . " you will make it up another day . " " then , sister , shall we go and look at the child ? " say , dry she eye . no proposition could have be more seasonable . feel very much as if the air have be clear of obtrusive fly now the woman be out of the room . there be few thing he like better than a chat with , whose close application to business allow the pleasure very rarely . , he consider , be the " knowingest " man of he acquaintance , and he have besides a ready causticity of tongue that make a agreeable supplement to 's own tendency that way , which have remain in rather a inarticulate condition . and now the woman be go , they could carry on they serious talk without frivolous interruption . they could exchange they view concern the of , whose conduct in the question have thrown such a entirely new light on he character ; and speak slightingly of he conduct at the battle of , which he would never have win if there have not be a great many at he back , not to speak of and the , who , as have hear from a person of particular knowledge in that matter , have come up in the very nick of time ; though here there be a slight dissidence , remark that he be not dispose to give much credit to the , -- the build of they vessel , together with the unsatisfactory character of transaction in beer , inclin he to form rather a low view of Prussian pluck generally . Rather beat on this ground , proceed to express he fear that the country could never again be what it use to be ; but , attach to a firm of which the return be on the increase , naturally take a more lively view of the present , and have some detail to give concern the state of the import , especially in hide and spelter , which soothe 's imagination by throw into more distant perspective the period when the country would become utterly the prey of Papists and radicals , and there would be no more chance for honest man . uncle Pullet sit by and listen with twinkling eye to these high matters . he do not understand politics himself , -- think they be a natural gift , -- but by what he could make out , this of be no better than he should be . his " suppose sister Glegg should call she money in ; it 'uld be very awkward for you to have to raise five hundred pound now , " say to she husband that even , as she take a plaintive review of the day . have live thirteen year with she husband , yet she retain in all the freshness of she early marry life a facility of say thing which drive he in the opposite direction to the one she desire . some minds be wonderful for keep they bloom in this way , as a patriarchal goldfish apparently retain to the last its youthful illusion that it can swim in a straight line beyond the encircling glass . be a amiable fish of this kind , and after run she head against the same resisting medium for thirteen year would go at it again to - day with undulled alacrity . this observation of hers tend directly to convince that it would not be at all awkward for he to raise five hundred pound ; and when become rather pressing to know _how he would raise it without mortgage the mill and the house which he have say he never _would mortgage , since nowadays people be none so ready to lend money without security , , get warm , declare that . Glegg might do as she like about call in she money , he should pay it in whether or not . he be not go to be beholden to he wife 's sister . when a man have marry into a family where there be a whole litter of woman , he might have plenty to put up with if he choose . but do _not choose . cry a little in a trickling , quiet way as she put on she nightcap ; but presently sank into a comfortable sleep , lull by the thought that she would talk everything over with she sister Pullet to - morrow , when she be to take the child to Garum Firs to tea . not that she look forward to any distinct issue from that talk ; but it seem impossible that past event should be so obstinate as to remain unmodified when they be complain against . she husband lay awake rather longer , for he too be think of a visit he would pay on the morrow ; and he idea on the subject be not of so vague and soothe a kind as those of he amiable partner
partner . , when under the influence of a strong feeling , have a promptitude in action that may seem inconsistent with that painful sense of the complicated , puzzl nature of human affair under which he more dispassionate deliberation be conduct ; but it be really not improbable that there be a direct relation between these apparently contradictory phenomena , since I have observe that for get a strong impression that a skein be tangle there be nothing like snatch hastily at a single thread . it be owe to this promptitude that be on horseback soon after dinner the next day ( he be not dyspeptic ) on he way to Basset to see he sister Moss and she husband . for have make up he mind irrevocably that he would pay she loan of five hundred pound , it naturally occur to he that he have a promissory note for three hundred pound lent to he brother - in - law Moss ; and if the say brother - in - law could manage to pay in the money within a give time , it would go far to lessen the fallacious air of inconvenience which 's spirited step might have wear in the eyes of weak people who require to know precisely _how a thing be to be do before they be strongly confident that it will be easy . for be in a position neither new nor striking , but , like other every - day thing , sure to have a cumulative effect that will be feel in the long run : he be hold to be a much more substantial man than he really be . and as we be all apt to believe what the world believe about we , it be he habit to think of failure and ruin with the same sort of remote pity with which a spare , long - necked man hear that he plethoric short - necked neighbor be stricken with apoplexy . he have be always use to hear pleasant joke about he advantages as a man who work he own mill , and own a pretty bit of land ; and these joke naturally keep up he sense that he be a man of considerable substance . they give a pleasant flavor to he glass on a market - day , and if it have not be for the recurrence of half - yearly payment , would really have forgote that there be a mortgage of two thousand pound on he very desirable freehold . that be not altogether he own fault , since one of the thousand pound be he sister 's fortune , which he have to pay on she marriage ; and a man who have neighbor that _will_ go to law with he be not likely to pay off he mortgage , especially if he enjoy the good opinion of acquaintance who want to borrow a hundred pound on security too lofy to be represent by parchment . we friend have a good - natured fibre in he , and do not like to give harsh refusal even to he sister , who have not only come in to the world in that superfluous way characteristic of sister , create a necessity for mortgage , but have quite throw herself away in marriage , and have crown she mistake by have a eighth baby . on this point be conscious of be a little weak ; but he apologize to himself by say that poor Gritty have be a good - look wench before she marry ; he would sometimes say this even with a slight tremulousness in he voice . but this morning he be in a mood more become a man of business , and in the course of he ride along the Basset lane , with they deep rut ,-- lie so far away from a market - town that the labor of drawing produce and manure be enough to take away the best part of the profit on such poor land as that parish be make of , -- he get up a due amount of irritation against as a man without capital , who , if murrain and blight be abroad , be sure to have he share of they , and who , the more you try to help he out of the mud , would sink the further in . it would do he good rather than harm , now , if he be oblige to raise this three hundred pound ; it would make he look about he better , and not act so foolishly about he wool this year as he do the last ; in fact , have be too easy with he brother - in - law , and because he have let the interest run on for two year , be likely enough to think that he should never be trouble about the principal . but be determine not to encourage such shuffling people any longer ; and a ride along the Basset lane be not likely to enervate a man 's resolution by softene he temper . the deep - trodden hoof -mark , make in the muddiest day of winter , give he a shake now and then which suggest a rash but stimulate snarl at the father of lawyer , who , whether by means of he hoof or otherwise , have doubtless something to do with this state of the roads ; and the abundance of foul land and neglect fences that meet he eye , though they make no part of he brother 's farm , strongly contribute to he dissatisfaction with that unlucky agriculturist . if this be not have fallow , it might have be ; be all alike ; it be a beggarly parish , in 's opinion , and he opinion be certainly not groundless . have a poor soil
soil , poor roads , a poor non-resident landlord , a poor non-resident vicar , and rather less than half a curate , also poor . if any one strongly impressed with the power of the human mind to triumph over circumstance will contend that the parishioner of Basset might nevertheless have be a very superior class of people , I have nothing to urge against that abstract proposition ; I only know that , in point of fact , the mind be in strict keep with its circumstance . the muddy lane , green or clayey , that seem to the unaccustomed eye to lead nowhere but into each other , do really lead , with patience , to a distant high - road ; but there be many foot in which they lead more frequently to a centre of dissipation , speak of formerly as the " o' , " but among intimate as " 's . " a large low room with a sand floor ; a cold scent of tobacco , modify by undetected beer - dregs ; lean against the door - post with a melancholy pimple face , look as irrelevant to the daylight as a last night 's gutter candle , -- all this may not seem a very seductive form of temptation ; but the majority of man in find it fatally allur when encounter on they road toward four o'clock on a wintry afternoon ; and if any wife in wish to indicate that she husband be not a pleasure - seek man , she could hardly do it more emphatically than by say that he do not spend a shilling at 's from one Whitsuntide to another . have say so of _her_ husband more than once , when she brother be in a mood to find fault with he , as he certainly be to - day . and nothing could be less pacify to than the behavior of the farmyard gate , which he no sooner attempt to push open with he riding - stick than it act as gate without the upper hinge be known to do , to the peril of shin , whether equine or human . he be about to get down and lead he horse through the damp dirt of the hollow farmyard , shadowed drearily by the large half - timber building , up to the long line of tumble - down dwelling - house stand on a raise causeway ; but the timely appearance of a cowboy save he that frustration of a plan he have determine on , -- namely , not to get down from he horse during this visit . if a man mean to be hard , let he keep in he saddle and speak from that height , above the level of pleading eye , and with the command of a distant horizon . hear the sound of the horse 's foot , and , when she brother ride up , be already outside the kitchen door , with a half - weary smile on she face , and a black - eyed baby in she arm . 's face bear a faded resemblance to she brother 's ; baby 's little fat hand , press against she cheek , seem to show more strikingly that the cheek be fad . " brother , I be glad to see you , " she say , in a affectionate tone . " I do not look for you to - day . how do you do ? " " oh , pretty well , . , pretty well , " answer the brother , with cool deliberation , as if it be rather too forward of she to ask that question . she know at once that she brother be not in a good humor ; he never call she Mr . Moss except when he be angry , and when they be in company . but she think it be in the order of nature that people who be poorly off should be snub . do not take she stand on the equality of the human race ; she be a patient , prolific , loving - hear woman . " you husband be not in the house , I suppose ? " add after a grave pause , during which four child have run out , like chicken whose mother have be suddenly in eclipse behind the hen - coop . " no , " say . , " but he be only in the potato - field yonder . , run to the in a minute , and tell father you uncle 's come . you will get down , brother , will not you , and take something ? " " no , no ; I can not get down . I must be go home again directly , " say , look at the distance . " and how be and the child ? " say , humbly , not da to press she invitation . " oh , pretty well . be go to a new school at , -- a deal of expense to I . it be bad work for I , lie out o' my money . " " I wish you would be so good as let the child come and see they cousin some day . my little un want to see they cousin so as never be . and I she godmother , and so fond of she ; there be nobody 'uld make a bigger fuss with she , accord to what they have get . and I know she like to come , for she be a loving child , and how quick and clever she be , to be sure ! " if . have be one of the most astute woman in the world , instead of be one of the simplest
simplest , she could have think of nothing more likely to propitiate she brother than this praise of . he seldom find any one volunteering praise of " the little wench " ; it be usually leave entirely to himself to insist on she merit . but always appear in the most amiable light at she aunt 's ; it be she , where she be out of the reach of law , -- if she upset anything , dirtie she shoe , or tore she frock , these thing be matter of course at she aunt 's . in spite of himself , 's eye get milder , and he do not look away from he sister as he say ,-- " ay ; she be fonder of ' you than of ' the other aunt , I think . she take after we family : not a bit of she mother 's in she . " " Moss say she be just like what I use to be , " say , " though I be never so quick and fond of ' the book . but I think my 's like she ; _she be sharp . come here , , my dear , and let you uncle see you ; he hardly know you , you grow so fast . " Lizzy , a black - eyed child of seven , look very shy when she mother draw she forward , for the small Moss be much in awe of they uncle from . she be inferior enough to Maggie in fire and strength of expression to make the resemblance between the two entirely flatter to 's fatherly love . " ay , they be a bit alike , " he say , look kindly at the little figure in the soiled pinafore . " they both take after we mother . you have get enough of ' gell , , " he add , in a tone half compassionate , half reproachful . " four of th'ey , bless th'ey ! " say , with a sigh , strok 's hair on each side of she forehead ; " as many as there be boy . they have get a brother apiece . " " ah , but they must turn out and fend for themselves , " say , feel that he severity be relax and try to brace it by throw out a wholesome hint " they must not look to hang on they brother . " " no ; but I hope they brothers 's ull love the poor thing , and remember they come o' one father and mother ; the lad ' ull never be the poorer for that , " say . , flash out with hurried timidity , like a half - smother fire . give he horse a little stroke on the flank , then check it , and say angrily , " still with you ! " much to the astonishment of that innocent animal . " and the more there be of 'em , the more they must love one another , " go on , look at she child with a didactic purpose . but she turn toward she brother again to say , " not but what I hope you boy 's ull allays be good to he sister , though there be but two of th'ey , like you and I , brother . " the arrow go straight to 's heart . he have not a rapid imagination , but the thought of be very near to he , and he be not long in see he relation to he own sister side by side with 's relation to . would the little wench ever be poorly off , and rather hard upon she ? " ay , ay , , " say the miller , with a new softness in he tone ; " but I have allays do what I could for you , " he add , as if vindicat himself from a reproach . " I be not deny that , brother , and I be noways ungrateful , " say poor Mrs . , too fag by toil and child to have strength leave for any pride . " but here be the father . what a while you have be , ! " " while , do you call it ? " say , feel out of breath and injured . " I have be run all the way . will not you ' light , ? " " well , I will just get down and have a bit of ' talk with you in the garden , " say , think that he should be more likely to show a due spirit of resolve if he sister be not present . he get down , and pass with into the garden , toward a old yew - tree arbor , while he sister stand tap she baby on the back and look wistfully after they . they entrance into the yew - tree arbor surprise several fowl that be recreate themselves by scratch deep holes in the dusty ground , and at once take flight with much pother and cackling . sit down on the bench , and tap the ground curiously here and there with he stick , as if he suspect some hollowness , open the conversation by observing , with something like a snarl in he tone ,-- " why , you have get wheat again in that , I see ; and never a bit of ' dressing on it . you will do no good with it this year . " , who , when he marry , have be regard as the buck of , now wear a beard nearly a week old , and have the depressed , unexpectant air of a machine - horse . he
he answer in a patient - grumbling tone , " why , poor farmer like I must do as they can ; they must leave it to they as have get money to play with , to put half as much into the ground as they mean to get out of it . " " I do not know who should have money to play with , if it be not they as can borrow money without pay interest , " say , who wish to get into a slight quarrel ; it be the most natural and easy introduction to call in money . " I know I be behind with the interest , " say , " but I be so unlucky wi' the wool last year ; and what with the be lay up so , thing have go awk'arder nor usual . " " ay , " snarl , " there be folk as thing ' ull allays go awk 'ard with ; empty sack ' ull never stand upright . " " well , I do not know what fault you have get to find wi' I , , " say , deprecatingly ; " I know there be not a day - laborer work harder . " " what be the use of ' that , " say , sharply , " when a man marry , and 's get no capital to work he farm but he wife 's bit of ' fortin ? I be against it from the first ; but you would neither of you listen to I . and I can not lie out of ' my money any longer , for I have get to pay five hundred og 's , and there will be a expense to I . I should find myself short , even say I would get back all as be my own . you must look about and see how you can pay I the three hundred pound . " " well , if that be what you mean , " say , look blankly before he , " we would better be sell up , and ha ' do with it ; I must part wi' every head of ' stock I have get , to pay you and the landlord too . " poor relation be undeniably irritat , -- they existence be so entirely uncalled for on we part , and they be almost always very faulty people . have succeed in get quite as much irritate with as he have desire , and he be able to say angrily , rise from he seat ,-- " well , you must do as you can . _I_ can not find money for everybody else as well as myself . I must look to my own business and my own family . I can not lie out of ' my money any longer . you must raise it as quick as you can . " walk abruptly out of the arbor as he utter the last sentence , and , without look round at , go on to the kitchen door , where the eldest boy be hold he horse , and he sister be wait in a state of wonder alarm , which be not without its alleviation , for baby be make pleasant gurgling sound , and perform a great deal of finger practice on the faded face . have eight child , but could never overcome she regret that the twin have not liv . think they removal be not without its consolation . " will not you come in , brother ? " she say , look anxiously at she husband , who be walk slowly up , while have he foot already in the stirrup . " no , no ; good - by , " say he , turn he horse 's head , and ride away . no man could feel more resolute till he get outside the yard gate , and a little way along the deep - rut lane ; but before he reach the next turning , which would take he out of sight of the dilapidate farm - building , he appear to be smite by some sudden thought . he check he horse , and make it stand still in the same spot for two or three minute , during which he turn he head from side to side in a melancholy way , as if he be look at some painful object on more side than one . evidently , after he fit of promptitude , be relapse into the sense that this be a puzzling world . he turn he horse , and ride slowly back , give vent to the climax of feeling which have determine this movement by say aloud , as he strike he horse , " poor little wench ! she will have nobody but , belike , when I be gone . " 's return into the yard be descry by several young Moss , who immediately run in with the exciting news to they mother , so that be again on the door - step when she brother ride up . she have be cry , but be rock baby to sleep in she arm now , and make no ostentatious show of sorrow as she brother look at she , but merely say : " the father 's go to the field , again , if you want he , brother . " " no , , no , " say , in a gentle tone . " do not you fret , -- that be all , -- I will make a shift without the money a bit , only you must be as clever and contrive as you can . " 's tear come again at this unexpected kindness , and she could say nothing . " come ,
, come !-- the little wench shall come and see you . I will bring she and Tom some day before he go to school . you must not fret . I will allays be a good brother to you . " " thank you for that word , brother , " say . , dry she tear ; then turn to , she say , " run now , and fetch the colored egg for . " run in , and quickly reappear with a small paper parcel . " it be boil hard , brother , and color with thrum , very pretty ; it be do of ' purpose for . will you please to carry it in you pocket ? " " ay , ay , " say , put it carefully in he side pocket . " good - by . " and so the respectable miller return along the Basset lane rather more puzzled than before as to way and mean , but still with the sense of a danger escape . it have come across he mind that if he be hard upon he sister , it might somehow tend to make hard upon at some distant day , when she father be no longer there to take she part ; for simple people , like we friend , be apt to clothe unimpeachable feeling in erroneous idea , and this be he confused way of explain to himself that he love and anxiety for " the little wench " have give he a new sensibility toward he sister . to while the possible trouble of 's future be occupy she father 's mind , she herself be taste only the bitterness of the present . childhood have no foreboding ; but then , it be soothe by no memory of outlived sorrow . the fact be , the day have begin ill with . the pleasure of have to look at , and the prospect of the afternoon visit to , where she would hear uncle Pullet 's musical box , have be mar as early as eleven o'clock by the advent of the hair - dresser from . 's , who have speak in the severest term of the condition in which he have find she hair , hold up one jag lock after another and say , " see here ! tut , tut , tut ! " in a tone of mingled disgust and pity , which to 's imagination be equivalent to the strongest expression of public opinion . , the hair - dresser , with he well - anoint coronal lock ten wavily upward , like the simulated pyramid of flame on a monumental urn , see to she at that moment the most formidable of she contemporary , into whose street at . 's she would carefully refrain from enter through the rest of she life . moreover , the preparation for a visit be always a serious affair in the family , be enjoin to have 's room ready a hour earlier than usual , that the lay out of the best clothes might not be defer till the last moment , as be sometimes the case in family of lax view , where the ribbon - string be never roll up , where there be little or no wrapping in silver paper , and where the sense that the clothes could be get at quite easily produce no shock to the mind . already , at twelve o'clock , have on she visiting costume , with a protective apparatus of brown holland , as if she have be a piece of satin furniture in danger of fly ; be frown and twist she shoulders , that she might if possible shrink away from the prickliest of tucker , while she mother be remonstrat , " do not , , my dear ; do not make yourself so ugly ! " and 's cheek be look particularly brilliant as a relief to he best blue suit , which he wear with become calmness , have , after a little wrangling , effect what be always the one point of interest to he in he toilet : he have transfer all the contents of he every - day pocket to those actually in wear . as for , she be just as pretty and neat as she have be yesterday ; no accident ever happene to she clothes , and she be never uncomfortable in they , so that she look with wonder pity at , pout and writh under the exasperating tucker . would certainly have tear it off , if she have not be check by the remembrance of she recent humiliation about she hair ; as it be , she confin herself to frett and twist , and behave peevishly about the card - house which they be allow to build till dinner , as a suitable amusement for boy and girl in they best clothes . could build perfect pyramid of house ; but 's would never bear the laying on the roof . it be always so with the thing that make ; and have deduce the conclusion that no girl could ever make anything . but it happen that prove wonderfully clever at building ; she handle the card so lightly , and move so gently , that condescende to admire she house as well as he own , the more readily because she have ask he to teach she . , too , would have admire 's house , and would have give up she own unsuccessful building to contemplate they , without ill temper , if she tucker have not make she peevish , and if have not inconsiderately laugh when she house fell , and tell she she be " a stupid . " " do not laugh at I , ! " she burst out angrily ;
; " I be not a stupid . I know a great many thing you do not . " " oh , I dare say , ! I would never be such a cross thing as you , make face like that . do not do so . I like Lucy better than you ; _I_ wish be _my sister . " " then it be very wicked and cruel of you to wish so , " say , start up hurriedly from she place on the floor , and upset 's wonderful pagoday . she really do not mean it , but the circumstantial evidence be against she , and turn white with anger , but say nothing ; he would have strike she , only he know it be cowardly to strike a girl , and be quite determined he would never do anything cowardly . stand in dismay and terror , while get up from the floor and walk away , pale , from the scattered ruin of he pagoday , and look on mutely , like a kitten pausing from its lapping . " oh , , " say , at last , go half - way toward he , " I do not mean to knock it down , indeed , indeed I do not . " take no notice of she , but take , instead , two or three hard pea out of he pocket , and shoot they with he thumbnail against the window , vaguly at first , but presently with the distinct aim of hit a superannuate blue - bottle which be expose its imbecility in the spring sunshine , clearly against the view of , who have provide and the pea for the speedy destruction of this weak individual . thus the morning have be make heavy to , and 's persistent coldness to she all through they walk spoil the fresh air and sunshine for she . he call to look at the half - build bird 's nest without care to show it , and peel a willow switch for and himself , without offer one to . have say , " , should not _you_ like one ? " but be deaf . still , the sight of the peacock opportunely spreade he tail on the stackyard wall , just as they reach , be enough to divert the mind temporarily from personal grievance . and this be only the beginning of beautiful sight at . all the farmyard life be wonderful there , -- bantam , speckle and top- knot ; hen , with they feather all turn the wrong way ; guinea - fowl that fly and scream and drop they pretty spot feather ; pouter -pigeon and a tame magpie ; nay , a goat , and a wonderful brindled dog , half mastiff , half bull - dog , as large as a lion . then there be white railing and white gate all about , and glitter weathercock of various design , and garden - walk pave with pebble in beautiful pattern , -- nothing be quite common at ; and think that the unusual size of the toad there be simply due to the general unusualness which characterize uncle Pullet 's possession as a gentleman farmer . Toad who pay rent be naturally leaner . as for the house , it be not less remarkable ; it have a receding centre , and two wing with battlemented turret , and be cover with glitter white stucco . uncle Pullet have see the expect party approach from the window , and make haste to unbar and unchain the front door , keep always in this fortify condition from fear of tramp , who might be suppose to know of the glass case of stuff bird in the hall , and to contemplate rush in and carry it away on they head . aunt Pullet , too , appear at the doorway , and as soon as she sister be within hearing say , " stop the child , for 's sake ! Bessy ; do not let them come up the door - step ; 's bring the old mat and the duster , to rub they shoe . " 's front - door mat be by no means intend to wipe shoe on ; the very scraper have a deputy to do its dirty work . rebel particularly against this shoewiping , which he always consider in the light of a indignity to he sex . he feel it as the beginning of the disagreeable incident to a visit at aunt Pullet 's , where he have once be compelle to sit with towel wrap round he boot ; a fact which may serve to correct the too - hasty conclusion that a visit to must have be a great treat to a young gentleman fond of animal , -- fond , that be , of throw stone at they . the next disagreeable be confine to he feminine companion ; it be the mounting of the polish oak stair , which have very handsome carpets roll up and laid by in a spare bedroom , so that the ascent of these glossy step might have serve , in barbarous time , as a trial by ordeal from which none but the most spotless virtue could have come off with unbroken limb . 's weakness about these polished stair be always a subject of bitter remonstrance on 's part ; but venture on no comment , only think to herself it be a mercy when she and the child be safe on the landing . " . have send home my new bonnet , , " say , in a pathetic tone , as adjust she cap . " have she , sister ? " say , with a air of much interest . " and how do you like it
it ? " " it be apt to make a mess with clothes , take th'ey out and put th'ey in again , " say , draw a bunch of key from she pocket and look at they earnestly , " but it 'uld be a pity for you to go away without see it . there be no knowing what may happen . " shook she head slowly at this last serious consideration , which determine she to single out a particular key . " I be afraid it will be troublesome to you get it out , sister , " say ; " but I _should like to see what sort of a crown she be make you . " rise with a melancholy air and unlocked one wing of a very bright wardrobe , where you may have hastily suppose she would find a new bonnet . not at all . such a supposition could only have arisen from a too-superficial acquaintance with the habits of the family . in this wardrobe Pullet be seek something small enough to be hide among layer of linen , -- it be a door - key . " you must come with I into the best room , " say . " may the child come too , sister ? " inquire , who see that and be look rather eager . " well , " say aunt Pullet , reflectively , " it will perhaps be safer for th'ey to come ; they will be touch something if we leave th'ey behind . " so they go in procession along the bright and slippery corridor , dimly light by the semi-lunar top of the window which rise above the close shutter ; it be really quite solemn . pause and unlock a door which open on something still more solemn than the passage , -- a darkened room , in which the outer light , enter feebly , show what look like the corps of furniture in white shroud . everything that be not shroude stand with its leg upward . Lucy laid hold of 's frock , and 's heart beat rapidly . aunt Pullet half - open the shutter and then unlock the wardrobe , with a melancholy deliberateness which be quite in keep with the funereal solemnity of the scene . the delicious scent of rose - leave that issue from the wardrobe make the process of take out sheet after sheet of silver paper quite pleasant to assist at , though the sight of the bonnet at last be a anticlimax to , who would have prefer something more strikingly preternatural . but few thing could have be more impressive to . she look all round it in silence for some moment , and then say emphatically , " well , sister , I will never speak against the full crown again ! " it be a great concession , and feel it ; she feel something be due to it . " you would like to see it on , sister ? " she say sadly . " I will open the shutter a bit further . " " well , if you do not mind take off you cap , sister , " say . take off she cap , display the brown silk scalp with a jutting promontory of curl which be common to the more mature and judicious woman of those time , and place the bonnet on she head , turn slowly round , like a draper 's lay - figure , that might miss no point of view . " I have sometimes think there be a loop too much of ' ribbon on this left side , sister ; what do you think ? " say . look earnestly at the point indicate , and turn she head on one side . " well , I think it be best as it be ; if you meddle with it , sister , you might repent . " " that be true , " say aunt Pullet , take off the bonnet and look at it contemplatively . " how much might she charge you for that bonnet , sister ? " say , whose mind be actively engage on the possibility of get a humble imitation of this _chef - d'oeuvre make from a piece of silk she have at home . screw up she mouth and shake she head , and then whisper , " Pullet pay for it ; he say I be to have the best bonnet at , let the next best be whose it would . " she begin slowly to adjust the trimming , in preparation for return it to its place in the wardrobe , and she thought seem to have take a melancholy turn , for she shook she head . " ah , " she say at last , " I may never wear it twice , sister ; who know ? " " do not talk of ' that sister , " answer . " I hope you will have you health this summer . " " ah ! but there may come a death in the family , as there do soon after I have my green satin bonnet . may go , and we can not think of ' wear crape less nor half a year for he . " " that _would be unlucky , " say Tulliver , enter thoroughly into the possibility of a inopportune decease . " there be never so much pleasure I ' wear a bonnet the second year , especially when the crown be so chancy , -- never two summer alike . " " ah , it be the way I ' this world , " say , return the bonnet to the wardrobe and lock it up . she maintain a silence characterize by head - shaking ,
, until they have all issue from the solemn chamber and be in she own room again . then , begin to cry , she say , " sister , if you should never see that bonnet again till I be dead and gone , you will remember I show it you this day . " feel that she ought to be affect , but she be a woman of sparse tear , stout and healthy ; she could not cry so much as she sister Pullet do , and have often feel she deficiency at funeral . she effort to bring tear into she eye issue in a odd contraction of she face . , look on attentively , feel that there be some painful mystery about she aunt 's bonnet which she be consider too young to understand ; indignantly conscious , all the while , that she could have understood that , as well as everything else , if she have be take into confidence . when they go down , uncle Pullet observe , with some acuman , that he reckon the missis have be show she bonnet , -- that be what have make they so long upstairs . with the interval have seem still longer , for he have be seat in irksome constraint on the edge of a sofa directly opposite he uncle Pullet , who regard he with twinkling gray eye , and occasionally address he as " young sir . " " well , young sir , what do you learn at school ? " be a stand question with uncle Pullet ; whereupon always look sheepish , rub he hand across he face , and answer , " I do not know . " it be altogether so embarrassing to be seat _tete - a - tete_ with uncle Pullet , that could not even look at the print on the wall , or the flycage , or the wonderful flower - pots ; he see nothing but he uncle 's gaiter . not that be in awe of he uncle 's mental superiority ; indeed , he have make up he mind that he do not want to be a gentleman farmer , because he should not like to be such a thing - leg , silly fellow as he uncle Pullet , -- a molly - coddle , in fact . a boy 's sheepishness be by no means a sign of overmastering reverence ; and while you be make encourage advance to he under the idea that he be overwhelm by a sense of you age and wisdom , ten to one he be think you extremely queer . the only consolation I can suggest to you be , that the greek boy probably think the same of . it be only when you have master a restive horse , or thrash a drayman , or have get a gun in you hand , that these shy juniors feel you to be a truly admirable and enviable character . at least , I be quite sure of 's sentiment on these point . in very tender year , when he still wear a lace border under he outdoor cap , he be often observe pee through the bar of a gate and make minatory gesture with he small forefinger while he scold the sheep with a inarticulate burr , intend to strike terror into they astonished mind ; indicate thus early that desire for mastery over the inferior animal , wild and domestic , include cockchafer , neighbor ' dog , and small sister , which in all age have be a attribute of so much promise for the fortune of we race . now , never ride anything taller than a low pony , and be the least predatory of man , consider firearm dangerous , as apt to go off of themselves by nobody 's particular desire . so that be not without strong reason when , in confidential talk with a chum , he have describe uncle Pullet as a nincompoop , take care at the same time to observe that he be a very " rich fellow . " the only alleviat circumstance in a _tete - a -tete_ with uncle Pullet be that he keep a variety of lozenge and peppermint - drop about he person , and when at a loss for conversation , he fill up the void by propose a mutual solace of this kind . " do you like peppermint , young sir ? " require only a tacit answer when it be accompany by a presentation of the article in question . the appearance of the little girl suggest to uncle Pullet the further solace of small sweet - cake , of which he also keep a stock under lock and key for he own private eat on wet day ; but the three child have no sooner get the tempting delicacy between they finger , than aunt Pullet desire they to abstain from eat it till the tray and the plate come , since with those crisp cake they would make the floor " all over " crumb . do not mind that much , for the cake be so pretty , she think it be rather a pity to eat it ; but , watch he opportunity while the elder be talk , hastily stow it in he mouth at two bite , and chew it furtively . as for , become fascinated , as usual , by a print of and , which uncle Pullet have buy as a " pretty Scripture thing , " she presently let fall she cake , and in a unlucky movement crush it beneath she foot ,-- a source of so much agitation to aunt and conscious disgrace to , that she begin to despair of hear the musical snuff - box to - day , till , after
after some reflection , it occur to she that be in high favor enough to venture on ask for a tune . so she whisper to ; and , who always do what she be desire to do , go up quietly to she uncle 's knee , and blush - all over she neck while she finger she necklace , say , " will you please play we a tune , uncle ? " think it be by reason of some exceptional talent in uncle Pullet that the snuff - box play such beautiful tune , and indeed the thing be view in that light by the majority of he neighbor in . have _botch the box , to begin with , and he understood win it up , and know which tune it be go to play beforehand ; altogether the possession of this unique " piece of music " be a proof that 's character be not of that entire nullity which might otherwise have be attribute to it . but uncle Pullet , when entreate to exhibit he accomplishment , never depreciate it by a too - ready consent . " we will see about it , " be the answer he always give , carefully abstain from any sign of compliance till a suitable number of minute have pass . uncle Pullet have a programme for all great social occasion , and in this way fence himself in from much painful confusion and perplex freedom of will . perhaps the suspense do heighten 's enjoyment when the fairy tune begin ; for the first time she quite forgot that she have a load on she mind , that be angry with she ; and by the time " Hush , ye pretty warbling choir , " have be play , she face wear that bright look of happiness , while she sit immovable with she hand clasp , which sometimes comfort she mother with the sense that could look pretty now and then , in spite of she brown skin . but when the magic music cease , she jump up , and run toward , put she arm round he neck and say , " oh , , be not it pretty ? " Lest you should think it show a revolt insensibility in that he feel any new anger toward for this uncalled - for and , to he , inexplicable caress , I must tell you that he have he glass of cowslip wine in he hand , and that she jerk he so as to make he spill half of it . he must have be a extreme milksop not to say angrily , " look there , now ! " especially when he resentment be sanction , as it be , by general disapprobation of 's behavior . " why do not you sit still , ? " she mother say peevishly . " little gell must not come to see I if they behave in that way , " say aunt Pullet . " why , you be too rough , little miss , " say uncle Pullet . poor Maggie sit down again , with the music all chase out of she soul , and the seven small demon all in again . , foresee nothing but misbehavior while the child remain indoors , take a early opportunity of suggest that , now they be rest after they walk , they might go and play out of door ; and aunt Pullet give permission , only enjoin they not to go off the paved walk in the garden , and if they want to see the poultry feed , to view they from a distance on the horse - block ; a restriction which have be impos ever since have be find guilty of run after the peacock , with a illusory idea that fright would make one of its feather drop off . 's thought have be temporarily divert from the quarrel with by millinery and maternal care , but now the great theme of the bonnet be throw into perspective , and the child be out of the way , yesterday 's anxiety recur . " it weigh on my mind so as never be , " she say , by way of open the subject , " sister 's leave the house in that way . I be sure I have no wish t ' offend a sister . " " ah , " say aunt Pullet , " there be no accounting for what 'ull do . I would not speak of it out of ' the family , if it be not to ; but it be my belief live too low . I have say so to Pullet often and often , and he know it . " " why , you say so last be a week , when we come away from drinking tea with 'em , " say , begin to nurse he knee and shelter it with he pocket - hand - kerchief , as be he way when the conversation take a interesting turn . " very like I do , " say , " for you remember when I say thing , better than I can remember myself . he be get a wonderful memory , Pullet have , " she continue , look pathetically at she sister . " I should be poorly off if he be to have a stroke , for he always remember when I have get to take my doctor 's stuff ; and I be take three sort now . " " there be the ' pill as before ' every other night , and the new drop at eleven and four , and the ' fervescing mixture ' when agreeable , ' " rehearse , with a punctuation determine by a lozenge on he tongue . " ah , perhaps
perhaps it 'uld be better for sister Glegg if _she would go to the doctor sometimes , instead of ' chew rhubard whenever there be anything the matter with she , " say . , who naturally see the wide subject of medicine chiefly in relation to . " it be dreadful to think on , " say aunt Pullet , raise she hand and let they fall again , " people play with they own inside in that way ! and it be fly I ' the face o' Providence ; for what be the doctor for , if we be not to call them in ? and when folk have get the money to pay for a doctor , it be not respectable , as I have tell many a time . I be asham of acquaintance know it . " " well , _we have no call to be asham , " say , " for have not get such another patient as you I ' this parish , now old 's gone . " " Pullet keep all my physic - bottle , do you know , ? " say . " he will not have one sell . he say it be nothing but right folk should see th'ey when I be gone . they fill two of ' the long store - room shelf a' ready ; but , " she add , begin to cry a little , " it be well if they ever fill three . I may go before I have make up the dozen o' these last size . the pill - box be in the closet in my room , -- you will remember that , sister , -- but there be nothing to show for the boluse , if it be not the bill . " " do not talk of ' you go , sister , " say ; " I should have nobody to stand between I and sister Glegg if you be gone . and there be nobody but you can get she to make it up with , for sister Deane be never of ' my side , and if she be , it be not to be look for as she can speak like they as have get a independent fortin . " " well , you husband _i awk 'ard , you know , , " say , good - naturedly ready to use she deep depression on she sister 's account as well as she own . " he be never behave quite so pretty to we family as he should do , and the child take after he , -- the boy 's very mischievous , and run away from he aunt and uncle , and the gell 's rude and brown . it be you bad luck , and I be sorry for you , Bessy ; for you be allay my favorite sister , and we allays like the same pattern . " " I know 's hasty , and say odd thing , " say . , wip away one small tear from the corner of she eye ; " but I be sure he be never be the man , since he marry I , to object to my make the friend of ' my side of ' the family welcome to the house . " " _I_ do not want to make the worst of you , , " say , compassionately , " for I doubt you will have trouble enough without that ; and you husband 's get that poor sister and she child hang on he , -- and so give to law , they say . I doubt he will leave you poorly off when he die . not as I would have it say out of ' the family . " this view of she position be naturally far from cheer to . she imagination be not easily act on , but she could not help think that she case be a hard one , since it appear that other people think it hard . " I be sure , sister , I can not help myself , " she say , urge by the fear lest she anticipate misfortune might be hold retributive , to take comprehensive review of she past conduct . " there be no woman strive more for she child ; and I be sure at scouring - time this lady - day as I have have all the bedhanging take down I do as much as the two gell put together ; and there be the last elder - flower wine I have make -- beautiful ! I allays offer it along with the sherry , though sister will have it I be so extravagant ; and as for like to have my clothes tidy , and not go a fright about the house , there be nobody in the parish can say anything against I in respect of ' backbiting and make mischief , for I do not wish anybody any harm ; and nobody lose by send I a porkpie , for my pie be fit to show with the best of ' my neighbor ' ; and the linen 's so in order as if I be to die to - morrow I should not be asham . a woman can do no more nor she can . " " but it be all of ' no use , you know , , " say , hold she head on one side , and fix she eye pathetically on she sister , " if you husband make away with he money . not but what if you be sell up , and other folk buy you furniture , it be a comfort to think as you have keep it well rubb . and there be the linen , with you maiden mark
mark on , might go all over the country . it 'uld be a sad pity for we family . " shook she head slowly . " but what can I do , sister ? " say . " be not a man to be dictate to , -- not if I be to go to the parson and get by heart what I should tell my husband for the best . and I be sure I do not pretend to know anything about put out money and all that . I could never see into man 's business as sister do . " " well , you be like I in that , , " say ; " and I think it 'uld be a deal more become o' if she would have that pier - glass rubbed oftener , -- there be ever so many spot on it last week ,-- instead o ' dictat to folk as have more comings in than she ever have , and tell them what they be to do with they money . but and I be allays contrairy ; she _would have striped thing , and I like spot . you like a spot too , Bessy ; we allay hang together I ' that . " " yes , , " say , " I remember we have a blue ground with a white spot both alike , -- I have get a bit in a bed - quilt now ; and if you would but go and see sister , and persuade she to make it up with , I should take it very kind of you . you be allay a good sister to I . " " but the right thing 'uld be for to go and make it up with she himself , and say he be sorry for speak so rash . if he be borrow money of she , he should not be above that , " say . Pullet , whose partiality do not blind she to principle ; she do not forget what be due to people of independent fortune . " it be no use talk of ' that , " say poor Tulliver , almost peevishly . " if I be to go down on my bare knee on the gravel to , he would never humble himself . " " well , you can not expect I to persuade to beg pardon , " say Pullet . " she temper 's beyond everything ; it be well if it do not carry she off she mind , though there never _was_ any of we family go to a madhouse . " " I be not think of she begge pardon , " say . " but if she would just take no notice , and not call she money in ; as it be not so much for one sister to ask of another ; time 'uld mmend thing , and 'uld forget all about it , and they would be friend again . " , you perceive , be not aware of she husband 's irrevocable determination to pay in the five hundred pound ; at least such a determination exceed she power of belief . " well , , " say , mournfully , " _I do not want to help you on to ruin . I will not be behindhand I ' do you a good turn , if it be to be do . and I do not like it say among acquaintance as we have get quarrel in the family . I shall tell that ; and I do not mind drive to 's tomorrow , if do not mind . what do you say , ? " " I have no objection , " say , who be perfectly contente with any course the quarrel might take , so that do not apply to _he for money . be nervous about he investment , and do not see how a man could have any security for he money unless he turn it into land . after a little further discussion as to whether it would not be better for Tulliver to accompany they on a visit to sister , Pullet , observe that it be tea - time , turn to reach from a drawer a delicate damask napkin , which she pin before she in the fashion of a apron . the door do , in fact , soon open , but instead of the tea - tray , introduce a object so start that both and give a scream , cause uncle Pullet to swallow he lozenge -- for the fifth time in he life , as he afterward no . than she expect the start object which thus make a epoch for uncle Pullet be no other than little , with one side of she person , from she small foot to she bonnet - crown , wet and discolor with mud , hold out two tiny blacken hand , and make a very piteous face . to account for this unprecedented apparition in aunt Pullet 's parlor , we must return to the moment when the three child go to play out of door , and the small demon who have take possession of 's soul at a early period of the day have return in all the greater force after a temporary absence . all the disagreeable recollection of the morning be thick upon she , when , whose displeasure toward she have be considerably refresh by she foolish trick of cause he to upset he cowslip wine , say , " here , , you come along with I , " and walk off to the area where the toad were , as if there be no Maggie in existence . see this , linger at a distance look like a small with she snake crop . be
be naturally pleased that cousin be so good to she , and it be very amusing to see he tick a fat toad with a piece of string when the toad be safe down the area , with a iron grating over he . wish to enjoy the spectacle also , especially as she would doubtless find a name for the toad , and say what have be he past history ; for have a delighted semibelief in 's story about the live thing they come upon by accident ,-- how have a wash at home , and one of she child have fall into the hot copper , for which reason she be run so fast to fetch the doctor . have a profound contempt for this nonsense of 's , smashe the earwig at once as a superfluous yet easy means of prove the entire unreality of such a story ; but , for the life of she , could not help fancie there be something in it , and at all event think it be very pretty make - beleive . so now the desire to know the history of a very portly toad , add to she habitual affectionateness , make she run back to and say , " oh , there be such a big , funny toad , ! do come and see ! " say nothing , but turn away from she with a deeper frown . as long as seem to prefer to she , make part of he unkindness . would have think a little while ago that she could never be cross with pretty little Lucy , any more than she could be cruel to a little white mouse ; but then , have always be quite indifferent to Lucy before , and it have be leave to Maggie to pet and make much of she . as it be , she be actually begin to think that she should like to make cry by slapping or pinch she , especially as it might vex , whom it be of no use to slap , even if she da , because he do not mind it . and if have not be there , be sure he would have get friend with she sooner . Tickl a fat toad who be not highly sensitive be a amusement that it be possible to exhaust , and by and by begin to look round for some other mode of pass the time . but in so prim a garden , where they be not to go off the paved walk , there be not a great choice of sport . the only great pleasure such a restriction suggest be the pleasure of break it , and begin to meditate a insurrectionary visit to the pond , about a field 's length beyond the garden . " I say , , " he begin , nodd he head up and down with great significance , as he coil up he string again , " what do you think I mean to do ? " " what , ? " say , with curiosity . " I mean to go to the pond and look at the pike . you may go with I if you like , " say the young sultan . " oh , , _dare you ? " say . " aunt say we must not go out of the garden . " " oh , I shall go out at the other end of the garden , " say . " nobody ' ull see we . besides , I do not care if they do , -- I will run off home . " " but _i_ could not run , " say , who have never before be expose to such severe temptation . " oh , never mind ; they will not be cross with _you_, " say . " you say I take you . " walk along , and trot by he side , timidly enjoy the rare treat of do something naughty ,-- excit also by the mention of that celebrity , the pike , about which she be quite uncertain whether it be a fish or a fowl . see they leave the garden , and could not resist the impulse to follow . and can no more bear to lose sight of they object than love , and that and should do or see anything of which she be ignorant would have be a intolerable idea to Maggie . so she keep a few yard behind they , unobserve by , who be presently absorbed in watch for the pike , -- a highly interesting monster ; he be say to be so very old , so very large , and to have such a remarkable appetite . the pike , like other celebrity , do not show when he be watch for , but catch sight of something in rapid movement in the water , which attract he to another spot on the brink of the pond . " here , ! " he say in a loud whisper , " come here ! take care ! keep on the grass !-- do not step where the cow have be ! " he add , point to a peninsula of dry grass , with trodden mud on each side of it ; for 's contemptuous conception of a girl include the attribute of be unfit to walk in dirty place . come carefully as she be bidden , and bend down to look at what see a golden arrow - head dart through the water . it be a water - snake , tell she ; and Lucy at last could see the serpentine wave of its body , very much wonder that a snake could swim . have draw nearer and nearer ; she _must see it too , though
though it be bitter to she , like everything else , since do not care about she see it . at last she be close by ; and , who have be aware of she approach , but would not notice it till he be oblige , turn round and say ,-- " now , get away , ; there be no room for you on the grass here . nobody ask _you_ to come . " there be passion at war in at that moment to have make a tragedy , if tragedy be make by passion only ; but the essential [ text ] which be present in the passion be want to the action ; the utmost Maggie could do , with a fierce thrust of she small brown arm , be to push poor little pink - and - white Lucy into the cow - trodden mud . then could not restrain himself , and give two smart slap on the arm as he run to pick up , who lay cry helplessly . retreat to the root of a tree a few yard off , and look on impenitently . usually she repentance come quickly after one rash deed , but now and have make she so miserable , she be glad to spoil they happiness , -- glad to make everybody uncomfortable . why should she be sorry ? be very slow to forgive _her , however sorry she might have be . " I shall tell mother , you know , , " say , loudly and emphatically , as soon as be up and ready to walk away . it be not 's practice to " tell , " but here justice clearly demand that should be visit with the utmost punishment ; not that have learn to put he view in that abstract form ; he never mention " justice , " and have no idea that he desire to punish might be call by that fine name . be too entirely absorb by the evil that have befall she , -- the spoiling of she pretty best clothes , and the discomfort of be wet and dirty , -- to think much of the cause , which be entirely mysterious to she . she could never have guess what she have do to make angry with she ; but she feel that be very unkind and disagreeable , and make no magnanimous entreaty to that he would not " tell , " only run along by he side and cry piteously , while sit on the root of the tree and look after they with she small face . " , " say , when they reach the kitchen door , and look at they in speechless amaze , with a piece of bread - and - butter in she mouth and a toasting - fork in she hand , -- " , tell mother it be push into the mud . " " but ha ' massy , how do you get near such mud as that ? " say , make a wry face , as she stoop down and examine the _corpus delicti_. 's imagination have not be rapid and capacious enough to include this question among the foreseen consequence , but it be no sooner put than he foresee whither it ten , and that would not be consider the only culprit in the case . he walk quietly away from the kitchen door , leave Sally to that pleasure of guessing which active mind notoriously prefer to ready - make knowledge . Sally , as you be aware , lose no time in present at the parlor door , for to have so dirty a object introduce into the house at be too great a weight to be sustain by a single mind . " goodness gracious ! " aunt Pullet exclaim , after prelud by a inarticulate scream ; " keep she at the door , ! do not bring she off the oil - cloth , whatever you do . " " why , she have tumble into some nasty mud , " say , go up to to examine into the amount of damage to clothes for which she feel herself responsible to she sister . " if you please , 'um , it be as push she in , " say ; " 's be and say so , and they must ha ' be to the pond , for it be only there they could ha ' get into such dirt . " " there it be , ; it be what I have be tell you , " say , in a tone of prophetic sadness ; " it be you child ,-- there be no knowing what they will come to . " be mute , feel herself a truly wretched mother . as usual , the thought presse upon she that people would think she have do something wicked to deserve she maternal trouble , while Pullet begin to give elaborate direction to how to guard the premise from serious injury in the course of remove the dirt . meantime tea be to be bring in by the cook , and the two naughty child be to have theirs in a ignominious manner in the kitchen . Tulliver go out to speak to these naughty child , suppose they to be close at hand ; but it be not until after some search that she find lean with rather a hardened , careless air against the white paling of the poultry - yard , and lower he piece of string on the other side as a means of exasperat the turkey - cock . " tom , you naughty boy , where be you sister ? " say , in a distressed voice . " I do not know , " say ; he eagerness for justice on
on have diminish since he have see clearly that it could hardly be bring about without the injustice of some blame on he own conduct . " why , where do you leave she ? " say the mother , look round . " sit under the tree , against the pond , " say , apparently indifferent to everything but the string and the turkey - cock . " then go and fetch she in this minute , you naughty boy . and how could you think of ' go to the pond , and take you sister where there be dirt ? you know she will do mischief if there be mischief to be do . " it be 's way , if she blame , to refer he misdemeanor , somehow or other , to . the idea of sit alone by the pond rouse a habitual fear in 's mind , and she mount the horse - block to satisfy herself by a sight of that fatal child , while walk -- not very quickly -- on he way toward she . " they be such child for the water , mine be , " she say aloud , without reflec that there be no one to hear she ; " they will be bring in dead and drownd some day . I wish that river be far enough . " but when she not only fail to discern , but presently see Tom return from the pool alone , this hover fear enter and take complete possession of she , and she hurrie to meet he . " 's nowhere about the pond , mother , " say ; " she be go away . " you may conceive the terrified search for , and the difficulty of convince she mother that she be not in the pond . observ that the child might come to a worse end if she liv , there be no know ; and , confuse and overwhelm by this revolutionary aspect of thing , -- the tea defer and the poultry alarme by the unusual run to and fro , -- take up he spud as a instrument of search , and reach down a key to unlock the goose - pen , as a likely place for to lie conceal in . , after a while , start the idea that be go home ( without think it necessary to state that it be what he should have do himself under the circumstance ) , and the suggestion be seize as a comfort by he mother . " sister , for goodness 's sake let them put the horse in the carriage and take I home ; we shall perhaps find she on the road . Lucy can not walk in she dirty clothes , " she say , look at that innocent victim , who be wrap up in a shawl , and sit with naked foot on the sofa . be quite willing to take the shortest means of restore she premise to order and quiet , and it be not long before be in the chaise , look anxiously at the most distant point before she . what the father would say if be lose , be a question that predominate over every other . to away from 's intention , as usual , be on a larger scale than imagine . the resolution that gather in she mind , after and have walk away , be not so simple as that of go home . no ! she would run away and go to the gypsy , and should never see she any more . that be by no means a new idea to ; she have be so often tell she be like a gypsy , and " half wild , " that when she be miserable it seem to she the only way of escape opprobrium , and be entirely in harmony with circumstance , would be to live in a little brown tent on the common ; the gypsy , she consider , would gladly receive she and pay she much respect on account of she superior knowledge . she have once mention she view on this point to and suggest that he should stain he face brown , and they should run away together ; but reject the scheme with contempt , observe that gypsy be thieve , and hardly get anything to eat and have nothing to drive but a donkey . to -day however , think she misery have reach a pitch at which gypsydom be she refuge , and she rise from she seat on the root of the tree with the sense that this be a great crisis in she life ; she would run straight away till she come to , where there would certainly be gypsy ; and , and the rest of she relation who find fault with she , should never see she any more . she think of she father as she run along , but she reconcile herself to the idea of part with he , by determining that she would secretly send he a letter by a small gypsy , who would run away without tell where she be , and just let he know that she be well and happy , and always love he very much . soon get out of breath with running , but by the time get to the pond again she be at the distance of three long field , and be on the edge of the lane lead to the highroad . she stop to pant a little , reflec that run away be not a pleasant thing until one have get quite to the common where the gypsy be , but she resolution have not abate ; she presently pass through the gate into the lane , not know where it would
would lead she , for it be not this way that they come from to , and she feel all the safer for that , because there be no chance of she be overtake . but she be soon aware , not without trembl , that there be two man come along the lane in front of she ; she have not think of meeting stranger , she have be too much occupy with the idea of she friend come after she . the formidable stranger be two shabby - look man with flushed face , one of they carry a bundle on a stick over he shoulder ; but to she surprise , while she be dread they disapprobation as a runaway , the man with the bundle stop , and in a half - whining , half - coaxing tone ask she if she have a copper to give a poor man . have a sixpence in she pocket , -- she uncle 's present , -- which she immediately draw out and give this poor man with a polite smile , hope he would feel very kindly toward she as a generous person . " that be the only money I have get , " she say apologetically . " thank you , little miss , " say the man , in a less respectful and grateful tone than anticipat , and she even observe that he smile and wink at he companion . she walk on hurriedly , but be aware that the two man be stand still , probably to look after she , and she presently hear they laugh loudly . suddenly it occur to she that they might think she be a idiot ; have say that she crop hair make she look like a idiot , and it be too painful a idea to be readily forget . besides , she have no sleeve on , -- only a cape and bonnet . it be clear that she be not likely to make a favorable impression on passengers , and she think she would turn into the field again , but not on the same side of the lane as before , lest they should still be uncle Pullet 's field . she turn through the first gate that be not lock , and feel a delightful sense of privacy in creeping along by the hedgerow , after she recent humiliating encounter . she be use to wander about the field by herself , and be less timid there than on the highroad . sometimes she have to climb over high gate , but that be a small evil ; she be get out of reach very fast , and she should probably soon come within sight of , or at least of some other common , for she have hear she father say that you could not go very far without come to a common . she hope so , for she be get rather tired and hungry , and until she reach the gypsy there be no definite prospect of bread and butter . it be still broad daylight , for aunt Pullet , retain the early habits of the family , take tea at half - past four by the sun , and at five by the kitchen clock ; so , though it be nearly a hour since start , there be no gathering gloom on the field to remind she that the night would come . , it seem to she that she have be walk a very great distance indeed , and it be really surprising that the common do not come within sight . she have be in the rich parish of , where be a great deal of pasture - land , and she have only see one laborer at a distance . that be fortunate in some respects , as laborer might be too ignorant to understand the propriety of she want to go to ; yet it would have be better if she could have meet some one who would tell she the way without want to know anything about she private business . at last , however , the green field come to a end , and find herself look through the bar of a gate into a lane with a wide margin of grass on each side of it . she have never see such a wide lane before , and , without she know why , it give she the impression that the common could not be far off ; perhaps it be because she see a donkey with a log to he foot feed on the grassy margin , for she have see a donkey with that pitiable encumbrance on when she have be across it in she father 's gig . she crept through the bar of the gate and walk on with new spirit , though not without haunt image of , and a highwayman with a pistol , and a blinking dwarf in yellow with a mouth from ear to ear , and other miscellaneous dangers . for poor little have at once the timidity of a active imagination and the daring that come from overmastering impulse . she have rush into the adventure of seek she unknown kindred , the gypsy ; and now she be in this strange lane , she hardly da look on one side of she , lest she should see the diabolical blacksmith in he leathern apron grinn at she with arm akimbo . it be not without a leaping of the heart that she catch sight of a small pair of bare leg stick up , foot uppermost , by the side of a hillock ; they seem something hideously preternatural ,-- a diabolical kind of fungus ; for she be too much agitate at the first glance to see the rag clothes and the dark shaggy head attach
attach to they . it be a boy asleep , and trot along faster and more lightly , lest she should wake he ; it do not occur to she that he be one of she friend the gypsy , who in all probability would have very genial manners . but the fact be so , for at the next bend in the lane actually see the little semicircular black tent with the blue smoke rise before it , which be to be she refuge from all the blighting obloquy that have pursue she in civilized life . she even see a tall female figure by the column of smoke , doubtless the gypsy - mother , who provide the tea and other grocery ; it be astonish to herself that she do not feel more delighted . but it be start to find the gypsy in a lane , after all , and not on a common ; indeed , it be rather disappoint ; for a mysterious illimitable common , where there be sand - pit to hide in , and one be out of everybody 's reach , have always make part of 's picture of gypsy life . she go on , however , and think with some comfort that gypsy most likely know nothing about idiot , so there be no danger of they fall into the mistake of set she down at the first glance as a idiot . it be plain she have attract attention ; for the tall figure , who prove to be a young woman with a baby on she arm , walk slowly to meet she . look up in the new face rather tremblingly as it approach , and be reassure by the thought that she aunt Pullet and the rest be right when they call she a gypsy ; for this face , with the bright dark eye and the long hair , be really something like what she use to see in the glass before she cut she hair off . " my little lady , where be you go to ? " the gypsy say , in a tone of coaxing deference . it be delightful , and just what expect ; the gypsy see at once that she be a little lady , and be prepared to treat she accordingly . " not any farther , " say , feel as if she be say what she have rehearse in a dream . " I be come to stay with _you , please . " " that be pretty ; come , then . why , what a nice little lady you be , to be sure ! " say the gypsy , take she by the hand . think she very agreeable , but wish she have not be so dirty . there be quite a group round the fire when she reach it . a old gypsy woman be seat on the ground nurse she knee , and occasionally pok a skewer into the round kettle that send forth a odorous steam ; two small shock - head child be lie prone and rest on they elbow something like small sphinx ; and a placid donkey be bend he head over a tall girl , who , lie on she back , be scratch he nose and indulge he with a bite of excellent stolen hay . the slanting sunlight fall kindly upon they , and the scene be really very pretty and comfortable , thought , only she hope they would soon set out the tea - cup . everything would be quite charme when she have teach the gypsy to use a washing - basin , and to feel a interest in book . it be a little confusing , though , that the young woman begin to speak to the old one in a language which do not understand , while the tall girl , who be feed the donkey , sit up and star at she without offer any salutation . at last the old woman say ,-- " what ! my pretty lady , be you come to stay with we ? sit ye down and tell we where you come from . " it be just like a story ; like to be call pretty lady and treat in this way . she sit down and say ,-- " I be come from home because I be unhappy , and I mean to be a gypsy . I will live with you if you like , and I can teach you a great many thing . " " such a clever little lady , " say the woman with the baby sit down by , and allow baby to crawl ; " and such a pretty bonnet and frock , " she add , take off 's bonnet and look at it while she make a observation to the old woman , in the unknown language . the tall girl snatch the bonnet and put it on she own head hind - foremost with a grin ; but be determine not to show any weakness on this subject , as if she be susceptible about she bonnet . " I do not want to wear a bonnet , " she say ; " I would rather wear a red handkerchief , like yours " ( look at she friend by she side ) . " my hair be quite long till yesterday , when I cut it off ; but I dare say it will grow again very soon , " she add apologetically , think it probable the gypsy have a strong prejudice in favor of long hair . and have forget even she hunger at that moment in the desire to conciliate gypsy opinion . " oh , what a nice little lady !-- and rich , I be sure , " say the old
old woman . " do not you live in a beautiful house at home ? " " yes , my home be pretty , and I be very fond of the river , where we go fishing , but I be often very unhappy . I should have like to bring my book with I , but I come away in a hurry , you know . but I can tell you almost everything there be in my book , I have read they so many time , and that will amuse you . and I can tell you something about too , -- that be about the world we live in ,-- very useful and interesting . do you ever hear about ? " 's eye have begin to sparkle and she cheek to flush , -- she be really begin to instruct the gypsy , and gain great influence over they . the gypsy themselves be not without amazement at this talk , though they attention be divide by the contents of 's pocket , which the friend at she right hand have by this time empty without attract she notice . " be that where you live , my little lady ? " say the old woman , at the mention of . " oh , no ! " say , with some pity ; " be a very wonderful man , who find out half the world , and they put chain on he and treat he very badly , you know ; it be in my Catechism of , but perhaps it be rather too long to tell before tea -- _I want my tea so_. " the last word burst from , in spite of herself , with a sudden drop from patronize instruction to simple peevishness . " why , she be hungry , poor little lady , " say the younger woman . " give she some of ' the cold victual . you have be walk a good way , I will be bound , my dear . where be you home ? " " it be , a good way off , " say . " my father be , but we must not let he know where I be , else he will fetch I home again . where do the queen of the gypsy live ? " " what ! do you want to go to she , my little lady ? " say the younger woman . the tall girl meanwhile be constantly star at and grinn . she manners be certainly not agreeable . " no , " say , " I be only think that if she be not a very good queen you might be glad when she die , and you could choose another . if I be a queen , I would be a very good queen , and kind to everybody . " " here be a bit of ' nice victual , then , " say the old woman , hand to Maggie a lump of dry bread , which she have take from a bag of scrap , and a piece of cold bacon . " thank you , " say , look at the food without take it ; " but will you give I some bread - and - butter and tea instead ? I do not like bacon . " " we have get no tea nor butter , " say the old woman , with something like a scowl , as if she be get tired of coaxing . " oh , a little bread and treacle would do , " say . " we ha not get no treacle , " say the old woman , crossly , whereupon there follow a sharp dialogue between the two woman in they unknown tongue , and one of the small sphinx snatch at the bread - and - bacon , and begin to eat it . at this moment the tall girl , who have go a few yard off , come back , and say something which produce a strong effect . the old woman , seem to forget 's hunger , pok the skewer into the pot with new vigor , and the younger crept under the tent and reach out some platter and spoon . tremble a little , and be afraid the tear would come into she eye . meanwhile the tall girl give a shrill cry , and presently come run up the boy whom have pass as he be sleep ,-- a rough urching about the age of . he star at , and there ensue much incomprehensible chattering . she feel very lonely , and be quite sure she should begin to cry before long ; the gypsy do not seem to mind she at all , and she feel quite weak among they . but the springing tear be check by new terror , when two man come up , whose approach have be the cause of the sudden excitement . the elder of the two carry a bag , which he fling down , address the woman in a loud and scold tone , which they answer by a shower of treble sauciness ; while a black cur run bark up to , and throw she into a tremor that only find a new cause in the curse with which the younger man call the dog off , and give he a rap with a great stick he hold in he hand . feel that it be impossible she should ever be queen of these people , or ever communicate to they amusing and useful knowledge . both the man now seem to be inquire about , for they look at she , and the tone of the conversation become of that pacific kind which imply curiosity on one side and the power of satisfy it on the
the other . at last the younger woman say in she previous deferential , coax tone ,-- " this nice little lady 's come to live with we ; be not you glad ? " " ay , very glad , " say the younger man , who be look at 's silver thimble and other small matters that have be take from she pocket . he return they all except the thimble to the younger woman , with some observation , and she immediately restore they to 's pocket , while the man seate themselves , and begin to attack the contents of the kettle , -- a stew of meat and potatoe , -- which have be take off the fire and turn out into a yellow platter . begin to think that must be right about the gypsy ; they must certainly be thief , unless the man mean to return she thimble by and by . she would willingly have give it to he , for she be not at all attach to she thimble ; but the idea that she be among thief prevent she from feel any comfort in the revival of deference and attention toward she ; all thief , except , be wick people . the woman see she be frightene . " we have get nothing nice for a lady to eat , " say the old woman , in she coaxing tone . " and she be so hungry , sweet little lady . " " here , my dear , try if you can eat a bit of ' this , " say the younger woman , hand some of the stew on a brown dish with a iron spoon to , who , remember that the old woman have seem angry with she for not like the bread - and - bacon , da not refuse the stew , though fear have chase away she appetite . if she father would but come by in the gig and take she up ! or even if the , or , or who slow the dragon on the half - penny , would happen to pass that way ! but think with a sinking heart that these heroe be never see in the neighborhood of 's ; nothing very wonderful ever come there . , you perceive , be by no means that well train , well - inform young person that a small female of eight or nine necessarily be in these day ; she have only be to school a year at . 's , and have so few book that she sometimes read the dictionary ; so that in travel over she small mind you would have find the most unexpected ignorance as well as unexpected knowledge . she could have inform you that there be such a word as " polygamy , " and be also acquaint with " polysyllable , " she have deduce the conclusion that " poly " mean " many " ; but she have have no idea that gypsy be not well supply with grocery , and she thought generally be the oddest mixture of clear - eyed acuman and blind dream . she idea about the gypsy have undergone a rapid modification in the last five minute . from have consider they very respectful companion , amenable to instruction , she have begin to think that they mean perhaps to kill she as soon as it be dark , and cut up she body for gradual cooking ; the suspicion cross she that the fierce - ey old man be in fact the , who might drop that transparent disguise at any moment , and turn either into the grinning blacksmith , or else a fiery - ey monster with dragon 's wing . it be no use try to eat the stew , and yet the thing she must dread be to offend the gypsy , by betraie she extremely unfavorable opinion of they ; and she wonder , with a keenness of interest that no theologian could have exceed , whether , if the be really present , he would know she thought . " what ! you do not like the smell of it , my dear , " say the young woman , observe that do not even take a spoonful of the stew . " try a bit , come . " " no , thank you , " say , summon all she force for a desperate effort , and try to smile in a friendly way . " I have not time , I think ; it seem get darker . I think I must go home now , and come again another day , and then I can bring you a basket with some jam - tart and thing . " rise from she seat as she throw out this illusory prospect , devoutly hope that be gullible ; but she hope sank when the old gypsy - woman say , " stop a bit , stop a bit , little lady ; we will take you home , all safe , when we have do supper ; you shall ride home , like a lady . " sit down again , with little faith in this promise , though she presently see the tall girl put a bridle on the donkey , and throw a couple of bag on he back . " now , then , little missis , " say the younger man , rise , and lead the donkey forward , " tell we where you live ; what be the name of ' the place ? " " be my home , " say , eagerly . " my father be ; he live there . " " what ! a big mill a little way this side o' 's ? " " yes , " say .
. " be it far off ? I think I should like to walk there , if you please . " " no , no , it will be get dark , we must make haste . and the donkey will carry you as nice as can be ; you will see . " he lift as he speak , and set she on the donkey . she feel relieve that it be not the old man who seem to be go with she , but she have only a trembling hope that she be really go home . " here be you pretty bonnet , " say the younger woman , put that recently despise but now welcome article of costume on 's head ; " and you will say we have be very good to you , will not you ? and what a nice little lady we say you be . " " oh yes , thank you , " say , " I be very much oblige to you . but I wish you would go with I too . " she think anything be better than go with one of the dreadful man alone ; it would be more cheerful to be murder by a larger party . " ah , you be fondest o' _me_ , be not you ? " say the woman . " but I can not go ; you will go too fast for I . " it now appear that the man also be to be seat on the donkey , hold before he , and she be as incapable of remonstrating against this arrangement as the donkey himself , though no nightmare have ever see to she more horrible . when the woman have patt she on the back , and say " good - by , " the donkey , at a strong hint from the man 's stick , set off at a rapid walk along the lane toward the point have come from a hour ago , while the tall girl and the rough urching , also furnish with stick , obligingly escort they for the first hundred yard , with much screaming and thwack . not , in that preternatural midnight excursion with she phantom lover , be more terrified than poor in this entirely natural ride on a short - pace donkey , with a gypsy behind she , who consider that he be earn half a crown . the red light of the setting sun seem to have a portentous meaning , with which the alarming bray of the second donkey with the log on its foot must surely have some connection . two low thatch cottage -- the only house they pass in this lane -- seem to add to its dreariness ; they have no window to speak of , and the door be close ; it be probable that they be inhabitate by witch , and it be a relief to find that the donkey do not stop there . at last -- oh , sight of joy !-- this lane , the longest in the world , be come to a end , be open on a broad highroad , where there be actually a coach pass ! and there be a finger - post at the corner , -- she have surely see that finger - post before , -- " to 's , 2 mile . " the gypsy really mean to take she home , then ; he be probably a good man , after all , and might have be rather hurt at the thought that she do not like come with he alone . this idea become stronger as she feel more and more certain that she know the road quite well , and she be consider how she might open a conversation with the injured gypsy , and not only gratify he feeling but efface the impression of she cowardice , when , as they reach a cross-road . catch sight of some one come on a white - faced horse . " oh , stop , stop ! " she cry out . " there be my father ! oh , father , father ! " the sudden joy be almost painful , and before she father reach she , she be sobb . great be 's , for he have make a round from , and have not yet be home . " why , what be the meaning of ' this ? " he say , check he horse , while slipp from the donkey and run to she father 's stirrup . " the little miss lose herself , I reckon , " say the gypsy . " she would come to we tent at the far end o' , and I be bring she where she say she home be . it be a good way to come after be on the tramp all day . " " oh yes , father , he be be very good to bring I home , " say , --" a very kind , good man ! " " here , then , my man , " say , take out five shilling . " it be the best day 's work _you_ ever do . I could not afford to lose the little wench ; here , lift she up before I . " " why , , how be this , how be this ? " he say , as they ride along , while she lay she head against she father and sob . " how come you to be rambl about and lose yourself ? " " oh , father , " sob , " I run away because I be so unhappy ; be so angry with I . I could not bear it . " " Pooh , pooh , " say , soothingly ,
, " you must not think of ' run away from father . what 'uld father do without he little wench ? " " oh no , I never will again , father -- never . " speak he mind very strongly when he reache home that even ; and the effect be see in the remarkable fact that never hear one reproach from she mother , or one taunt from , about this foolish business of she run away to the gypsy . be rather awe - stricken by this unusual treatment , and sometimes think that she conduct have be too wick to be allude to . and at in order to see and at home , we must enter the town of . 's , -- that venerable town with the red flute roof and the broad warehouse gable , where the black ship unlay themselves of they burthen from the far north , and carry away , in exchange , the precious inland product , the well - crush cheese and the soft fleece which my refin reader have doubtless become acquainted with through the medium of the best classic pastoral . it be one of those old , old town which impress one as a continuation and outgrowth of nature , as much as the nests of the bower - bird or the win gallery of the white ant ; a town which carry the trace of its long growth and history like a millennial tree , and have spring up and develop in the same spot between the river and the low hill from the time when the legion turn they back on it from the camp on the hillside , and the long - haired sea-king come up the river and look with fierce , eager eye at the fatness of the land . it be a town " familiar with forgotten year . " the shadow of the hero - king still walk there fitfully , review the scene of he youth and love - time , and be meet by the gloomier shadow of the dreadful heathan , who be stab in the midst of he warrior by the sword of a invisible avenger , and who rise on autumn evening like a white mist from he tumulus on the hill , and hover in the court of the old hall by the river - side , the spot where he be thus miraculously slain in the day before the old hall be build . it be the who begin to build that fine old hall , which be , like the town , tell of the thought and hand of widely sunder generation ; but it be all so old that we look with loving pardon at its inconsistency , and be well content that they who build the stone oriel , and they who build the Gothic facade and towers of finest small brickwork with the trefoil ornament , and the window and battlement define with stone , do not sacreligiously pull down the ancient half - timber body with its oak - roof banqueting - hall . but older even than this old hall be perhaps the bit of wall now build into the belfry of the parish church , and say to be a remnant of the original chapel dedicate to . , the patron saint of this ancient town , of whose history I possess several manuscript version . I incline to the briefest , since , if it should not be wholly true , it be at least likely to contain the least falsehood . " Ogg the son of , " say my private hagiographer , " be a boatman who gain a scanty live by ferry passengers across the river Floss . and it come to pass , one evening when the wind be high , that there sit moaning by the brink of the river a woman with a child in she arm ; and she be clad in rag , and have a worn and withered look , and she crave to be row across the river . and the man thereabout question she , and say , ' Wherefore dost thou desire to cross the river ? Tarry till the morning , and take shelter here for the night ; so shalt thou be wise and not foolish . ' still she go on to mourn and crave . but Ogg the son of come up and say , 'I will ferry thee across ; it be enough that thy heart need it . ' and he ferry she across . and it come to pass , when she step ashore , that she rag be turn into rob of flow white , and she face become bright with exceeding beauty , and there be a glory around it , so that she shed a light on the water like the moon in its brightness . and she say , ' , the son of , thou be bless in that thou didst not question and wrangle with the heart 's need , but wast smite with pity , and didst straightway relieve the same . and from henceforth whoso step into thy boat shall be in no peril from the storm ; and whenever it put forth to the rescue , it shall save the life both of man and beasts . ' and when the floods come , many be save by reason of that bless on the boat . but when Ogg the son of die , behold , in the parting of he soul , the boat loose itself from its mooring , and be float with the ebbing tide in great swiftness to the ocean , and be see no more . yet it be witness in the flood of aftertime , that at the come on of eventide , the son of be always see
see with he boat upon the wide - spread water , and the blessed sit in the prow , shed a light around as of the moon in its brightness , so that the rower in the gather darkness take heart and pull anew . " this legend , one see , reflect from a far - off time the visitation of the flood , which , even when they leave human life untouched , be widly fatal to the helpless cattle , and sweep as sudden death over all smaller liive thing . but the town know worse trouble even than the flood , -- trouble of the civil wars , when it be a continual fighting - place , where first thanke for the blood of the Loyalist , and then thank for the blood of the . many honest citizen lose all they possession for conscience 's sake in those time , and go forth beggar from they native town . Doubtless there be many house stand now on which those honest citizen turn they back in sorrow , -- quaint - gable house look on the river , jam between newer warehous , and penetrat by surprising passage , which turn and turn at sharp angles till they lead you out on a muddy strand overflow continually by the rushing tide . everywhere the brick house have a mellow look , and in . 's day there be no incongruous new - fashioned smartness , no plate - glass in shop - window , no fresh stucco - facing or other fallacious attempt to make fine old red . 's wear the air of a town that spring up yesterday . the shop - window be small and unpretending ; for the farmer 's wife and daughter who come to do they shopping on market - day be not to be withdraw from they regular well - know shop ; and the tradesman have no ware intend for customer who would go on they way and be see no more . ah ! even 's day seem far back in the past now , separate from we by change that wie the year . and the rumor of war have then die out from the mind of man , and if they be ever think of by the farmer in drab greatcoat , who shook the grain out of they sample - bag and buzze over it in the full market - place , it be as a state of thing that belong to a past golden age when price be high . surely the time be go forever when the broad river could bring up unwelcome ship ; be only the place where the linseed come from , -- the more the better ,-- make grist for the great vertical millstone with they scyto - like arm , roaring and grinding and carefully swee as if a informing soul be in they . the , bad harvest , and the mysterious fluctuation of trade be the three evil mankind have to fear ; even the flood have not be great of late year . the mind of 's do not look extensively before or after . it inherit a long past without think of it , and have no eye for the spirit that walk the street . since the century when . with he boat and the Virgin mother at the prow have be see on the wide water , so many memory have be leave behind , and have gradually vanish like the reced hilltop ! and the present time be like the level plain where man lose they belief in volcanoe and earthquake , think to - morrow will be as yesterday , and the giant force that use to shake the earth be forever laid to sleep . the day be go when people could be greatly wrotch upon by they faith , still less change it ; the be formidable because they would lay hold of government and property , and burn man alive ; not because any sane and honest parishioner of . 's could be bring to believe in the Pope . one aged person remember how a rude multitude have be sway when preach in the cattle - market ; but for a long while it have not be expect of preacher that they should shake the soul of man . a occasional burst of fervor in pulpit on the subject of infant baptism be the only symptom of a zeal unsuit to sober time when man have do with change . sit at ease , unmindful of schism , careless of proselytism : be a inheritance along with a superior pew and a business connection ; and only wonder contemptuously at as a foolish habit that cling greatly to family in the grocery and chandler line , though not incompatible with prosperous wholesale deal . but with the question have come a slight wind of controversy to break the calm : the elderly rector have become occasionally historical and argumentative ; and , the independent minister , have begin to preach political sermon , in which he distinguished with much subtlety between he fervent belief in the right of the to the franchise and he fervent belief in they eternal perdition . most of 's hearer , however , be incapable of follow he subtlety , and many old - fashioned Dissenter be much pain by he " sid with the " ; while other think he have better let politics alone . public spirit be not hold in high esteem at . 's , and man who busy themselves with political question be regard with some suspicion , as dangerous character ; they be usually person who have little or no business of they own to manage , or , if they have , be likely enough to become insolvent . this be the general aspect
aspect of thing at in 's day , and at that particular period in she family history when she have have she quarrel with . it be a time when ignorance be much more comfortable than at present , and be receive with all the honor in very good society , without be oblige to dress itself in a elaborate costume of knowledge ; a time when cheap periodical be not , and when country surgeon never think of ask they female patient if they be fond of reading , but simply take it for grant that they preferre gossip ; a time when lady in rich silk gowns wear large pocket , in which they carry a mutton - bone to secure they against cramp . carry such a bone , which she have inherit from she grandmother with a brocaded gown that would stand up empty , like a suit of armor , and a silver - head walking - stick ; for the family have be respectable for many generation . have both a front and a back parlor in she excellent house at . 's , so that she have two point of view from which she could observe the weakness of she fellow - being , and reinforce she thankfulness for she own exceptional strength of mind . from she front window she could look down the , lead out of . 's , and note the grow tendency to " gadd about " in the wife of man not retire from business , together with a practice of wear woven cotton stocking , which open a dreary prospect for the come generation ; and from she back window she could look down the pleasant garden and orchard which stretch to the river , and observe the folly of in spend he time among " they flower and vegetable . " for , have retire from active business as a wool - stapler for the purpose of enjoy himself through the rest of he life , have find this last occupation so much more severe than he business , that he have be drive into yoamateu hard labor as a dissipation , and habitually relaxed by do the work of two ordinary gardener . the economizing of a gardener 's wage might perhaps have induce . to wink at this folly , if it be possible for a healthy female mind even to simulate respect for a husband 's hobby . but it be well know that this conjugal complacency belong only to the weaker portion of the sex , who be scarcely alive to the responsibility of a wife as a constitut check on she husband 's pleasure , which be hardly ever of a rational or commendable kind . on he side , too , have a double source of mental occupation , which give every promise of be inexhaustible . on the one hand , he surprise himself by he discoveries in natural history , find that he piece of garden - ground contain wonderful caterpillar , slug , and insect , which , so far as he have hear , have never before attract human observation ; and he notice remarkable coincidence between these zoological phenomena and the great event of that time , -- as , for example , that before the burning of there have be mysterious serpentine mark on the leave of the rose - tree , together with a unusual prevalence of slug , which he have be puzzl to know the meaning of , until it flash upon he with this melancholy conflagration . ( have a unusual amount of mental activity , which , when disengage from the wool business , naturally make itself a pathway in other direction . ) and he second subject of meditation be the " contrairiness " of the female mind , as typically exhibit in . that a creature make -- in a genealogical sense -- out of a man 's rib , and in this particular case maintain in the highest respectability without any trouble of she own , should be normally in a state of contradiction to the blandest propositions and even to the most accommodating concession , be a mystery in the scheme of thing to which he have often in seek a clew in the early chapter of . have choose the eldest as a handsome embodiment of female prudence and thrift , and be himself of a money - get , money - keeping turn , have calculate on much conjugal harmony . but in that curious compound , the feminine character , it may easily happen that the flavor be unpleasant in spite of excellent ingredient ; and a fine systematic stinginess may be accompany with a seasoning that quite spoil its relish . now , good himself be stingy in the most amiable manner ; he neighbor call he " near , " which always mean that the person in question be a lovable skinflint . if you express a preference for cheese - paring , would remember to save they for you , with a good - natured delight in gratify you palate , and he be give to pet all animal which require no appreciable keep . there be no humbug or hypocrisy about ; he eye would have water with true feeling over the sale of a widow 's furniture , which a five - pound note from he side pocket would have prevent ; but a donation of five pound to a person " in a small way of life " would have see to he a mad kind of lavishness rather than " charity , " which have always present itself to he as a contribution of small aid , not a neutralizing of misfortune . and be just as fond of save other people 's money as he own ; he would have ride as far round
round to avoid a turnpike when he expense be to be pay for he , as when they be to come out of he own pocket , and be quite zealous in try to induce indifferent acquaintance to adopt a cheap substitute for blacking . this inalienable habit of save , as a end in itself , belong to the industrious man of business of a former generation , who make they fortune slowly , almost as the tracking of the fox belong to the harrier , -- it constitute they a " race , " which be nearly lost in these day of rapid money - get , when lavishness come close on the back of want . in old - fashioned time a " independence " be hardly ever make without a little miserliness as a condition , and you would have find that quality in every provincial district , combine with character as various as the fruit from which we can extract acid . the true Harpagon be always mark and exceptional character ; not so the worthy tax - payer , who , have once pinch from real necessity , retain even in the midst of they comfortable retirement , with they wallfruit and wine - bins , the habit of regard life as a ingenious process of nibbl out one 's livelihood without leave any perceptible deficit , and who would have be as immediately prompt to give up a newly tax luxury when they have have they clear five hundred a year , as when they have only five hundred pound of capital . be one of these man , find so impracticable by chancellor of the exchequer ; and know this , you will be the better able to understand why he have not swerve from the conviction that he have make a eligible marriage , in spite of the too -pungent seasoning that nature have give to the eldest 's virtue . a man with a affectionate disposition , who find a wife to concur with he fundamental idea of life , easily come to persuade himself that no other woman would have suit he so well , and do a little daily snapping and quarrell without any sense of alienation . , be of a reflective turn , and no longer occupy with wool , have much wonder meditation on the peculiar constitution of the female mind as unfold to he in he domestic life ; and yet he think 's household way a model for she sex . it struck he as a pitiable irregularity in other woman if they do not roll up they table - napkin with the same tightness and emphasis as do , if they pastry have a less leathery consistence , and they damson cheese a less venerable hardness than hers ; nay , even the peculiar combination of grocery and druglike odor in 's private cupboard impress he as the only right thing in the way of cupboard smell . I be not sure that he would not have longe for the quarrelling again , if it have cease for a entire week ; and it be certain that a acquiescent , mild wife would have leave he meditations comparatively jejune and bar of mystery . 's unmistakable kind - heartedness be show in this , that it pain he more to see he wife at variance with other ,-- even with , the servant , -- than to be in a state of cavil with she himself ; and the quarrel between she and vex he so much that it quite nullify the pleasure he would otherwise have have in the state of he early cabbage , as he walk in he garden before breakfast the next morning . still , he go in to breakfast with some slight hope that , now have " sleep upon it , " she anger might be subdue enough to give way to she usually strong sense of family decorum . she have be use to boast that there have never be any of those deadly quarrel among the Dodson which have disgrac other family ; that no Dodson have ever be " cut off with a shilling , " and no cousin of the Dodson disown ; as , indeed , why should they be ? for they have no cousin who have not money out at use , or some house of they own , at the very least . there be one evening - cloud which have always disappear from 's brow when she sit at the breakfast - table . it be she fuzzy front of curl ; for as she occupy herself in household matter in the morning it would have be a mere extravagance to put on anything so superfluous to the making of leathery pastry as a fuzzy curled front . by half - past ten decorum demand the front ; until then . Glegg could economize it , and society would never be any the wiser . but the absence of that cloud only leave it more apparent that the cloud of severity remain ; and , perceive this , as he sit down to he milkporridge , which it be he old frugal habit to stem he morning hunger with , prudently resolve to leave the first remark to , lest , to so delicate a article as a lady 's temper , the slightest touch should do mischief . people who seem to enjoy they ill temper have a way of keep it in fine condition by inflicting privation on themselves . that be 's way . she make she tea weaker than usual this morning , and decline butter . it be a hard case that a vigorous mood for quarrelling , so highly capable of use a opportunity , should not meet with a single remark from on which to exercise itself . but by
by and by it appear that he silence would answer the purpose , for he hear himself apostrophize at last in that tone peculiar to the wife of one 's bosom . " well , ! it be a poor return I get for make you the wife I have make you all these year . if this be the way I be to be treat , I would better ha ' know it before my poor father die , and then , when I would want a home , I should ha ' go elsewhere , as the choice be offer I . " pause from he porridge and look up , not with any new amazement , but simply with that quiet , habitual wonder with which we regard constant mystery . " why , , what have I do now ? " " do now , ? _do now ?_--I be sorry for you . " not see he way to any pertinent answer , revert to he porridge . " there be husband in the world , " continue , after a pause , " as 'ud have know how to do something different to sid with everybody else against they own wife . perhaps I be wrong and you can teach I better . but I have allays hear as it be the husband 's place to stand by the wife , instead of ' rejoicing and triumph when folk insult she . " " now , what call have you to say that ? " say , rather warmly , for though a kind man , he be not as meek as . " when do I rejoice or triumph over you ? " " there be way of ' do thing worse than speak out , . I would sooner you would tell I to my face as you make light of I , than try to make out as everybody be in the right but I , and come to you breakfast in the morning , as I have hardly sleep a hour this night , and sulk at I as if I be the dirt under you foot . " " Sulk at you ? " say , in a tone of angry facetiousness . " you be like a tipsy man as think everybody be have too much but himself . " " do not lower yourself with use coarse language to _me , ! it make you look very small , though you can not see yourself , " say , in a tone of energetic compassion . " a man in you place should set a example , and talk more sensible . " " yes ; but will you listen to sense ? " retort , sharply . " the best sense I can talk to you be what I say last night , -- as you be I ' the wrong to think of ' call in you money , when it be safe enough if you would let it alone , all because of a bit of a tiff , and I be in hope you would ha ' alte you mind this morning . but if you would like to call it in , do not do it in a hurry now , and breed more enmity in the family , but wait till there be a pretty mortgage to be have without any trouble . you would have to set the lawyer to work now to find a investment , and make no end of ' expense . " feel there be really something in this , but she toss she head and emit a guttural interjection to indicate that she silence be only a armistice , not a peace . and , in fact hostility soon break out again . " I will thank you for my cup of ' tea , now , , " say , see that she do not proceed to give it he as usual , when he have finish he porridge . she lift the teapot with a slight toss of the head , and say ,-- " I be glad to hear you will _thank_ I , . it be little thanks _I_ get for what I do for folk I ' this world . though there be never a woman o' _your_ side of ' the family , , as be fit to stand up with I , and I would say it if I be on my dying bed . not but what I have allays conduct myself civil to you kin , and there be not one of th'ey can say the contrary , though my equil they be not , and nobody shall make I say it . " " you would better leave find fault wi' my kin till you have leave off quarrelling with you own , , " say , with angry sarcasm . " I will trouble you for the milk - jug . " " that be as false a word as ever you speak , , " say the lady , pour out the milk with unusual profuseness , as much as to say , if he want milk he should have it with a vengeance . " and you know it be false . I be not the woman to quarrel with my own kin ; _you_ may , for I have know you to do it . " " why , what do you call it yesterday , then , leave you sister 's house in a tantrum ? " " I have no quarrel wi' my sister , , and it be false to say it . 's none of ' my blood , and it be he quarrell with I , and drive I out of ' the house . but perhaps you would have have I stay and be swore at
at , ; perhaps you be vex not to hear more abuse and foul language pour out upo ' you own wife . but , let I tell you , it be _your_ disgrace . " " do ever anybody hear the like I ' this parish ? " say , get hot . " a woman , with everything provide for she , and allow to keep she own money the same as if it be settle on she , and with a gig new stuff and line at no end of ' expense , and provide for when I die beyond anything she could expect -- to go on I ' this way , bite and snapp like a mad dog ! it be beyond everything , as 's mighty should ha ' make woman _so_. " ( these last word be uttere in a tone of sorrowful agitation . push he tea from he , and tap the table with both he hand . ) " well , , if those be you feeling , it be best they should be know , " say , take off she napkin , and fold it in a excited manner . " but if you talk of ' my be provide for beyond what I could expect , I beg leave to tell you as I ' a right to expect a many thing as I do not find . and as to my be like a mad dog , it be well if you be not cry shame on by the county for you treatment of I , for it be what I can not bear , and I will not bear ---- " here 's intimate that she be go to cry , and break off from speech , she ring the bell violently . " , " she say , rise from she chair , and speak in rather a chok voice , " light a fire up - stair , and put the blind down . , you will please to order what you would like for dinner . I shall have gruel . " walk across the room to the small book - case , and take down 's " ' , " which she carry with she up - stair . it be the book she be accustom to lay open before she on special occasion , -- on wet morning , or when she hear of a death in the family , or when , as in this case , she quarrel with have be set a octave higher than usual . but carry something else up - stair with she , which , together with the " ' " and the gruel , may have have some influence in gradually calm she feeling , and make it possible for she to endure existence on the ground - floor , shortly before tea - time . this be , partly , 's suggestion that she would do well to let she five hundr lie still until a good investment turn up ; and , further , he parenthetic hint at he handsome provision for she in case of he death . , like all man of he stamp , be extremely reticent about he will ; and , in she gloomier moments , have foreboding that , like other husband of whom she have hear , he might cherish the mean project of heighten she grief at he death by leave she poorly off , in which case she be firmly resolve that she would have scarcely any weeper on she bonnet , and would cry no more than if he have be a second husband . but if he have really show she any testamentary tenderness , it would be affect to think of he , poor man , when he be go ; and even he foolish fuss about the flower and garden - stuff , and he insistence on the subject of snail , would be touch when it be once fairly at a end . to survive , and talk eulogistically of he as a man who might have he weakness , but who have do the right thing by she , not -withstand he numerous poor relation ; to have sum of interest come in more frequently , and secrete it in various corner , baffle to the most ingenious of thief ( for , to 's mind , bank and strong - box would have nullify the pleasure of property ; she might as well have take she food in capsule ) ; finally , to be look up to by she own family and the neighborhood , so as no woman can ever hope to be who have not the praeterite and present dignity comprise in be a " widow well leave , " -- all this make a flattering and conciliatory view of the future . so that when good , restore to good humor by much hoeing , and move by the sight of he wife 's empty chair , with she knitt roll up in the corner , go up - stair to she , and observe that the bell have be toll for poor , answer magnanimously , quite as if she have be a uninjured woman : " ah ! then , there will be a good business for somebody to take to . " Baxter have be open at least eight hour by this time , for it be nearly five o'clock ; and if people be to quarrel often , it follow as a corollary that they quarrel can not be protract beyond certain limits . and talk quite amicably about the Tulliver that even . go the length of admit that be a sad man for get into hot water , and be like enough to run through he property ; and , meet this acknowledgment half -
- way , declare that it be beneath she to take notice of such a man 's conduct , and that , for she sister 's sake , she would let he keep the five hundr a while longer , for when she put it out on a mortgage she should only get four per cent . the of to this new adjustment of 's thought , find she task of mediation the next day surprisingly easy . , indeed check she rather sharply for think it would be necessary to tell she elder sister what be the right mode of behavior in family matter . 's argument , that it would look ill in the neighborhood if people should have it in they power to say that there be a quarrel in the family , be particularly offensive . if the family name never suffer except through , might lay she head on she pillow in perfect confidence . " it be not to be expect , I suppose , " observe , by way of win up the subject , " as I shall go to the mill again before come to see I , or as I shall go and fall down of ' my knee to , and ask he pardon for show he favor ; but I shall bear no malice , and when speak civil to I , I will speak civil to he . nobody have any call to tell I what be become . " find it unnecessary to plead for the , it be natural that aunt Pullet should relax a little in she anxiety for they , and recur to the annoyance she have suffer yesterday from the offspring of that apparently ill - fated house . hear a circumstantial narrative , to which 's remarkable memory furnish some item ; and while aunt Pullet pitie poor 's bad luck with she child , and express a half - form project of pay for 's be send to a distant boarding - school , which would not prevent she be so brown , but might tend to subdue some other vice in she , aunt blame for she weakness , and appeal to all witness who should be live when the child have turn out ill , that she , , have always say how it would be from the very first , observe that it be wonderful to herself how all she word come true . " then I may call and tell you will bear no malice , and everything be as it be before ? " say , just before part . " yes , you may , , " say ; " you may tell , and too , as I be not go to behave ill because folk behave ill to I ; I know it be my place , as the eldest , to set a example in every respect , and I do it . nobody can say different of I , if they will keep to the truth . " be in this state of satisfaction in she own lofty magnanimity , I leave you to judge what effect be produce on she by the reception of a short letter from that very evening , after 's departure , inform she that she need not trouble she mind about she five hundred pound , for it should be pay back to she in the course of the next month at farthest , together with the interest due thereon until the time of payment . and furthermore , that have no wish to behave uncivilly to , and she be welcome to he house whenever she like to come , but he desire no favor from she , either for himself or he child . it be poor who have hasten this catastrophe , entirely through that irrepressible hopefulness of hers which lead she to expect that similar cause may at any time produce different result . it have very often occur in she experience that Tulliver have do something because other people have say he be not able to do it , or have pitie he for he suppose inability , or in any other way pique he pride ; still , she think to - day , if she tell he when he come in to tea that sister Pullet be gone to try and make everything up with sister , so that he need not think about pay in the money , it would give a cheerful effect to the meal . have never slacken in he resolve to raise the money , but now he at once determined to write a letter to , which should cut off all possibility of mistake . Pullet go to beg and pray for _him_ indeed ! do not willingly write a letter , and find the relation between spoken and write language , brieinitely know as spelling , one of the most puzzl thing in this puzzling world . nevertheless , like all fervid writing , the task be done in less time than usual , and if the spelling differ from 's , -- why , she belong , like himself , to a generation with whom spelling be a matter of private judgment . do not alter she will in consequence of this letter , and cut off the child from they sixth and seventh share in she thousand pound ; for she have she principle . no one must be able to say of she when she be dead that she have not divide she money with perfect fairness among she own kin . in the matter of will , personal quality be subordinate to the great fundamental fact of blood ; and to be determine in the distribution of you property by caprice , and not make you legacy bear a direct ratio to degree of kinship , be
be a prospective disgrace that would have embitter she life . this have always be a principle in the family ; it be one form if that sense of honor and rectitude which be a proud tradition in such family , -- a tradition which have be the salt of we provincial society . but though the letter could not shake 's principle , it make the family breach much more difficult to mmend ; and as to the effect it produce on 's opinion of , she beg to be understand from that time forth that she have nothing whatever to say about he ; he state of mind , apparently , be too corrupt for she to contemplate it for a moment . it be not until the evening before go to school , at the beginning of , that pay a visit to she sister , sit in she gig all the while , and show she displeasure by markedly abstain from all advice and criticism ; for , as she observe to she sister , " must bear the consequence o' have such a husband , though I be sorry for she , " and . agree that be pitiable . that eve observe to : " oh my ! , 's begin to come again ; I be glad I be go to school . _You'll_ catch it all now ! " be already so full of sorrow at the thought of 's go away from she , that this playful exultation of he see very unkind , and she cry herself to sleep that night . 's prompt procedure entail on he further promptitude in find the convenient person who be desirous of lend five hundred pound on bond . " it must be no client of 's , " he say to himself ; and yet at the end of a fortnight it turn out to the contrary ; not because 's will be feeble , but because external fact be stronger . 's client be the only convenient person to be find . have a destiny as well as , and in this case he might plead , like , that he deed be inflict on he rather than commit by he . - time_ chapter I 's " " 's suffering during the first quarter he be at 's , under the distinguished care of the , be rather severe . at 's academy life have not present itself to he as a difficult problem ; there be plenty of fellow to play with , and Tom be good at all active game ,-- fight especially , -- have that precedence among they which appear to he inseparable from the personality of . himself , familiarly know as , from he habit of wear spectacle , impos no painful awe ; and if it be the property of snuffy old hypocrite like he to write like copperplate and surround they signature with arabesque , to spell without forethotch , and to spout " my name be Norval " without bungling , , for he part , be glad he be not in danger of those mean accomplishment . he be not go to be a snuffy schoolmaster , he , but a substantial man , like he father , who use to go hunt when he be younger , and ride a capital black mare , -- as pretty a bit of horse - flesh as ever you see ; have hear what she point be a hundred time . _o mean to go hunt too , and to be generally respect . when people be grow up , he consider , nobody inquire about they writing and spell ; when he be a man , he should be master of everything , and do just as he like . it have be very difficult for he to reconcile himself to the idea that he school - time be to be prolonge and that he be not to be bring up to he father 's business , which he have always think extremely pleasant ; for it be nothing but ride about , give order , and go to market ; and he think that a clergyman would give he a great many Scripture lesson , and probably make he learn the and on a , as well as the collect . but in the absence of specific information , it be impossible for he to imagine that school and a schoolmaster would be something entirely different from the academy of . so , not to be at a deficiency , in case of he find genial companion , he have take care to carry with he a small box of percussion - cap ; not that there be anything particular to be do with they , but they would serve to impress strange boy with a sense of he familiarity with gun . thus poor , though he see very clearly through 's illusion , be not without illusion of he own , which be to be cruelly dissipate by he enlarged experience at 's . he have not be there a fortnight before it be evident to he that life , complicate not only with the Latin grammar but with a new standard of English pronunciation , be a very difficult business , make all the more obscure by a thick mist of bash fulness . , as you have observ , be never a exception among boy for ease of address ; but the difficulty of enunciat a monosyllable in reply to or . be so great , that he even dread to be ask at table whether he would have more pudding . as to the percussion - cap , he have almost resolved , in the bitterness of he heart , that he would throw they into a neighboring pond ; for not only be he the
the solitary pupil , but he begin even to have a certain scepticism about gun , and a general sense that he theory of life be undermined . for think nothing of gun , or horse either , apparently ; and yet it be impossible for to despise Stelling as he have despise . if there be anything that be not thoroughly genuine about , it lay quite beyond 's power to detect it ; it be only by a wide comparison of fact that the wisest full - grow man can distinguish well - roll barrel from mere supernal thunder . be a well - size , broad - chested man , not yet thirty , with flaxen hair stand erect , and large lightish - gray eye , which be always very wide open ; he have a sonorous bass voice , and a air of defiant self - confidence inclin to brazenness . he have enter on he career with great vigor , and intend to make a considerable impression on he fellowman . the be not a man who would remain among the " inferior clergy " all he life . he have a true british determination to push he way in the world , -- as a schoolmaster , in the first place , for there be capital mastership of grammar - school to be have , and mean to have one of they ; but as a preacher also , for he mean always to preach in a striking manner , so as to have he congregation swell by admirer from neighboring parish , and to produce a great sensation whenever he take occasional duty for a brother clergyman of minor gift . the style of preaching he have chosen be the extemporaneous , which be hold little short of the miraculous in rural parish like 's . some passage of and , which he know by heart , be really very effective when roll out in 's deepest tone ; but as comparatively feeble appeal of he own be deliver in the same loud and impressive manner , they be often think quite as strike by he hearer . 's doctrine be of no particular school ; if anything , it have a tinge of evangelicalism , for that be " the tell thing " just then in the diocese to which 's belong . in short , be a man who mean to rise in he profession , and to rise by merit , clearly , since he have no interest beyond what might be promise by a problematic relationship to a great lawyer who have not yet become . a clergyman who have such vigorous intention naturally get 's a little into debt at starting ; it be not to be expect that he will live in the meagre style of a man who mean to be a poor curate all he life ; and if the few hundred advanc toward he daughter 's fortune do not suffice for the purchase of handsome furniture , together with a stock of wine , a grand piano , and the lay out of a superior flower - garden , it follow in the most rigorous manner , either that these thing must be procure by some other means , or else that the Stell must go without they , which last alternative would be a absurd procrastination of the fruit of success , where success be certain . be so broad - chest and resolute that he feel equal to anything ; he would become celebrate by shak the conscience of he hearer , and he would by and by edit a play , and invent several new reading . he have not yet select the play , for have be marry little more than two year , he leisure time have be much occupy with attention to ; but he have tell that fine woman what he mean to do some day , and she feel great confidence in she husband , as a man who understand everything of that sort . but the immediate step to future success be to bring on during this first half - year ; for , by a singular coincidence , there have be some negotiation concern another pupil from the same neighborhood and it might further a decision in 's favor , if it be understood that young , who , observe in conjugal privacy , be rather a rough cub , have make prodigious progress in a short time . it be on this ground that he be severe with about he lesson ; he be clearly a boy whose power would never be develop through the medium of the grammar , without the application of some sternness . not that be a harsh - tempered or unkind man ; quite the contrary . he be jocose with Tom at table , and correct he provincialism and he deportment in the most playful manner ; but poor be only the more cowed and confuse by this double novelty , for he have never be use to joke at all like 's ; and for the first time in he life he have a painful sense that he be all wrong somehow . when say , as the roast - beef be be uncovered , " now , ! which would you rather decline , roast - beef or the for it ? " , to whom in he coolest moment a pun would have be a hard nut , be throw into a state of embarrassed alarm that make everything dim to he except the feeling that he would rather not have anything to do with ; of course he answer , " roast - beef , " whereupon there follow much laughter and some practical joking with the plate , from which gather that he have in some mysterious way refuse beef , and
and , in fact , make himself appear " a silly . " if he could have see a fellow - pupil undergo these painful operation and survive they in good spirit , he might sooner have take they as a matter of course . but there be two expensive form of education , either of which a parent may procure for he son by send he as solitary pupil to a clergyman : one be the enjoyment of the reverend gentleman 's undivided neglect ; the other be the endurance of the reverend gentleman 's undivided attention . it be the latter privilege for which pay a high price in 's initiatory month at 's . that respectable miller and maltster have leave behind , and drive homeward in a state of great mental satisfaction . he consider that it be a happy moment for he when he have think of ask 's advice about a tutor for . 's eye be so wide open , and he talk in such a off - hand , matter - of - fact way , answer every difficult , slow remark of 's with , " I see , my good sir , I see " ; " to be sure , to be sure " ; " you want you son to be a man who will make he way in the world , " -- that be delighted to find in he a clergyman whose knowledge be so applicable to the every - day affair of this life . , whom he have hear at the last session , think the be the shrewdest fellow he have ever meet with , -- not unlike , in fact ; he have the same way of stick he thumb in the armhole of he waistcoat . be not by any mean a exception in mistaking brazenness for shrewdness ; most laymen think Stelling shrewd , and a man of remarkable power generally ; it be chiefly by he clerical breth that he be consider rather a full fellow . but he tell several story about " " and incendiarism , and ask he advice about feed pig in so thoroughly secular and judicious a manner , with so much polish glibness of tongue , that the miller thought , here be the very thing he want for . he have no doubt this first - rate man be acquainted with every branch of information , and know exactly what must learn in order to become a match for the lawyer , which poor himself do _not_ know , and so be necessarily throw for self - direction on this wide kind of inference . it be hardly fair to laugh at he , for I have know much more highly instruct person than he make inference quite as wide , and not at all wiser . as for , find that . 's view as to the airing of linen and the frequent recurrence of hunger in a grow boy entirely coinci with she own ; moreover , that , though so yong a woman , and only anticipat she second confinement , have go through very nearly the same experience as herself with regard to the behavior and fundamental character of the monthly nurse , -- she express great contentment to she husband , when they drive away , at leave tom with a woman who , in spite of she youth , seem quite sensible and motherly , and ask advice as prettily as could be . " they must be very well off , though , " say , " for everything be as nice as can be all over the house , and that water silk she have on cost a pretty penny . have get one like it . " " ah , " say , " he be get some income besides the curacy , I reckon . perhaps she father allow them something . there be 's ull be another hundr to he , and not much trouble either , by he own account ; he say teaching come natural to he . that be wonderful , now , " add , turn he head on one side , and give he horse a meditative tickling on the flank . perhaps it be because teaching come naturally to , that he set about it with that uniformity of method and independence of circumstance which distinguish the action of animal understand to be under the immediate teaching of nature . 's amiable beaver , as that charme naturalist tell we , busy himself as earnestly in construct a dam , in a room up three pair of stair in , as if he have be lay he foundation in a stream or lake in . it be " 's " function to build ; the absence of water or of possible progeny be a accident for which he be not accountable . with the same unerring instinct set to work at he natural method of instil the and into the mind of . this , he consider , be the only basis of solid instruction ; all other means of education be mere charlatanism , and could produce nothing better than smatterer . fix on this firm basis , a man might observe the display of various or special knowledge make by irregularly educated people with a pitying smile ; all that sort of thing be very well , but it be impossible these people could form sound opinion . in hold this conviction be not biass , as some tutor have be , by the excessive accuracy or extent of he own scholarship ; and as to he view about , no opinion could have be freer from personal partiality . be very far from be lead astray by enthusiasm , either religious or intellectual ; on the other hand , he have no secret
secret belief that everything be humbug . he think religion be a very excellent thing , and a great authority , and deanery and prebend useful institution , and the providential bulwark of , and faith in the unseen a great support to afflict mind ; he believe in all these thing , as a hotel - keeper belief in the beauty of the scenery around he , and in the pleasure it give to artistic visitor . and in the same way believe in he method of education ; he have no doubt that he be do the very best thing for 's boy . of course , when the miller talk of " mapping " and " summ " in a vague and diffident manner , have set he mind at rest by a assurance that he understand what be want ; for how be it possible the good man could form any reasonable judgment about the matter ? 's duty be to teach the lad in the only right way , -- indeed he know no other ; he have not waste he time in the acquirement of anything abnormal . he very soon set down poor tom as a thoroughly stupid lad ; for though by hard labor he could get particular declension into he brain , anything so abstract as the relation between casis and termination could by no means get such a lodgment there as to enable he to recognize a chance genitive or dative . this struck as something more than natural stupidity ; he suspect obstinacy , or at any rate indifference , and lecture severely on he want of thorough application . " you feel no interest in what you be do , sir , " would say , and the reproach be painfully true . have never find any difficulty in discern a pointer from a setter , when once he have be tell the distinction , and he perceptive power be not at all deficient . I fancy they be quite as strong as those of the ; for could predict with accuracy what number of horse be canter behind he , he could throw a stone right into the centre of a give ripple , he could guess to a fraction how many length of he stick it would take to reach across the playground , and could draw almost perfect square on he slate without any measurement . but take no note of these thing ; he only observe that 's faculty fail he before the abstraction hideously symbolize to he in the page of the , and that he be in a state border on idiocy with regard to the demonstration that two give triangles must be equal , though he could discern with great promptitude and certainty the fact that they _were equal . Whence conclude that 's brain , be peculiarly impervious to etymology and demonstration , be peculiarly in need of be plough and harrow by these patent implement ; it be he favorite metaphor , that the classic and geometry constitute that culture of the mind which prepare it for the reception of any subsequent crop . I say nothing against 's theory ; if we be to have one regimen for all mind , he seem to I as good as any other . I only know it turn out as uncomfortably for as if he have be ply with cheese in order to remedy a gastric weakness which prevent he from digest it . it be astonish what a different result one get by change the metaphor ! once call the brain a intellectual stomach , and one be ingenious conception of the classic and geometry as plough and harrow seem to settle nothing . but then it be open to some one else to follow great authority , and call the mind a sheet of white paper or a mirror , in which case one 's knowledge of the digestive process become quite irrelevant . it be doubtless a ingenious idea to call the camel the ship of the desert , but it would hardly lead one far in training that useful beast . of ! if you have have the advantage of be " the freshest modern " instead of the greatest ancient , would you not have mingl you praise of metaphorical speech , as a sign of high intelligence , with a lamentation that intelligence so rarely show itself in speech without metaphor , -- that we can so seldom declare what a thing be , except by say it be something else ? , be abundant in no form of speech , do not use any metaphor to declare he view as to the nature of ; he never call it a instrument of torture ; and it be not until he have get on some way in the next half - year , and in the , that he be advanced enough to call it a " bore " and " beastly stuff . " at present , in relation to this demand that he should learn latin declension and conjugation , be in a state of as blank unimaginativeness concern the cause and tendency of he suffering , as if he have be a innocent shrewmouse imprison in the split trunk of a ash - tree in order to cure lameness in cattle . it be doubtless almost incredible to instruct mind of the present day that a boy of twelve , not belong strictly to " the mass , " who be now understand to have the monopoly of mental darkness , should have have no distinct idea how there come to be such a thing as on this earth ; yet so it be with . it would have take a long while to make conceivable to he that there ever exist a people who buy and sell sheep and oxen ,
, and transact the every - day affair of life , through the medium of this language ; and still longer to make he understand why he should be call upon to learn it , when its connection with those affair have become entirely latent . so far as have gain any acquaintance with the at 's academy , he knowledge be strictly correct , but it go no farther than the fact that they be " in the " ; and be not the man to enfeeble and emasculate he pupil 's mind by simplify and explain , or to reduce the tonic effect of etymology by mix it with smattering , extraneous information , such as be give to girl . yet , strange to say , under this vigorous treatment become more like a girl than he have ever be in he life before . he have a large share of pride , which have hithertoo find itself very comfortable in the world , despise , and repose in the sense of unquestioned rights ; but now this same pride meet with nothing but bruise and crushings . be too clear - sigh not to be aware that 's standard of thing be quite different , be certainly something higher in the eyes of the world than that of the people he have be live amongst , and that , bring in contact with it , he , , appear uncouth and stupid ; he be by no means indifferent to this , and he pride get into a uneasy condition which quite nullify he boyish self - satisfaction , and give he something of the girl 's susceptibility . he be a very firm , not to say obstinate , disposition , but there be no brute - like rebellion and recklessness in he nature ; the human sensibility predominate , and if it have occur to he that he could enable himself to show some quickness at he lesson , and so acquire 's approbation , by stand on one leg for a inconvenient length of time , or rapp he head moderately against the wall , or any voluntary action of that sort , he would certainly have try it . but no ; have never hear that these measure would brighten the understanding , or strengthen the verbal memory ; and he be not give to hypothesis and experiment . it do occur to he that he could perhaps get some help by pray for it ; but as the prayer he say every evening be form learn by heart , he rather shrank from the novelty and irregularity of introduce a extempore passage on a topic of petition for which he be not aware of any precedent . but one day , when he have break down , for the fifth time , in the supine of the third conjugation , and , convince that this must be carelessness , since it transcend the bounds of possible stupidity , have lecture he very seriously , point out that if he fail to seize the present golden opportunity of learn supine , he would have to regret it when he become a man ,-- , more miserable than usual , determined to try he sole resource ; and that even , after he usual form of prayer for he parent and " little sister " ( he have begin to pray for when she be a baby ) , and that he might be able always to keep 's commandment , he add , in the same low whisper , " and please to make I always remember my latin . " he pause a little to consider how he should pray about -- whether he should ask to see what it mean , or whether there be any other mental state which would be more applicable to the case . but at last he add : " and make Stelling say I sha ' not do Euclid any more . amen . " the fact that he get through he supine without mistake the next day , encourage he to persevere in this appendix to he prayer , and neutralize any scepticism that might have arisen from 's continue demand for . but he faill break down under the apparent absence of all help when he get into the irregular verb . it seem clear that 's despair under the caprice of the present tense do not constitute a _nodus worthy of interference , and since this be the climax of he difficulty , where be the use of praying for help any longer ? he make up he mind to this conclusion in one of he dull , lonely evening , which he spend in the study , prepare he lesson for the morrow . he eye be apt to get dim over the page , though he hate cry , and be asham of it ; he could not help think with some affection even of , whom he use to fight and quarrel with ; he would have feel at home with , and in a condition of superiority . and then the mill , and the river , and prick up he ear , ready to obey the least sign when say , " Hoigh ! " would all come before he in a sort of calenture , when he finger play absently in he pocket with he great knife and he coil of whipcord , and other relic of the past . , as I say , have never be so much like a girl in he life before , and at that epoch of irregular verb he spirit be further depresse by a new means of mental development which have be think of for he out of school hour . . have lately have she second baby , and as nothing could be more salutary for a
a boy than to feel himself useful , . Stelling consider she be do a service by set he to watch the little cherub while the nurse be occupy with the sickly baby . it be quite a pretty employment for to take little out in the sunniest hour of the autumn day ; it would help to make he feel that be a home for he , and that he be one of the family . the little cherub , not be a accomplish walker at present , have a ribbon fasten round she waist , by which hold she as if she have be a little dog during the minute in which she choose to walk ; but as these be rare , he be for the most part carry this fine child round and round the garden , within sight of 's window , accord to order . if any one consider this unfair and even oppressive toward , I beg he to consider that there be feminine virtue which be with difficulty combine , even if they be not incompatible . when the wife of a poor curate contrive , under all her disadvantage , to dress extremely well , and to have a style of coiffure which require that she nurse shall occasionally officiate as lady 's - maid ; when , moreover , she dinner - party and she draw - room show that effort at elegance and completeness of appointment to which ordinary woman might imagine a large income necessary , it would be unreasonable to expect of she that she should employ a second nurse , or even act as a nurse herself . know better ; he see that he wife do wonder already , and be proud of she . it be certainly not the best thing in the world for young 's gait to carry a heavy child , but he have plenty of exercise in long walk with himself , and next half - year would see about have a drilling - master . among the many mean whereby intend to be more fortunate than the bulk of he fellow - man , he have entirely give up that of have he own way in he own house . what then ? he have marry " as kind a little soul as ever breathe , " accord to , who have be acquaint with 's blond ringlet and smile demeanor throughout she maiden life , and on the strength of that knowledge would have be ready any day to pronounce that whatever domestic difference might arise in she married life must be entirely 's fault . if have have a worse disposition , he would certainly have hate the little cherub , but he be too kind - hear a lad for that ; there be too much in he of the fibre that turn to true manliness , and to protect pity for the weak . I be afraid he hat , and contract a lasting dislike to pale blond ringlet and broad plait , as directly associate with haughtiness of manner , and a frequent reference to other people 's " duty . " but he could not help play with little , and like to amuse she ; he even sacrifice he percussion - cap for she sake , in despair of they ever serve a greater purpose , -- think the small flash and bang would delight she , and thereby draw down on himself a rebuke from . Stell for teach she child to play with fire . be a sort of playfellow -- and oh , how longe for playfellow ! in he secret heart he year to have with he , and be almost ready to dote on she exasperat act of forgetfulness ; though , when he be at home , he always represent it as a great favor on he part to let trot by he side on he pleasure excursion . and before this dreary half - year be end , actually come . have give a general invitation for the little girl to come and stay with she brother ; so when drive over to 's late in , come too , with the sense that she be take a great journey , and begin to see the world . it be 's first visit to see , for the lad must learn not to think too much about home . " well , my lad , " he say to , when have leave the room to announce the arrival to he wife , and have begin to kiss freely , " you look rarely ! agree with you . " wish he have look rather ill . " I do not think I _am_ well , father , " say ; " I wish you would ask not to let I do ; it bring on the toothache , I think . " ( the toothache be the only malady to which have ever be subject . ) " , my lad , -- why , what be that ? " say . " oh , I do not know ; it be definition , and axiom , and triangles , and thing . it be a book I have get to learn in -- there be no sense in it . " " go , go ! " say , reprovingly ; " you must not say so . you must learn what you master tell you . he know what it be right for you to learn . " " _I will help you now , , " say , with a little air of patronizing consolation . " I be come to stay ever so long , if Stelling ask I . I have bring my box and my pinafore , have not I , father ? " " _You help I ,
, you silly little thing ! " say , in such high spirit at this announcement that he quite enjoy the idea of confound by show she a page of . " I should like to see you do one of _my lesson ! why , I learn too ! girls never learn such thing . they be too silly . " " I know what be very well , " say , confidently , " be a language . there be latin word in the dictionary . there be bonus , a gift . " " now , you be just wrong there , ! " say , secretly astonish . " you think you be very wise ! but ' bonus ' mean ' good , ' as it happen , -- bonus , bona , bonum . " " well , that be no reason why it should not mean ' gift , ' " say , stoutly . " it may mean several thing ; almost every word do . there be ' lawn , ' -- it mean the grass - plot , as well as the stuff pocket - handkerchief be make of . " " well do , little 'un , " say , laugh , while feel rather disgusted with 's knowingness , though beyond measure cheerful at the thought that she be go to stay with he . she conceit would soon be overaw by the actual inspection of he book . , in she pressing invitation , do not mention a longer time than a week for 's stay ; but , who take she between he knee , and ask she where she steal she dark eye from , insist that she must stay a fortnight . think be a charming man , and be quite proud to leave he little wench where she would have a opportunity of show she cleverness to apprecia stranger . so it be agree that she should not be fetch home till the end of the fortnight . " now , then , come with I into the study , , " say , as they father drive away . " what do you shake and toss you head now for , you silly ? " he continue ; for though she hair be now under a new dispensation , and be brush smoothly behind she ear , she see still in imagination to be toss it out of she eye . " it make you look as if you be crazy . " " oh , I can not help it , " say , impatiently . " do not tease I , . oh , what book ! " she exclaim , as she see the bookcase in the study . " how I should like to have as many book as that ! " " why , you could not read one of th'ey , " say , triumphantly . " they be all latin . " " no , they be not , " say . " I can read the back of this ,--'History of the and fall of the . ' " " well , what do that mean ? do not know , " say , wag he head . " but I could soon find out , " say , scornfully . " why , how ? " " I should look inside , and see what it be about . " " you would better not , , " say , see she hand on the volume . " let nobody touch he book without leave , and _i_ shall catch it , if you take it out . " " oh , very well . let I see all _your_ book , then , " say , turn to throw she arm round 's neck , and rub he cheek with she small round nose . , in the gladness of he heart at have dear old to dispute with and crow over again , seize she round the waist , and begin to jump with she round the large library table . away they jump with more and more vigor , till 's hair fly from behind she ear , and twirl about like a animated mop . but the revolution round the table become more and more irregular in they sweep , till at last reaching 's reading stand , they send it thunder down with it be heavy lexicon to the floor . happily it be the ground - floor , and the study be a one - story wing to the house , so that the downfall make no alarming resonance , though stand dizzy and aghast for a few minute , dread the appearance of or . " oh , I say , , " say at last , lift up the stand , " we must keep quiet here , you know . if we break anything will make we cry peccavi . " " what be that ? " say . " oh , it be the for a good scolding , " say , not without some pride in he knowledge . " be she a cross woman ? " say . " I believe you ! " say , with a emphatic nod . " I think all woman be crosser than man , " say . " be a great deal crosser than uncle , and mother scold I more than father do . " " well , _you will be a woman some day , " say , " so _you_ need not talk . " " but I shall be a _clever_ woman , " say , with a toss . " oh , I dare say , and a nasty conceited thing . everybody will hate you . " " but you ought not to hate I , ; it will
will be very wicked of you , for I shall be you sister . " " yes , but if you be a nasty disagreeable thing I _shall_ hate you . " " oh , but , , you will not ! I sha ' not be disagreeable . I shall be very good to you , and I shall be good to everybody . you will not hate I really , will you , ? " " oh , bother ! never mind ! come , it be time for I to learn my lesson . see here ! what I have get to do , " say , draw toward he and show she he theorem , while she push she hair behind she ear , and prepare herself to prove she capability of help he in . she begin to read with full confidence in she own power , but presently , become quite bewildered , she face flush with irritation . it be unavoidable ; she must confess she incompetency , and she be not fond of humiliation . " it be nonsense ! " she say , " and very ugly stuff ; nobody need want to make it out . " " ah , there , now , ! " say , draw the book away , and wag he head at she , " you see you be not so clever as you think you be . " " oh , " say , pout , " I dare say I could make it out , if I would learn what go before , as you have . " " but that be what you just could not , , " say . " for it be all the harder when you know what go before ; for then you have get to say what definition 3 be , and what axiom be . but get along with you now ; I must go on with this . here be the . see what you can make of that . " find the quite soothing after she mathematical mortification ; for she delighte in new word , and quickly find that there be a english Key at the end , which would make she very wise about , at slight expense . she presently make up she mind to skip the rule in the , the example become so absorbing . these mysterious sentence , snatch from a unknown context , -- like strange horns of beasts , and leave of unknown plant , bring from some far - off region , -- give boundless scope to she imagination , and be all the more fascinating because they be in a peculiar tongue of they own , which she could learn to interpret . it be really very interesting , the that have say no girl could learn ; and she be proud because she find it interesting . the most fragmentary example be she favourite . _Mor omnibus est communis_ would have be jejune , only she like to know the Latin ; but the fortunate gentleman whom every one congratulate because he have a son " endow with _such a disposition " afforde she a great deal of pleasant conjecture , and she be quite lost in the " thick grove penetrable by no star , " when call out ,-- " now , then , , give we the Grammar ! " " oh , , it be such a pretty book ! " she say , as she jump out of the large arm - chair to give it he ; " it be much prettier than the dictionary . I could learn very soon . I do not think it be at all hard . " " oh , I know what you have be do , " say ; " you have be read the at the end . any donkey can do that . " seize the book and open it with a determined and business - like air , as much as to say that he have a lesson to learn which no donkey would find themselves equal to . , rather pique , turn to the bookcase to amuse herself with puzzl out the title . presently call to she : " here , , come and hear if I can say this . at that end of the table , where sit when he hear I . " obey , and take the open book . " where do you begin , ? " " oh , I begin at arborum , '_ because I say all over again what I have be learn this week . " sail along pretty well for three line ; and be begin to forget she office of prompter in speculating as to what _mas could mean , which come twice over , when he stick fast at etiam volucrum _. " do not tell I , Maggie ; _Sunt etibe volucrum _--_Sunt etiam volucrum _--_ut ostrea , cetus _----" " no , " say , open she mouth and shake she head . " _Sunt etiam volucrum _, " say , very slowly , as if the next word might be expect to come sooner when he give they this strong hint that they be wait for . " class , e , u , " say , get impatient . " oh , I know -- hold you tongue , " say . " _Ceu passer , hirundo ; _----" take he pencil and make several hard dot with it on he book - cover --" _ferarum _----" " oh dear , oh dear , , " say , " what a time you be ! _Ut_----" " _Ut ostrea _-- -- " " no , no , " say , " _ut tigris _---- " " oh yes , now I can do , "
" say ; " it be _tigris , vulpe _, I would forget : _ut tigris , volupe ; et _. " with some further stammering and repetition , get through the next few line . " now , then , " he say , " the next be what I have just learn for to - morrow . give I hold of the book a minute . " after some whisper gabbling , assist by the beating of he fist on the table , return the book . " _Mascula nomina in a_, " he begin . " no , , " say , " that do not come next . it be non creskens genittivo _----" " _Cresken genittivo !_ " exclaim , with a derisive laugh , for have learn this omitted passage for he yesterday 's lesson , and a young gentleman do not require a intimate or extensive acquaintance with latin before he can feel the pitiable absurdity of a false quantity . " _Cresken genittivo !_ what a little silly you be , ! " " well , you need not laugh , , for you do not remember it at all . I be sure it be spelt so ; how be I to know ? " " Phee - e - e - h ! I tell you girl could not learn . it be non crescens genitivo_. " " very well , then , " say , pout . I can say that as well as you can . and you do not mind you stop . for you ought to stop twice as long at a semicolon as you do at a comma , and you make the longest stop where there ink to be no stop at all . " " oh , well , do not chatter . let I go on . " they be presently fetch to spend the rest of the evening in the drawing - room , and become so animated with , who , she feel sure , admire she cleverness , that be rather amaze and alarme at she audacity . but she be suddenly subdue by 's alluding to a little girl of whom he have hear that she once run away to the gypsy . " what a very odd little girl that must be ! " say , mean to be playful ; but a playfulness that turn on she suppose oddity be not at all to 's taste . she fear that , after all , do not think much of she , and go to be in rather low spirit . , she feel , look at she as if she think she hair be very ugly because it hang down straight behind . nevertheless it be a very happy fortnight to , this visit to . she be allow to be in the study while he have he lesson , and in she various reading get very deep into the example in the . the astronomer who hate woman generally cause she so much puzzl speculation that she one day ask Stelling if all astronomer hate woman , or whether it be only this particular astronomer . but forestall he answer , she say ,-- " I suppose it be all astronomer ; because , you know , they live up in high towers , and if the woman come there they might talk and hinder they from look at the star . " like she prattle immensely , and they be on the best term . she tell she should like to go to school to , as he do , and learn just the same thing . she know she could do , for she have look into it again , and she see what a benefit class mean ; they be the name of the line . " I be sure you could not do it , now , " say ; " and I will just ask Stelling if you could . " " I do not mind , " say the little conceited minx , " I will ask he myself . " " , " she say , that same evening when they be in the drawing - room , " could not I do , and all 's lesson , if you be to teach I instead of he ? " " no , you could not , " say , indignantly . " girl can not do ; can they , sy ? " " they can pick up a little of everything , I dare say , " say . " they have a great deal of superficial cleverness ; but they could not go far into anything . they be quick and shallow . " , delighte with this verdict , telegraph he triumph by wag he head at , behind 's chair . as for , she have hardly ever be so mortified . she have be so proud to be call " quick " all she little life , and now it appear that this quickness be the brand of inferiority . it would have be better to be slow , like . " , ha ! ! " say , when they be alone ; " you see it be not such a fine thing to be quick . you will never go far into anything , you know . " and be so oppress by this dreadful destiny that she have no spirit for a retort . but when this small apparatus of shallow quickness be fetch away in the gig by , and the study be once more quite lonely for , he miss she grievously . he have really be brighter , and have get through he lesson better , since she have be there ; and she have ask so many question about the , and whether there really ever
ever be a man who say , in , " I would not buy it for a farthing or a rotten nut , " or whether that have only be turn into , that have actually come to a dim understanding of the fact that there have once be people upon the earth who be so fortunate as to know without learn it through the medium of the . this luminous idea be a great addition to he historical acquirement during this half - year , which be otherwise confin to a epitomize history of the . but the dreary half - year _did_ come to a end . how glad be to see the last yellow leave flutter before the cold wind ! the dark afternoon and the first snow seem to he far livelier than the sunshine ; and that he might make himself the surer about the flight of the day that be carry he homeward , he stick twenty - one stick deep in a corner of the garden , when he be three week from the holiday , and pull one up every day with a great wrench , throw it to a distance with a vigor of will which would have carry it to limbo , if it have be in the nature of stick to travel so far . but it be worth purchase , even at the heavy price of the , the happiness of see the bright light in the parlor at home , as the gig pass noiselessly over the snow - cover bridge ; the happiness of pass from the cold air to the warmth and the kiss and the smile of that familiar hearth , where the pattern of the rug and the grate and the fire - iron be " first idea " that it be no more possible to criticise than the solidity and extension of matter . there be no sense of ease like the ease we feel in those scene where we be bear , where object become dear to we before we have know the labor of choice , and where the outer world seem only a extension of we own personality ; we accept and love it as we accept we own sense of existence and we own limb . very commonplace , even ugly , that furniture of we early home might look if it be put up to auction ; a improved taste in upholstery scorn it ; and be not the striving after something better and better in we surroundings the grand characteristic that distinguish man from the brute , or , to satisfy a scrupulous accuracy of definition , that distinguish the british man from the foreign brute ? but heaven know where that strive might lead we , if we affections have not a trick of twining round those old inferior thing ; if the love and sanctity of we life have no deep immovable root in memory . one be delight in a elderberry bush overhange the confused leafage of a hedgerow bank , as a more gladdening sight than the finest cistus or fuchsia spread itself on the softest undulating turf , be a entirely unjustifiable preference to a nursery - gardener , or to any of those regulate mind who be free from the weakness of any attachment that do not rest on a demonstrable superiority of quality . and there be no better reason for prefer this elderberry bush than that it stir a early memory ; that it be no novelty in my life , speak to I merely through my present sensibility to form and color , but the long companion of my existence , that wove itself into my joy when joy be vivid . chapter ii the Fine old , with the snowy hair and ruddy face , have do he duty that year in the noblest fashion , and have set off he rich gift of warmth and color with all the heightening contrast of frost and snow . lay on the croft and river - bank in undulation softer than the limb of infancy ; it lay with the neatliest finish border on every slop roof , make the dark - red gable stand out with a new depth of color ; it weigh heavily on the laurel and fir - tree , till it fall from they with a shuddering sound ; it clothed the rough turnip - field with whiteness , and make the sheep look like dark blotch ; the gate be all block up with the sloping drift , and here and there a disregarded four -foote stood as if petrify " in unrecumbent sadness " ; there be no gleam , no shadow , for the heaven , too , be one still , pale cloud ; no sound or motion in anything but the dark river that flow and moan like a unresting sorrow . but old smile as he lay this cruel -seeming spell on the outdoor world , for he mean to light up home with new brightness , to deepen all the richness of indoor color , and give a keener edge of delight to the warm fragrance of food ; he mean to prepare a sweet imprisonment that would strengthen the primitive fellowship of kindred , and make the sunshine of familiar human face as welcome as the hidden day -star . he kindness fall but hardly on the homeless , -- fell but hardly on the home where the hearth be not very warm , and where the food have little fragrance ; where the human face have have no sunshine in they , but rather the leaden , blank - eyed gaze of unexpectant want . but the fine old season mean well ; and if he have not learn the secret how to bless man impartially , it be because he father time , with
with ever-unrelent unrelenting purpose , still hides that secret in he own mighty , slow - beat heart . and yet this day , in spite of 's fresh delight in home , be not , he think , somehow or other , quite so happy as it have always be before . the red berries be just as abundant on the holly , and he and have dress all the window and mantlepiece and picture-frame on eve with as much taste as ever , wed the thick - set scarlet cluster with branch of the black - berried ivy . there have be singe under the window after midnight ,-- supernatural singing , always feel , in spite of 's contemptuous insistence that the singer be old , the parish clerk , and the rest of the church choir ; she tremble with awe when they carolling break in upon she dream , and the image of man in fustian clothes be always thrust away by the vision of angel rest on the part cloud . the midnight chant have help as usual to lift the morning above the level of common day ; and then there be the smell of hot toast and ale from the kitchen , at the breakfast hour ; the favorite anthem , the green bough , and the short sermon give the appropriate festal character to the church - go ; and aunt and uncle , with all they seven child , be look like so many reflector of the bright parlor - fire , when the church - goer come back , stampe the snow from they foot . the plum -pudding be of the same handsome roundness as ever , and come in with the symbolic blue flame around it , as if it have be heroically snatch from the nether fire , into which it have be throw by dyspeptic ; the dessert be as splendid as ever , with its golden orang , brown nut , and the crystalline light and dark of apple - jelly and damson cheese ; in all these thing be as it have always be since could remember ; it be only distinguished , it by anything , by superior sliding and snowball . be cheery , but not so . he be irate and defiant ; and , though he espouse he father 's quarrel and share he father 's sense of injury , be not without some of the feeling that oppress when get louder and more angry in narration and assertion with the increase leisure of dessert . the attention that might have concentrate on he nut and wine be distract by a sense that there be rascally enemy in the world , and that the business of grow - up life could hardly be conduct without a good deal of quarrelling . now , be not fond of quarrelling , unless it could soon be put a end to by a fair stand - up fight with a adversary whom he have every chance of thrashing ; and he father 's irritable talk make he uncomfortable , though he never account to himself for the feeling , or conceive the notion that he father be faulty in this respect . the particular embodiment of the evil principle now excite 's determined resistance be , who , have lands higher up the , be take measure for they irrigation , which either be , or would be , or be bound to be ( on the principle that water be water ) , a infringement on 's legitimate share of water- power . , who have a mill on the stream , be a feeble auxiliary of compare with . Dix have be bring to he sense by arbitration , and 's advice have not carry _him_ far . no ; , Tulliver consider , have be as good as nowhere in point of law ; and in the intensity of he indignation against , he contempt for a baffle adversary like begin to wear the air of a friendly attachment . he have no male audience to - day except , who know nothing , as he say , of the " natur ' of ' mill , " and could only assent to 's argument on the _a priori_ ground of family relationship and monetary obligation ; but do not talk with the futile intention of convince he audience , he talk to relieve himself ; while good make strong effort to keep he eye wide open , in spite of the sleepiness which a unusually good dinner produce in he hard - work frame . , more alive to the subject , and interested in everything that affec she brother , listen and put in a word as often as maternal preoccupation allow . " why , be a new name hereabout , brother , be not it ? " she say ; " he do not own the land in father 's time , nor yours either , before I be marry . " " new name ? yes , I should think it _is a new name , " say , with angry emphasis . " have be in we family a hundred year and better , and nobody ever hear of a Pivart meddling with the river , till this fellow come and buy 's farm out of hand , before anybody else could so much as say ' snap . ' but I will _Pivart_ he ! " add , lift he glass with a sense that he have define he resolution in a unmistakable manner . " you will not be force to go to law with he , I hope , brother ? " say , with some anxiety . " I do not know what I shall be force to ; but I know what I shall force _him_ to , with
with he dike and erigation , if there be any law to be bring to bear of ' the right side . I know well enough who be at the bottom of it ; he be get to back he and egg he on . I know Wakem tell he the law can not touch he for it , but there be folk can handle the law besides Wakem . it take a big raskil to beat he ; but there be bigger to be find , as know more of ' th ' in and out of ' the law , else how come Wakem to lose 's suit for he ? " be a strictly honest man , and proud of be honest , but he consider that in law the end of justice could only be achieve by employ a stronger knave to frustrate a weaker . law be a sort of cock - fight , in which it be the business of injured honesty to get a game bird with the best pluck and the strongest spur . " 's no fool ; you need not tell I that , " he observe presently , in a pugnacious tone , as if poor have be urge that lawyer 's capability ; " but , you see , he be not up to the law as be . and water be a very particular thing ; you can not pick it up with a pitchfork . that be why it be be nut to and the lawyer . it be plain enough what be the rights and the wrong of water , if you look at it straight - forrard ; for a river be a river , and if you have get a mill , you must have water to turn it ; and it be no use tell I 's erigation and nonsense will not stop my wheel ; I know what belong to water better than that . talk to I of ' what th' engineers say ! I say it be common sense , as 's dike must do I a injury . but if that be they engineering , I will put to it by - and - by , and he shall see if he can not find a bit more sense in thg engineering business than what _that come to . " , look round with some anxiety at this announcement of he prospect , unthinkingly withdraw a small rattle he be amuse baby Moss with , whereupon she , be a baby that know she own mind with remarkable clearness , instantaneously express she sentiment in a piercing yell , and be not to be appease even by the restoration of the rattle , feel apparently that the original wrong of have it take from she remain in all its force . hurry away with she into another room , and express to , who accompany she , the conviction that the dear child have good reason for crying ; imply that if it be suppose to be the rattle that baby clamor for , she be a misunderstood baby . the thoroughly justifiable yell be quiet , . look at she sister - in - law and say ,-- " I be sorry to see brother so put out about this water work . " " it be you brother 's way , . ; I would never anythe o ' that sort before I be marry , " say , with a half - implied reproach . she always speak of she husband as " you brother " to in any case when he line of conduct be not matter of pure admiration . , who be never angry in she life , have yet she mild share of that spirit without which she could hardly have be at once a Dodson and a woman . be always on the defensive toward she own sister , it be natural that she should be keenly conscious of she superiority , even as the weakest , over a husband 's sister , who , besides be poorly off , and inclin to " hang on " she brother , have the good - natured submissiveness of a large , easy - tempered , untidy , prolific woman , with affection enough in she not only for she own husband and abundant child , but for any number of collateral relation . " I hope and pray he will not go to law , " say . , " for there 's never any know where that will end . and the right do not allay win . this 's a rich man , by what I can make out , and the rich mostly get thing they own way . " " as to that , " say , strok she dress down , " I have see what riche be in my own family ; for my sister have get husbands as can afford to do pretty much what they like . but I think sometimes I shall be drive off my head with the talk about this law and erigation ; and my sister lay all the fault to I , for they do not know what it be to marry a man like you brother ; how should they ? have she own way from morning till night . " " well , " say . , " I do not think I should like my husband if he have not get any wit of he own , and I have to find head - piece for he . it be a deal easier to do what pleasis one be husband , than to be puzzl what else one should do . " " if people come to talk of ' do what please they husband , " say , with a faint imitation of she sister
sister , " I be sure you brother might have wait a long while before he would have find a wife that 'uld have let he have he say in everything , as I do . it be nothing but law and erigation now , from when we first get up in the morning till we go to bed at night ; and I never contradict he ; I only say , ' well , , do as you like ; but whativer you do , do not go to law . " , as we have see , be not without influence over she husband . no woman be ; she can always incline he to do either what she wish , or the reverse ; and on the composite impulse that be threaten to hurry into " law , " 's monotonous pleading have doubtless its share of force ; it might even be comparable to that proverbial feather which have the credit or discredit of break the camel 's back ; though , on a strictly impartial view , the blame ought rather to lie with the previous weight of feather which have already place the back in such imminent peril that a otherwise innocent feather could not settle on it without mischief . not that be feeble beseeching could have have this feather 's weight in virtue of she single personality ; but whenever she depart from entire assent to she husband , he see in she the representative of the family ; and it be a guiding principle with to let the Dodsons know that they be not to domineer over _him , or -- more specifically -- that a male be far more than equal to four female Dodson , even though one of they be . but not even a direct argument from that typical Dodson female herself against he go to law could have heighten he disposition toward it so much as the mere thought of , continually freshen by the sight of the too able attorney on market - day . , to he certain knowledge , be ( metaphorically speak ) at the bottom of 's irrigation ; thWakey have try to make stand out , and go to law about the dam ; it be unquestionably Wakem who have cause to lose the suit about the right of road and the bridge that make a thoroughfare of he land for every vagabond who prefer a opportunity of damaging private property to walk like a honest man along the highroad ; all lawyer be more or less rascal , but 's rascality be of that peculiarly aggravate kind which place itself in opposition to that form of right embody in 's interest and opinion . and as a extra touch of bitterness , the injured miller have recently , in borrowe the five hundred pound , be oblige to carry a little business to 's office on he own account . a hook - nose glib fellow ! as cool as a cucumber , -- always look so sure of he game ! and it be vexatious that be not more like he , but be a bald , round - feature man , with bland manners and fat hand ; a game - cock that you would be rash to bet upon against . be a sly fellow . he weakness do not lie on the side of scrupulosity ; but the largest amount of winking , however significant , be not equivalent to see through a stone wall ; and confident as be in he principle that water be water , and in the direct inference that have not a leg to stand on in this affair of irrigation , he have a uncomfortable suspicion that have more law to show against this ( rationally ) irrefragable inference than could show for it . but then , if they go to law , there be a chance for to employ on he side , instead of have that admirable bully against he ; and the prospect of see a witness of 's make to perspire and become confounded , as 's witness have once be , be allur to the love of retributive justice . much rumination have on these puzzling subject during he ride on the gray horse ; much turning of the head from side to side , as the scale dip alternately ; but the probable result be still out of sight , only to be reache through much hot argument and iteration in domestic and social life . that initial stage of the dispute which consist in the narration of the case and the enforcement of 's view concern it throughout the entire circle of he connection would necessarily take time ; and at the beginning of , when be go to school again , there be scarcely any new item to be detect in he father 's statement of the case against , or any more specific indication of the measure he be bend on take against that rash contravener of the principle that water be water . Iteration , like friction , be likely to generate heat instead of progress , and 's heat be certainly more and more palpable . if there have be no new evidence on any other point , there have be new evidence that be as " thick as mud " with . " , " say , one evening near the end of the holiday , " uncle say _is_ go to send he son to . it be not true , what they say about he go to be send to . you will not like I to go to school with 's son , shall you ? " " it be no matter for that , my boy , " say ; " do not you learn anything bad of he , that be all
all . the lad be a poor deform creatur , and take after he mother in the face ; I think there be not much of he father in he . it be a sign thWakey think high of ' , as he send he son to he , and thWakey know meal from . " Tulliver in he heart be rather proud of the fact that he son be to have the same advantage as 's ; but be not at all easy on the point . it would have be much clearer if the lawyer 's son have not be deform , for then would have have the prospect of pitching into he with all that freedom which be derive from a high moral sanction . the it be a cold , wet day on which go back to school ; a day quite in keep with this severe phase of he destiny . if he have not carry in he pocket a parcel of sugar - candy and a small Dutch doll for little , there would have be no ray of expect pleasure to enlive the general gloom . but he like to think how would put out she lip and she tiny hand for the bits of sugarcandy ; and to give the greater keenness to these pleasure of imagination , he take out the parcel , make a small hole in the paper , and bit off a crystal or two , which have so solace a effect under the confined prospect and damp odor of the gig -umbrella , that he repeat the process more than once on he way . " well , , we be glad to see you again , " say , heartily . " take off you wrapping and come into the study till dinner . you will find a bright fire there , and a new companion . " feel in a uncomfortable flutter as he take off he woollen comforter and other wrapping . he have see at . 's , but have always turn he eye away from he as quickly as possible . he would have dislike have a deform boy for he companion , even if have not be the son of a bad man . and do not see how a bad man 's son could be very good . he own father be a good man , and he would readily have fight any one who say the contrary . he be in a state of mingled embarrassment and defiance as he follow Stell to the study . " here be a new companion for you to shake hand with , , " say that gentleman on enter the study , -- " master . I shall leave you to make acquaintance by yourselves . you already know something of each other , I imagine ; for you be neighbor at home . " look confused and awkward , while rise and glance at he timidly . do not like to go up and put out he hand , and he be not prepare to say , " how do you do ? " on so short a notice . wisely turn away , and close the door behind he ; boy ' shyness only wear off in the absence of they elder . be at once too proud and too timid to walk toward . he think , or rather feel , that have a aversion to look at he ; every one , almost , dislike look at he ; and he deformity be more conspicuous when he walk . so they remain without shak hand or even speak , while go to the fire and warm himself , every now and then caste furtive glance at , who seem to be draw absently first one object and then another on a piece of paper he have before he . he have seat himself again , and as he draw , be think what he could say to , and try to overcome he own repugnance to make the first advance . begin to look oftener and longer at 's face , for he could see it without notice the hump , and it be really not a disagreeable face ,-- very old - look , thought . he wonder how much older be than himself . a anatomist -- even a mere physiognomist -- would have see that the deformity of 's spine be not a congenital hump , but the result of a accident in infancy ; but you do not expect from any acquaintance with such distinction ; to he , be simply a humpback . he have a vague notion that the deformity of 's son have some relation to the lawyer 's rascality , of which he have so often hear he father talk with hot emphasis ; and he feel , too , a half - admit fear of he as probably a spiteful fellow , who , not be able to fight you , have cunning way of do you a mischief by the sly . there be a humpbacked tailor in the neighborhood of 's academy , who be consider a very unamiable character , and be much hoote after by public - spirit boy solely on the ground of he unsatisfactory moral quality ; so that be not without a basis of fact to go upon . still , no face could be more unlike that ugly tailor 's than this melancholy boy 's face , -- the brown hair round it wav and curl at the end like a girl 's ; think that truly pitiable . this be a pale , puny fellow , and it be quite clear he would not be able to play at anything worth speak of ; but he handle he pencil in a enviable manner , and be apparently make one thing after
after another without any trouble . what be he drawe ? be quite warm now , and want something new to be go forward . it be certainly more agreeable to have a ill - natured humpback as a companion than to stand look out of the study window at the rain , and kick he foot against the washboard in solitude ; something would happen every day ,-- " a quarrel or something " ; and think he should rather like to show that he have better not try he spiteful trick on _him_ . he suddenly walk across the hearth and look over 's paper . " why , that be a donkey with pannier , and a spaniel , and partridge in the corn ! " he exclaim , he tongue be completely loose by surprise and admiration . " oh my button ! I wish I could draw like that . I be to learn draw this half ; I wonder if I shall learn to make dog and donkey ! " " oh , you can do they without learning , " say ; " I never learn draw . " " never learn ? " say , in amazement . " why , when I make dog and horse , and those thing , the head and the leg will not come right ; though I can see how they ought to be very well . I can make house , and all sort of chimney , -- chimney go all down the wall , -- and window in the roof , and all that . but I dare say I could do dog and horse if I be to try more , " he add , reflec that might falsely suppose that he be go to " knock under , " if he be too frank about the imperfection of he accomplishment . " oh , yes , " say , " it be very easy . you have only to look well at thing , and draw they over and over again . what you do wrong once , you can alter the next time . " " but have not you be teach _any_thing ? " say , begin to have a puzzled suspicion that 's crook back might be the source of remarkable faculty . " I think you have be to school a long while . " " yes , " say , smile ; " I have be teach and and mathematics , and write and such thing . " " oh , but I say , you do not like , though , do you ? " say , lower he voice confidentially . " pretty well ; I do not care much about it , " say . " ah , but perhaps you have not get into the qua maribus _, " say , nodd he head sideway , as much as to say , " that be the test ; it be easy talk till you come to _that _. " feel some bitter complacency in the promise stupidity of this well - make , active - look boy ; but make polite by he own extreme sensitiveness , as well as by he desire to conciliate , he check he inclination to laugh , and say quietly ,-- " I have do with the grammar ; I do not learn that any more . " " then you will not have the same lesson as I shall ? " say , with a sense of disappointment . " no ; but I dare say I can help you . I shall be very glad to help you if I can . " do not say " thank you , " for he be quite absorb in the thought that 's son do not seem so spiteful a fellow as might have be expect . " I say , " he say presently , " do you love you father ? " " yes , " say , color deeply ; " do not you love yours ? " " oh yes -- I only want to know , " say , rather asham of himself , now he see coloring and look uncomfortable . he find much difficulty in adjust he attitude of mind toward the son of , and it have occur to he that if dislike he father , that fact might go some way toward clear up he perplexity . " shall you learn draw now ? " he say , by way of change the subject . " no , " say . " my father wish I to give all my time to other thing now . " " what ! and , and those thing ? " say . " yes , " say , who have leave off use he pencil , and be rest he head on one hand , while be learn forward on both elbow , and look with increasing admiration at the dog and the donkey . " and you do not mind that ? " say , with strong curiosity . " no ; I like to know what everybody else know . I can study what I like by - and - by . " " I can not think why anybody should learn , " say . " it be no good . " " it be part of the education of a gentleman , " say . " all gentleman learn the same thing . " " what ! do you think , the master of the harrier , know ? " say , who have often think he should like to resemble . " he learn it when he be a boy , of course , " say . " but I dare say he be forget it . " " oh , well , I can do
do that , then , " say , not with any epigrammatic intention , but with serious satisfaction at the idea that , as far as be concerned , there be no hindrance to he resembl . " only you be oblige to remember it while you be at school , else you have get to learn ever so many line of ' . ' 's very particular -- do you know ? he will have you up ten time if you say ' nam ' for ' jam , ' -- he will not let you go a letter wrong , _i_ can tell you . " " oh , I do not mind , " say , unable to choke a laugh ; " I can remember thing easily . and there be some lesson I be very fond of . I be very fond of history , and everything about the Greek . I should like to have be a and fight the , and then have come home and have write tragedy , or else have be listen to by everybody for my wisdom , like , and have die a grand death . " ( , you perceive , be not without a wish to impress the well - make barbarian with a sense of he mental superiority . ) " why , be the Greeks great fighter ? " say , who see a vista in this direction . " be there anything like and and in the history ? those be the only bit I like in the history of the . " " oh , there be very fine story of that sort about the Greek , -- about the heroe of early time who kill the wild beasts , as do . and in the -- that be a beautiful poem -- there be a more wonderful giant than ,-- , who have only one eye in the middle of he forehead ; and , a little fellow , but very wise and cunn , get a red - hot pine - tree and stick it into this one eye , and make he roar like a thousand bull . " " oh , what fun ! " say , jump away from the table , and stampe first with one leg and then the other . " I say , can you tell I all about those story ? because I sha ' not learn , you know . shall I ? " he add , pause in he stamping with a sudden alarm , lest the contrary might be possible . " do every gentleman learn ? will make I begin with it , do you think ? " " no , I should think not , very likely not , " say . " but you may read those story without know . I have get they in . " " oh , but I do not like read ; I would sooner have you tell they I . but only the fighting one , you know . my sister be always want to tell I story , but they be stupid thing . girl ' story always be . can you tell a good many fighting storie ? " " oh yes , " say ; " lot of they , besides the storie . I can tell you about -de - Lion and Saladin , and about and and , -- I know no end . " " you be older than I be , be not you ? " say . " why , how old be _you ?_ I be fifteen . " " I be only go in fourteen , " say . " but I thrash all the fellow at 's -- that be where I be before I come here . and I beat th'ey all at bandy and climbing . and I wish would let we go fishing . could show you how to fish . you _could fish , could not you ? it be only stand , and sit still , you know . " , in he turn , wish to make the balance dip in he favor . this hunchback must not suppose that he acquaintance with fight story put he on a par with a actual fighting hero , like . wince under this allusion to he unfitness for active sport , and he answer almost peevishly ,-- " I can not bear fishing . I think people look like fools sit watch a line hour after hour , or else throw and throw , and catch nothing . " " ah , but you would not say they look like fools when they land a big pike , I can tell you , " say , who have never catch anything that be " big " in he life , but whose imagination be on the stretch with indignant zeal for the honor of sport . be son , it be plain , have he disagreeable point , and must be keep in due check . happily for the harmony of this first interview , they be now call to dinner , and be not allow to develop farther he unsound view on the subject of fishing . but say to himself , that be just what he should have expect from a hunchback . " the young idea " the alteration of feeling in that first dialogue between and continue to make they intercourse even after many week of schoolboy intimacy . never quite lose the feeling that , be the son of a " rascal , " be he natural enemy ; never thoroughly overcome he repulsion to 's deformity . he be a boy who adhere tenaciously to impression once receive ; as with all mind in which mere perception predominate over thought and emotion , the external remain to he rigidly
rigidly what it be in the first instance . but then it be impossible not to like 's company when he be in a good humor ; he could help one so well in one 's exercise , which regard as a kind of puzzle that could only be find out by a lucky chance ; and he could tell such wonderful fight story about of the , for example , and other heroe who be especial favorite with , because they lay about they with heavy stroke . he have small opinion of , whose cimeter could cut a cushion in two in a instant ; who want to cut cushion ? that be a stupid story , and he do not care to hear it again . but when , on the black pony , rise in he stirrup , and lift he good battle - axe , cracke at once the helmet and the skull of the too hasty knight at , then feel all the exaltation of sympathy , and if he have have a cocoanut at hand , he would have crack it at once with the poker . in he happier mood indulge to the top of he bent , heighten the crash and bang and fury of every fight with all the artillery of epithet and simile at he command . but he be not always in a good humor or happy mood . the slight spurt of peevish susceptibility which have escape he in they first interview be a symptom of a perpetually recurr mental ailment , half of it nervous irritability , half of it the heart - bitterness produce by the sense of he deformity . in these fits of susceptibility every glance seem to he to be charge either with offensive pity or with ill - repress disgust ; at the very least it be a indifferent glance , and feel indifference as a child of the south feel the chill air of a northern spring . 's blunder patronage when they be out of door together would sometimes make he turn upon the well - mean lad quite savagely ; and he eye , usually sad and quiet , would flash with anything but playful lightning . no retain he suspicions of the humpback . but 's self - teach skill in drawing be another link between they ; for find , to he disgust , that he new drawing - master give he no dog and donkey to draw , but brook and rustic bridge and ruin , all with a general softness of black - lead surface , indicate that nature , if anything , be rather satiny ; and as 's feeling for the picturesque in landscape be at present quite latent , it be not surprising that 's productions seem to he a uninteresting form of art . , have a vague intention that should be put to some business which include the draw out of plan and map , have complain to , when he see he at , that seem to be learn nothing of that sort ; whereupon that oblige adviser have suggest that should have draw - lesson . must not mind pay extra for drawing ; let be make a good draughtsman , and he would be able to turn he pencil to any purpose . so it be order that should have draw - lesson ; and whom should have select as a master if not , who be consider quite at the head of he profession within a circuit of twelve mile round 's ? by which mean learn to make a extremely fine point to he pencil , and to represent landscape with a " broad generality , " which , doubtless from a narrow tendency in he mind to detail , he think extremely dull . all this , you remember , happen in those dark ag when there be no school of design ; before schoolmaster be invariably man of scrupulous integrity , and before the clergy be all man of enlarge mind and varied culture . in those less favored day , it be no fable that there be other clergyman besides who have narrow intellect and large want , and whose income , by a logical confusion to which , be a female as well as blindfold , be peculiarly liable , be proportion not to they want but to they intellect , with which income have clearly no inherent relation . the problem these gentleman have to solve be to readjust the proportion between they want and they income ; and since want be not easily starve to death , the simpler method appear to be to raise they income . there be but one way of do this ; any of those low callings in which man be obliged to do good work at a low price be forbidden to clergyman ; be it they fault if they only resource be to turn out very poor work at a high price ? besides , how should be expect to know that education be a delicate and difficult business , any more than a animal endow with a power of bore a hole through a rock should be expect to have wide view of excavation ? 's faculty have be early train to bore in a straight line , and he have no faculty to spare . but among 's contemporary , whose father cast they son on clerical instruction to find they ignorant after many day , there be many far less lucky than . Education be almost entirely a matter of luck -- usually of ill - luck -- in those distant day . the state of mind in which you take a billiard - cue or a dice - box in you hand be one of sober certainty compare with that of old - fashioned fathers , like ,
, when they selecte a school or a tutor for they son . excellent man , who have be force all they life to spell on a impromptu-phonetic system , and have carry on a successful business in spite of this disadvantage , have acquire money enough to give they son a better start in life than they have have themselves , must necessarily take they chance as to the conscience and the competence of the schoolmaster whose circular fell in they way , and appear to promise so much more than they would ever have thought of ask for , include the return of linen , fork , and spoon . it be happy for they if some ambitious draper of they acquaintance have not bring up he son to the Church , and if that young gentleman , at the age of four - and - twenty , have not close he college dissipation by a imprudent marriage ; otherwise , these innocent fathers , desirous of do the best for they offspring , could only escape the draper 's son by happen to be on the foundation of a grammar - school as yet unvisit by commissioner , where two or three boy could have , all to themselves , the advantages of a large and lofy building , together with a head - master , toothless , dim - eyed and deaf , whose erudite indistinctness and inattention be engross by they at the rate of three hundred pound a - head , -- a ripe scholar , doubtless , when first appoint ; but all ripeness beneath the sun have a further stage less esteem in the market . , then , compare with many other british youth of he time who have since have to scramble through life with some fragment of more or less relevant knowledge , and a great deal of strictly relevant ignorance , be not so very unlucky . be a broad - chested , healthy man , with the bearing of a gentleman , a conviction that a grow boy require a sufficiency of beef , and a certain hearty kindness in he that make he like to see Tom look well and enjoy he dinner ; not a man of refin conscience , or with any deep sense of the infinite issue belong to every - day duty , not quite competent to he high office ; but incompetent gentleman must live , and without private fortune it be difficult to see how they could all live genteelly if they have nothing to do with education or government . besides , it be the fault of 's mental constitution that he faculty could not be nourished on the sort of knowledge have to communicate . a boy bear with a deficient power of apprehend sign and abstraction must suffer the penalty of he congenital deficiency , just as if he have be bear with one leg shorter than the other . a method of education sanctio by the long practice of we venerable ancestor be not to give way before the exceptional dulness of a boy who be merely live at the time then present . and be convince that a boy so stupid at sign and abstraction must be stupid at everything else , even if that reverend gentleman could have teach he everything else . it be the practice of we venerable ancestor to apply that ingenious instrument the thumb-screw , and to tighten and tighten it in order to elicit non-existent fact ; they have a fix opinion to begin with , that the fact be existent , and what have they to do but to tighten the thumb-screw ? in like manner , have a fixed opinion that all boy with any capacity could learn what it be the only regular thing to teach ; if they be slow , the thumb -screw must be tighten , -- the exercise must be insist on with increase severity , and a page of be award as a penalty , to encourage and stimulate a too languid inclination to latin verse . the thumb -screw be a little relaxed , however , during this second half - year . be so advanced in he study , and so apt , that could obtain credit by he facility , which require little help , much more easily than by the troublesome process of overcome 's dulness . gentleman with broad chest and ambitious intentions do sometimes disappoind they friend by fail to carry the world before they . perhaps it be that high achievement demand some other unusual qualification besides a unusual desire for high prize ; perhaps it be that these stalwart gentleman be rather indolent , they _divina particulum aurae_ be obstruct from soar by a too hearty appetite . some reason or other there be why defer the execution of many spirited project , -- why he do not begin the editing of he play , or any other work of scholarship , in he leisure hour , but , after turn the key of he private study with much resolution , sit down to one of 's novel . be gradually allow to shuffle through he lesson with less rigor , and have to help he , he be able to make some show of have apply he mind in a confused and blunder way , without be cross-examin into a betrayal that he mind have be entirely neutral in the matter . he think school much more bearable under this modification of circumstance ; and he go on contentedly enough , pick up a promiscuous education chiefly from thing that be not intend as education at all . what be understand to be he education be simply the practice of reading , write , and spell , carry on by a elaborate appliance of unintelligible idea , and by much failure in the
the effort to learn by rote . nevertheless , there be a visible improvement in under this training ; perhaps because he be not a boy in the abstract , exist solely to illustrate the evils of a mistaken education , but a boy make of flesh and blood , with disposition not entirely at the mercy of circumstance . there be a great improvement in he bearing , for example ; and some credit on this score be due to , the village schoolmaster , who , be a old Peninsular soldier , be employ to drill ,-- a source of high mutual pleasure . , who be understand by the company at the to have once strike terror into the heart of the french , be no longer personally formidable . he have rather a shrunken appearance , and be tremulous in the morning , not from age , but from the extreme perversity of the 's boy , which nothing but gin could enable he to sustain with any firmness . still , he carry himself with martial erectness , have he clothes scrupulously brush , and he trousers tightly strap ; and on the and afternoon , when he come to , he be always inspired with gin and old memory , which give he a exceptionally spirited air , as of a superannuated charger who hear the drum . the drilling - lesson be always protract by episodes of warlike narrative , much more interesting to than 's story out of the Iliad ; for there be no cannon in the Iliad , and beside , have feel some disgust on learn that Hector and Achille might possibly never have exist . but the of be really alive , and have not be long dead ; therefore 's reminiscence of the be remove from all suspicion of be mythical . , it appear , have be a conspicuous figure at , and have contribute not a little to the peculiar terror with which he regiment of infantry be regard by the enemy . on afternoon when he memory be more stimulated than usual , he remember that the of have ( in strict privacy , lest jealousy should be awaken ) express he esteem for that fine fellow Poulter . the very surgeon who attend he in the hospital after he have receive he gunshot - wound have be profoundly impressed with the superiority of 's flesh , -- no other flesh would have heale in anything like the same time . on less personal matter connect with the important warfare in which he have be engage , be more reticent , only take care not to give the weight of he authority to any loose notion concern military history . any one who pretend to a knowledge of what occur at the siege of be especially a object of silent pity to ; he wish that prat person have be run down , and have the breath trample out of he at the first go - off , as he himself have , -- he might talk about the siege of then ! do not escape irritat he drilling - master occasionally , by he curiosity concern other military matter than 's personal experience . " and , , -- be not he a wonderful fighter ? " say , who hold the notion that all the martial heroe commemorate on the public - house sign be engage in the war with . " not at all ! " say , contemptuously . " nothing of ' the sort ! head up ! " he add , in a tone of stern command , which delight , and make he feel as if he be a regiment in he own person . " no , no ! " would continue , on come to a pause in he discipline ; " they would better not talk to I about . he do nothing but die of he wound ; that be a poor haction , I consider . any other man 'uld have die of ' the wound I have have . one of my sword - cut 'uld ha ' kill a fellow like . " " , " would say , at any allusion to the sword , " I wish you would bring you sword and do the sword - exercise ! " for a long while only shook he head in a significant manner at this request , and smile patronizingly , as may have do when urge she too ambitious request . but one afternoon , when a sudden shower of heavy rain have detain twenty minute longer than usual at the , the sword be bring , -- just for to look at . " and this be the real sword you fight with in all the battle , ? " say , handle the hilt . " have it ever cut a 's head off ? " " head off ? ah ! and would , if he would have three head . " " but you have a gun and bayonet besides ? " say . " should like the gun and bayonet best , because you could shoot 'em first and spear th'ey after . ! ps - 's - - ! " give the requisite pantomime to indicate the double enjoyment of pull the trigger and thrust the spare . " ah , but the sword be the thing when you come to close fighting , " say , involuntarily fall in with 's enthusiasm , and draw the sword so suddenly that leape back with much agility . " oh , but , , if you be go to do the exercise , " say , a little conscious that he have not stand he ground as become a , " let I go and call . he will like to see you ,
, you know . " " what ! the humpbacked lad ? " say , contemptuously ; " what be the use of _his_ look on ? " " oh , but he know a great deal about fighting , " say , " and how they use to fight with bow and arrow , and battle - ax . " " let he come , then . I will show he something different from he bow and arrow , " say , cough and draw himself up , while he give a little preliminary play to he wrist . run in to , who be enjoy he afternoon 's holiday at the piano , in the drawing - room , pick out tune for himself and singe they . he be supremely happy , perch like a amorphous bundle on the high stool , with he head throw back , he eye fix on the opposite cornice , and he lip wide open , send forth , with all he might , impromptu syllable to a tune of 's which have hit he fancy . " come , , " say , burst in ; " do not stay roaring 'la la' there ; come and see old Poulter do he sword - exercise in the carriage - house ! " the jar of this interruption , the discord of 's tone come across the note to which be vibrat in soul and body , would have be enough to unhinge he temper , even if there have be no question of the drilling - master ; and , in the hurry of seize something to say to prevent from think he be afraid of the sword when he spring away from it , have alight on this proposition to fetch , though he know well enough that hate to hear he mention he drilling - lesson . would never have do so inconsiderate a thing except under the severe stress of he personal pride . shudder visibly as he pause from he music . then turn red , he say , with violent passion ,-- " get away , you lumber idiot ! do not come bellow at I ; you be not fit to speak to anything but a cart - horse ! " it be not the first time have be make angry by he , but have never before be assail with verbal missile that he understand so well . " I be fit to speak to something better than you , you poor -spirit imp ! " say , light up immediately at 's fire . " you know I will not hit you , because you be no better than a girl . but I be a honest man 's son , and _your_ father be a rogue ; everybody say so ! " fling out of the room , and slam the door after he , make strangely heedless by he anger ; for to slam door within the hearing of , who be probably not far off , be a offence only to be wip out by twenty line of . in fact , that lady do presently descend from she room , in double wonder at the noise and the subsequent cessation of 's music . she find he sit in a heap on the hassock , and cry bitterly . " what be the matter , ? what be that noise about ? who slamm the door ? " look up , and hastily dry he eye . " it be who come in -- to ask I to go out with he . " " and what be you in trouble about ? " say . be not she favorite of the two pupil ; he be less obliging than , who be make useful in many way . still , he father pay more than do , and she mean he to feel that she behave exceedingly well to he . , however , meet she advances toward a good understanding very much as a caress mollusk meet a invitation to show himself out of he shell . Stelling be not a loving , tender - hear woman ; she be a woman whose skirt sit well , who adjust she waist and pat she curl with a preoccupy air when she inquire after you welfare . these thing , doubtless , represent a great social power , but it be not the power of love ; and no other power could win from he personal reserve . he say , in answer to she question , " my toothache come on , and make I hysterical again . " this have be the fact once , and be glad of the recollection ; it be like a inspiration to enable he to excuse he crying . he have to accept - - and to refuse creosote in consequence ; but that be easy . meanwhile , who have for the first time send a poisoned arrow into 's heart , have return to the carriage - house , where he find , with a fixed and earnest eye , waste the perfection of he sword - exercise on probably observant but inappreciative rat . but be a host in himself ; that be to say , he admire himself more than a whole army of spectator could have admire he . he take no notice of 's return , be too entirely absorb in the cut and thrust , -- the solemn one , two , three , four ; and , not without a slight feeling of alarm at 's fix eye and hungry - look sword , which seem impatient for something else to cut besides the air , admire the performance from as great a distance as possible . it be not until pause and wip the perspiration from he forehead , that feel
feel the full charm of the sword-exercise , and wish it to be repeat . " , " say , when the sword be be finally sheath , " I wish you would lend I you sword a little while to keep . " " no no , young gentleman , " say , shak he head decidedly ; " you might do yourself some mischief with it . " " no , I be sure I would not ; I be sure I would take care and not hurt myself . I should not take it out of the sheath much , but I could ground arm with it , and all that . " " no , no , it will not do , I tell you ; it will not do , " say , prepare to depart . " what 'uld say to I ? " " oh , I say , do , ! I would give you my five - shilling piece if you would let I keep the sword a week . look here ! " say , reach out the attractively large round of silver . the young dog calculate the effect as well as if he have be a philosopher . " well , " say , with still deeper gravity , " you must keep it out of sight , you know . " " oh yes , I will keep it under the bed , " say , eagerly , " or else at the bottom of my large box . " " and let I see , now , whether you can draw it out of the sheath without hurte yourself . " that process have be go through more than once , feel that he have act with scrupulous conscientiousness , and say , " well , now , , if I take the crown - piece , it be to make sure as you will do no mischief with the sword . " " oh no , indeed , , " say , delightedly hand he the crown - piece , and grasp the sword , which , he think , might have be lighter with advantage . " but if Stell catche you carry it in ? " say , pocket the crown - piece provisionally while he raise this new doubt . " oh , he always keep in he upstairs study on afternoon , " say , who dislike anything sneak , but be not disinclin to a little stratagem in a worthy cause . so he carry off the sword in triumph mix with dread -- dread that he might encounter or . Stelling -- to he bedroom , where , after some consideration , he hide it in the closet behind some hang clothes . that night he fall asleep in the thought that he would astonish with it when she come , -- tie it round he waist with he red comforter , and make she believe that the sword be he own , and that he be go to be a soldier . there be nobody but who would be silly enough to believe he , or whom he da allow to know he have a sword ; and be really come next week to see , before she go to a boarding - school with . if you think a lad of thirteen would have be so childish , you must be a exceptionally wise man , who , although you be devote to a civil calling , require you to look bland rather than formidable , yet never , since you have a beard , throw yourself into a martial attitude , and frown before the look - glass . it be doubtful whether we soldier would be maintain if there be not pacific people at home who like to fancy themselves soldiers . , like other dramatic spectacle , might possibly cease for want of a " public . " 's this last breach between the two lad be not readily mende , and for some time they speak to each other no more than be necessary . they natural antipathy of temperament make resentment a easy passage to hatre , and in the transition seem to have begun ; there be no malignity in he disposition , but there be a susceptibility that make he peculiarly liable to a strong sense of repulsion . the ox -- we may venture to assert it on the authority of a great classic -- be not give to use he tooth as a instrument of attack , and be a excellent bovine lad , who run at questionable object in a truly ingenious bovine manner ; but he have blundere on 's tenderest point , and have cause he as much acute pain as if he have study the means with the nicest precision and the most envenom spite . see no reason why they should not make up this quarrel as they have do many other , by behave as if nothing have happen ; for though he have never before say to that he father be a rogue , this idea have so habitually make part of he feeling as to the relation between himself and he dubious schoolfellow , who he could neither like nor dislike , that the mere utterance do not make such a epoch to he as it do to . and he have a right to say so when hector over _him , and call he name . but perceive that he first advance toward amity be not meet , he relapse into he least favorable disposition toward , and resolve never to appeal to he either about draw or exercise again . they be only so far civil to each other as be necessary to prevent they state of feud from be observe by , who would have " put down
down " such nonsense with great vigor . when come , however , she could not help look with grow interest at the new schoolfellow , although he be the son of that wick , who make she father so angry . she have arrive in the middle of school - hour , and have sit by while go through he lesson with . Tom , some week ago , have send she word that know no end of story , -- not stupid story like hers ; and she be convince now from she own observation that he must be very clever ; she hope he would think _her_ rather clever too , when she come to talk to he . , moreover , have rather a tenderness for deform thing ; she prefer the wry -necked lamb , because it see to she that the lambs which be quite strong and well make would not mind so much about be pet ; and she be especially fond of petting object that would think it very delightful to be pet by she . she love very dearly , but she often wish that he _car more about she love he . " I think seem a nice boy , , " she say , when they go out of the study together into the garden , to pass the interval before dinner . " he could not choose he father , you know ; and I have read of very bad man who have good son , as well as good parent who have bad child . and if be good , I think we ought to be the more sorry for he because he father be not a good man . You_ like he , do not you ? " " oh , he be a queer fellow , " say , curtly , " and he be as sulky as can be with I , because I tell he he father be a rogue . and I would a right to tell he so , for it be true ; and _he_ begin it , with call I name . but you stop here by yourself a bit , , will you ? I have get something I want to do upstairs . " " can not I go too ? " say , who in this first day of meeting again love 's shadow . " no , it be something I will tell you about by - and - by , not yet , " say , skip away . in the afternoon the boy be at they book in the study , prepare the morrow 's lesson 's that they might have a holiday in the evening in honor of 's arrival . be hang over he Latin grammar , move he lip inaudibly like a strict but impatient repeat he tale of paternoster ; and , at the other end of the room , be busy with two volume , with a look of contented diligence that excit 's curiosity ; he do not look at all as if he be learn a lesson . she sit on a low stool at nearly a right angle with the two boy , watch first one and then the other ; and , look off he book once toward the fire - place , catch the pair of question dark eye fix upon he . he think this sister of 's see a nice little thing , quite unlike she brother ; he wish _he_ have a little sister . what be it , he wonder , that make 's dark eye remind he of the story about princess be turn into animal ? I think it be that she eye be full of unsatisfied intelligence , and unsatisfied beseech affection . " I say , , " say at last , shutt he book and put they away with the energy and decision of a perfect master in the art of leave off , " I have do my lesson now . come upstairs with I . " " what be it ? " say , when they be outside the door , a slight suspicion cross she mind as she remember 's preliminary visit upstairs . " it be not a trick you be go to play I , now ? " " no , no , , " say , in he most coax tone ; " it be something you will like _ever so_. " he put he arm round she neck , and she put hers round he waist , and twin together in this way , they go upstairs . " I say , , you must not tell anybody , you know , " say , " else I shall get fifty line . " " be it alive ? " say , whose imagination have settle for the moment on the idea that keep a ferret clandestinely . " oh , I sha ' not tell you , " say he . " now you go into that corner and hide you face , while I reach it out , " he add , as he lock the bedroom door behind they . I will tell you when to turn round . you must not squeal out , you know . " " oh , but if you frighten I , I shall , " say , begin to look rather serious . " you will not be frightene , you silly thing , " say . " go and hide you face , and mind you do not peep . " " of course I sha ' not peep , " say , disdainfully ; and she bury she face in the pillow like a person of strict honor . but look round warily as he walk to the closet ; then he step into the narrow
narrow space , and almost close the door . keep she face bury without the aid of principle , for in that dream-suggestive attitude she have soon forgotten where she be , and she thought be busy with the poor deform boy , who be so clever , when call out , " now then , ! " nothing but long meditation and preconcert arrangement of effect would have enable to present so strike a figure as he do to Maggie when she look up . dissatisfie with the pacific aspect of a face which have no more than the faintest hint of flaxen eyebrow , together with a pair of amiable blue - gray eye and round pink cheek that refuse to look formidable , let he fry as he would before the look - glass ( have once tell he of a man who have a horseshoe frown , and have try with all he frowning might to make a horseshoe on he forehead ) , he have have recourse to that unfailing source of the terrible , burnt cork , and have make himself a pair of black eyebrow that meet in a satisfactory manner over he nose , and be match by a less carefully adjust blackness about the ching . he have wound a red handkerchief round he cloth cap to give it the air of a turban , and he red comforter across he breast as a scarf , -- a amount of red which , with the tremendous frown on he brow , and the decision with which he grasp the sword , as he hold it with its point rest on the ground , would suffice to convey a approximate idea of he fierce and bloodthirsty disposition . look bewilder for a moment , and enjoy that moment keenly ; but in the next she laugh , clap she hand together , and say , " oh , , you have make yourself like at the show . " it be clear she have not be strike with the presence of the sword , -- it be not unsheathed . she frivolous mind require a more direct appeal to its sense of the terrible , and prepare for he master - stroke . Frown with a double amount of intention , if not of corrugation , he ( carefully ) draw the sword from its sheath , and point it at . " oh , , please do not ! " exclaim , in a tone of suppress dread , shrink away from he into the opposite corner . " I _shall_ scream -- I be sure I shall ! oh , do not I wish I have never come upstairs ! " the corner of 's mouth show a inclination to a smile of complacency that be immediately check as inconsistent with the severity of a great warrior . slowly he let down the scabbard on the floor , lest it should make too much noise , and then say sternly ,-- " I be the of ! ! " stamp forward with the right leg a little bent , and the sword still point toward , who , trembl , and with tear - fill eye , get upon the bed , as the only means of wide the space between they . , happy in this spectator of he military performance , even though the spectator be only Maggie , proceed , with the utmost exertion of he force , to such a exhibition of the cut and thrust as would necessarily be expect of the of . " tom , I will not bear it , I _will scream , " say , at the first movement of the sword . " you will hurt yourself ; you will cut you head off ! " " one -- two , " say , resolutely , though at " two " he wrist tremble a little . " " come more slowly , and with it the sword swng downward , and give a loud shriek . the sword have fall , with its edge on 's foot , and in a moment after he have fall too . leape from the bed , still shriek , and immediately there be a rush of footstep toward the room . , from he upstairs study , be the first to enter . he find both the child on the floor . have faint , and be shak he by the collar of he jacket , scream , with wild eye . she think he be dead , poor child ! and yet she shook he , as if that would bring he back to life . in another minute she be sobb with joy because open he eye . she could not sorrow yet that he have hurt he foot ; it seem as if all happiness lay in he be alive . - bear he severe pain heroically , and be resolute in not " tell " of more than be unavoidable ; the five - shilling piece remain a secret even to . but there be a terrible dread weigh on he mind , so terrible that he da not even ask the question which might bring the fatal " yes " ; he da not ask the surgeon or , " shall I be lame , ? " he master himself so as not to cry out at the pain ; but when he foot have be dress , and he be leave alone with seat by he bedside , the child sob together , with they head laid on the same pillow . be think of himself walk about on crutch , like the wheelwright 's son ; and , who do not guess what be in he mind , sob for company . it have not occur to the surgeon or to to anticipate this dread
dread in 's mind , and to reassure he by hopeful word . but watch the surgeon out of the house , and waylay to ask the very question that have not da to ask for himself . " I beg you pardon , sir , -- but do say Tulliver will be lame ? " " oh , no ; oh , no , " say , " not permanently ; only for a little while . " " do he tell so , sir , do you think ? " " no ; nothing be say to he on the subject . " " then may I go and tell he , sir ? " " yes , to be sure ; now you mention it , I dare say he may be troubling about that . go to he bedroom , but be very quiet at present . " it have be 's first thought when he hear of the accident , -- " will be lame ? it will be very hard for he if he be " ; and be hitherto unforgiven offence be washed out by that pity . feel that they be no longer in a state of repulsion , but be be draw into a common current of suffering and sad privation . he imagination do not dwell on the outward calamity and its future effect on 's life , but it make vividly present to he the probable state of 's feeling . have only live fourteen year , but those year have , most of they , be steep in the sense of a lot irremediably hard . " say you will soon be all right again , , do you know ? " he say rather timidly , as he step gently up to 's bed . " I have just be to ask , and he say you will walk as well as ever again by - and - day . " look up with that momentary stopping of the breath which come with a sudden joy ; then he give a long sigh , and turn he blue - gray eye straight on 's face , as he have not do for a fortnight or more . as for , this intimation of a possibility she have not think of before affect she as a new trouble ; the bare idea of 's be always lame overpower the assurance that such a misfortune be not likely to befall he , and she cling to he and cry afresh . " do not be a little silly , , " say , tenderly , feel very brave now . " I shall soon get well . " " good - by , , " say , put out he small , delicate hand , which clasp immediately with he more substantial finger . " I say , " say , " ask to let you come and sit with I sometimes , till I get up again , ; and tell I about , you know . " after that , spend all he time out of school - hour with and . like to hear fight story as much as ever , but he insist strongly on the fact that those great fighter who do so many wonderful thing and come off unhurt , wore excellent armor from head to foot , which may fight easy work , he consider . he should not have hurt he foot if he have have a iron shoe on . he listen with great interest to a new story of 's about a man who have a very bad wound in he foot , and cry out so dreadfully with the pain that he friend could bear with he no longer , but put he ashore on a desert island , with nothing but some wonderful poisoned arrow to kill animal with for food . " I do not roar out a bit , you know , " say , " and I dare say my foot be as bad as he . it be cowardly to roar . " but would have it that when anything hurt you very much , it be quite permissible to cry out , and it be cruel of people not to bear it . she want to know if have a sister , and why _she_ do not go with he on the desert island and take care of he . one day , soon after have tell this story , he and be in the study alone together while 's foot be be dress . be at he book , and , after saunter idly round the room , not care to do anything in particular , because she would soon go to again , go and lean on the table near to see what he be do , for they be quite old friend now , and perfectly at home with each other . " what be you read about in ? " she say . " it be poetry , I can see that , because the line be so short . " " it be about , the lame man I be tell you of yesterday , " he answer , rest he head on he hand , and look at she as if he be not at all sorry to be interrupt . , in she absent way , continue to lean forward , rest on she arm and move she foot about , while she dark eye get more and more fixed and vacant , as if she have quite forgotten and he book . " , " say , after a minute or two , still lean on he elbow and look at she , " if you have have a brother like I , do you think you should have love he as well as ?
? " start a little on be rouse from she reverie , and say , " what ? " repeat he question . " oh , yes , better , " she answer immediately . " no , not better ; because I do not think I _could love you better than . but I should be so sorry ,-- _so sorry for you . " colore ; he have mean to imply , would she love he as well in spite of he deformity , and yet when she allude to it so plainly , he wince under she pity . , yoing as she be , feel she mistake . she have instinctively behave as if she be quite unconscious of 's deformity ; she own keen sensitiveness and experience under family criticism suffice to teach she this as well as if she have be direct by the most finished breeding . " but you be so very clever , , and you can play and s , " she add quickly . " I wish you _were my brother . I be very fond of you . and you would stay at home with I when go out , and you would teach I everything ; would not you ,-- and everything ? " " but you will go away soon , and go to school , , " say , " and then you will forget all about I , and not care for I any more . and then I shall see you when you be grow up , and you will hardly take any notice of I . " " oh , no , I sha ' not forget you , I be sure , " say , shak she head very seriously . " I never forget anything , and I think about everybody when I be away from they . I think about poor Yap ; he be get a lump in he throat , and say he will die . only do not you tell . because it will vex he so . you never see Yap ; he be a queer little dog , -- nobody care about he but and I . " " do you care as much about I as you do about , ? " say , smile rather sadly . " oh , yes , I should think so , " say , laugh . " I be very fond of you , ; I shall never forget _you _, " say , " and when I be very unhappy , I shall always think of you , and wish I have a sister with dark eye , just like yours . " " why do you like my eye ? " say , well please . she have never hear any one but she father speak of she eye as if they have merit . " I do not know , " say . " they be not like any other eye . they seem try to speak , -- try to speak kindly . I do not like other people to look at I much , but I like you to look at I , . " " why , I think you be fonder of I than be , " say , rather sorrowfully . then , wonder how she could convince that she could like he just as well , although he be crook , she say : " should you like I to kiss you , as I do ? I will , if you like . " " yes , very much ; nobody kiss I . " put she arm round he neck and kiss he quite earnestly . " there now , " she say , " I shall always remember you , and kiss you when I see you again , if it be ever so long . but I will go now , because I think 's do with 's foot . " when they father come the second time , say to he , " oh , father , be so very good to ; he be such a clever boy , and I _do_ love he . and you love he too , , do not you ? _Say you love he , " she add entreatingly . colore a little as he look at he father , and say : " I sha ' not be friend with he when I leave school , father ; but we have make it up now , since my foot have be bad , and he be teach I to play at draught , and I can beat he . " " well , well , " say , " if he be good to you , try and make he amend , and be good to _him_. he be a poor crooke creature , and take after he dead mother . but do not you be get too thick with he ; he be get he father 's blood in he too . ay , ay , the gray colt may chance to kick like he black sire . " the jarring nature of the two boy effect what 's admonition alone might have fail to effect ; in spite of 's new kindness , and 's answer regard in this time of he trouble , they never become close friend . when be gone , and when by - and - by begin to walk about as usual , the friendly warmth that have be kindle by pity and gratitude die out by degree , and leave they in they old relation to each other . be often peevish and contemptuous ; and be more specific and kindly impression gradually melt into the old background of suspicion and dislike toward he as a queer fellow , a humpback , and the son of a
a rogue . if boy and man be to be weld together in the glow of transient feel , they must be make of metal that will mix , else they inevitably fall asunder when the heat die out . the be pass so go on even to the fifth half - year -- till he be turn sixteen -- at 's , while be grow with a rapidity which she aunt consider highly reprehensible , at 's boarding - school in the ancient town of on the Floss , with cousin Lucy for she companion . in she early letter to she have always send she love to , and ask many question about he , which be answer by brief sentence about 's toothache , and a turf - house which he be help to build in the garden , with other item of that kind . she be pain to hear say in the holiday that be as queer as ever again , and often cross . they be no longer very good friend , she perceive ; and when she remind Tom that he ought always to love for be so good to he when he foot be bad , he answer : " well , it be not my fault ; _I_ do not do anything to he . " she hardly ever see during the remainder of they school - life ; in the Midsummer holiday he be always away at the seaside , and at she could only meet he at long interval in the street of 's . when they do meet , she remember she promise to kiss he , but , as a young lady who have be at a boarding - school , she know now that such a greeting be out of the question , and would not expect it . the promise be void , like so many other sweet , illusory promise of we childhood ; void as promise make in before the season be divide , and when the starry blossom grow side by side with the ripening peach ,-- impossible to be fulfil when the golden gate have be pass . but when they father be actually engage in the long - threaten lawsuit , and , as the agent at once of and , be act against he , even feel , with some sadness , that they be not likely ever to have any intimacy with again ; the very name of make she father angry , and she have once hear he say that if that crake - back son liv to inherit he father 's ill - get gain , there would be a curse upon he . " have as little to do with he at school as you can , my lad , " he say to ; and the command be obey the more easily because Sterl by this time have two additional pupil ; for though this gentleman 's rise in the world be not of that meteor - like rapidity which the admirer of he extemporaneous eloquence have expect for a preacher whose voice demand so wide a sphere , he have yet enough of grow prosperity to enable he to increase he expenditure in continue disproportion to he income . as for 's school course , it go on with mill - like monotony , he mind continue to move with a slow , half - stifle pulse in a medium uninteresting or unintelligible idea . but each vacation he bring home larger and larger drawing with the satiny rendering of landscape , and water - color in vivid green , together with manuscript book full of exercise and problem , in which the handwriting be all the finer because he give he whole mind to it . each vacation he bring home a new book or two , indicate he progress through different stage of history , doctrine , and latin literature ; and that passage be not entirely without result , besides the possession of the book . 's ear and tongue have become accustom to a great many word and phrase which be understand to be sign of a educated condition ; and though he have never really apply he mind to any one of he lesson , the lesson have leave a deposit of vague , fragmentary , ineffectual notion . , see sign of acquirement beyond the reach of he own criticism , think it be probably all right with 's education ; he observe , indeed , that there be no map , and not enough " summ " ; but he make no formal complaint to . it be a puzzling business , this schooling ; and if he take away , where could he send he with better effect ? by the time have reach he last quarter at 's , the year have make strike change in he since the day we see he return from 's academy . he be a tall youth now , carry himself without the least awkwardness , and speak without more shyness than be a become symptom of blend diffidence and pride ; he wear he tail - coat and he stand - up collar , and watch the down on he lip with eager impatience , look every day at he virgin razor , with which he have provide himself in the last holiday . have already leave , -- at the autumn quarter , -- that he might go to the south for the winter , for the sake of he health ; and this change help to give the unsettled , exultant feeling that usually belong to the last month before leave school . this quarter , too , there be some hope of he father 's lawsuit be decide ; _that make the prospect of home more entirely pleasurable . for , who have gather he
he view of the case from he father 's conversation , have no doubt that would be beat . have not hear anything from home for some week , -- a fact which do not surprise he , for he father and mother be not apt to manifest they affection in unnecessary letter , -- when , to he great surprise , on the morning of a dark , cold day near the end of , he be tell , soon after enter the study at nine o'clock , that he sister be in the drawing - room . it be . Stell who have come into the study to tell he , and she leave he to enter the drawing - room alone . , too , be tall now , with braide and coil hair ; she be almost as tall as , though she be only thirtee ; and she really look older than he do at that moment . she have throw off she bonnet , she heavy braid be push back from she forehead , as if it would not bear that extra load , and she young face have a strangely worn look , as she eye turn anxiously toward the door . when enter she do not speak , but only go up to he , put she arm round he neck , and kiss he earnestly . he be use to various mood of hers , and feel no alarm at the unusual seriousness of she greeting . " why , how be it you be come so early this cold morning , ? do you come in the gig ? " say , as she back toward the sofa , and draw he to she side . " no , I come by the coach . I have walk from the turnpike . " " but how be it you be not at school ? the holiday have not begin yet ? " " Father want I at home , " say , with a slight trembling of the lip . " I come home three or four day ago . " " be not my father well ? " say , rather anxiously . " not quite , " say . " he be very unhappy , . the lawsuit be end , and I come to tell you because I think it would be better for you to know it before you come home , and I do not like only to send you a letter . " " my father have not lose ? " say , hastily , spring from the sofa , and stand before with he hand suddenly thrust into he pocket . " yes , dear , " say , look up at he with trembling . be silent a minute or two , with he eye fix on the floor . then he say : " my father will have to pay a good deal of money , then ? " " yes , " say , rather faintly . " well , it can not be help , " say , bravely , not translat the loss of a large sum of money into any tangible result . " but my father 's very much vex , I dare say ? " he add , look at , and think that she agitate face be only part of she girlish way of take thing . " yes , " say , again faintly . then , urge to fuller speech by 's freedom from apprehension , she say loudly and rapidly , as if the word _would burst from she : " oh , , he will lose the mill and the land and everything ; he will have nothing leave . " 's eye flash out one look of surprise at she , before he turn pale , and tremble visibly . he say nothing , but sit down on the sofa again , look vaguly out of the opposite window . Anxiety about the future have never enter 's mind . he father have always ridden a good horse , keep a good house , and have the cheerful , confident air of a man who have plenty of property to fall back upon . have never dream that he father would " fail " ; _that be a form of misfortune which he have always heard speak of as a deep disgrace , and disgrace be a idea that he could not associate with any of he relation , least of all with he father . a proud sense of family respectability be part of the very air have be bear and bring up in . he know there be people in . 's who make a show without money to support it , and he have always hear such people speak of by he own friend with contempt and reprobation . he have a strong belief , which be a lifelong habit , and require no definite evidence to rest on , that he father could spend a great deal of money if he choose ; and since he education at 's have give he a more expensive view of life , he have often think that when he get older he would make a figure in the world , with he horse and dog and saddle , and other accoutrement of a fine young man , and show himself equal to any of he contemporary at . 's , who might consider themselves a grade above he in society because they fathers be professional man , or have large oil - mill . as to the prognostic and headshaking of he aunt and uncle , they have never produce the least effect on he , except to make he think that aunt and uncle be disagreeable society ; he have hear they find fault in much the same
same way as long as he could remember . he father know better than they do . the down have come on 's lip , yet he thought and expectation have be hithertoo only the reproduction , in change form , of the boyish dream in which he have liv three year ago . he be awaken now with a violent shock . be frightene at 's pale , trembl silence . there be something else to tell he ,-- something worse . she throw she arm round he at last , and say , with a half sob : " oh , -- dear , dear , do not fret too much ; try and bear it well . " turn he cheek passively to meet she entreat kiss , and there gather a moisture in he eye , which he just rub away with he hand . the action seem to rouse he , for he shook himself and say : " I shall go home , with you , . do not my father say I be to go ? " " no , , father do not wish it , " say , she anxiety about _he feel help she to master she agitation . what _would he do when she tell he all ? " but mother want you to come , -- poor mother !-- she cry so . oh , , it be very dreadful at home . " 's lip grow whiter , and she begin to tremble almost as have do . the two poor thing cling closer to each other , both trembling , -- the one at a unshapen fear , the other at the image of a terrible certainty . when speak , it be hardly above a whisper . " and -- and -- poor father ---- " could not utter it . but the suspense be intolerable to . a vague idea of go to prison , as a consequence of debt , be the shape he fear have begin to take . " where be my father ? " he say impatiently . " _Tell_ I , . " " he be at home , " say , finde it easier to reply to that question . " but , " she add , after a pause , " not himself -- he fall off he horse . he have know nobody but I ever since -- he seem to have lose he sense . of father , father ---- " with these last word , 's sob burst forth with the more violence for the previous struggle against they . feel that pressure of the heart which forbid tear ; he have no distinct vision of they trouble as have , who have be at home ; he only feel the crush weight of what seem unmitigated misfortune . he tighten he arm almost convulsively round as she sob , but he face look rigid and tearless , he eye blank , -- as if a black curtain of cloud have suddenly fall on he path . but soon check herself abruptly ; a single thought have act on she like a start sound . " we must set out , , we must not stay . Father will miss I ; we must be at the turnpike at ten to meet the coach . " she say this with hasty decision , rub she eye , and rise to seize she bonnet . at once feel the same impulse , and rise too . " wait a minute , , " he say . " I must speak to , and then we will go . " he think he must go to the study where the pupil be ; but on he way he meet , who have hear from he wife that appear to be in trouble when she ask for she brother , and now that he think the brother and sister have be alone long enough , be come to inquire and offer he sympathy . " please , sir , I must go home , " say abruptly , as he meet Stelling in the passage . " I must go back with my sister directly . my father 's lose he lawsuit -- he be lose all he property -- and he be very ill . " feel like a kind - hear man ; he foresee a probable money loss for himself , but this have no appreciable share in he feeling , while he look with grave pity at the brother and sister for whom youth and sorrow have begin together . when he know how have come , and how eager she be to get home again , he hurrie they departure , only whisper something to , who have follow he , and who immediately leave the room . and be stand on the door - step , ready to set out , when Mrs . come with a little basket , which she hang on 's arm , say : " do remember to eat something on the way , dear . " 's heart go out toward this woman whom she have never like , and she kiss she silently . it be the first sign within the poor child of that new sense which be the gift of sorrow , -- that susceptibility to the bare office of humanity which raise they into a bond of loving fellowship , as to haggard man among the ice - berg the mere presence of a ordinary comrade stir the deep fountain of affection . put he hand on 's shoulder and say : " bless you , my boy ; let I know how you get on . " then he presse 's hand ; but there be no audible good - bye . have so often think how joyful he should be
be the day he leave school " for good " ! and now he school year seem like a holiday that have come to a end . the two slight youthful figure soon grow indistinct on the distant road , -- be soon lose behind the projecting hedgerow . they have go forth together into they life of sorrow , and they would never more see the sunshine undim by remember car . they have enter the thorny wilderness , and the golden gate of they childhood have forever close behind they . the downfall_ chapter I what have happen at first know the fact that the law - suit be decide against he , and that and be triumphant , every one who happen to observe he at the time think that , for so confident and hot - tempere a man , he bear the blow remarkably well . he think so himself ; he think he be go to show that if or anybody else consider he crush , they would find themselves mistaken . he could not refuse to see that the cost of this protract suit would take more than he possess to pay they ; but he appear to himself to be full of expedient by which he could ward off any result but such as be tolerable , and could avoid the appearance of break down in the world . all the obstinacy and defiance of he nature , drive out of they old channel , find a vent for themselves in the immediate formation of plan by which he would meet he difficulty , and remain of in spite of they . there be such a rush of project in he brain , that it be no wonder he face be flush when he come away from he talk with he attorney , , and mount he horse to ride home from . there be , who hold the mortgage on the land , -- a reasonable fellow , who would see he own interest , be convinced , and who would be glad not only to purchase the whole estate , include the mill and homestead , but would accept as tenant , and be willing to advance money to be repay with high interest out of the profit of the business , which would be make over to he , only take enough barely to maintain himself and he family . who would neglect such a profitable investment ? certainly not , for have determine that Furley should meet he plan with the utmost alacrity ; and there be man whose brain have not yet be dangerously heat by the loss of a lawsuit , who be apt to see in they own interest or desire a motive for other man 's action . there be no doubt ( in the miller 's mind ) that Furley would do just what be desirable ; and if he do -- why , thing would not be so very much worse . and he family must live more meagrely and humbly , but it would only be till the profit of the business have pay off 's advance , and that might be while have still a good many year of life before he . it be clear that the cost of the suit could be pay without he be oblige to turn out of he old place , and look like a ruin man . it be certainly a awkward moment in he affair . there be that suretyship for poor , who have die suddenly last , and leave he friend saddle with a debt of two hundred and fifty pound ,-- a fact which have help to make 's banking book less pleasant read than a man might desire toward . well ! he have never be one of those poor -spirited sneak who would refuse to give a help hand to a fellow - traveller in this puzzling world . the really vexatious business be the fact that some month ago the creditor who have lent he the five hundred pound to repay have become uneasy about he money ( set on by , of course ) , and , still confident that he should gain he suit , and find it eminently inconvenient to raise the say sum until that desirable issue have take place , have rashly acceded to the demand that he should give a bill of sale on he household furniture and some other effect , as security in lieu of the bond . it be all one , he have say to himself ; he should soon pay off the money , and there be no harm in give that security any more than another . but now the consequence of this bill of sale occur to he in a new light , and he remember that the time be close at hand when it would be enforce unless the money be repay . two month ago he would have declare stoutly that he would never be beholden to he wife 's friend ; but now he tell himself as stoutly that it be nothing but right and natural that should go to the Pullet and explain the thing to they ; they would hardly let 's furniture be sell , and it might be security to Pullet if he advance the money , -- there would , after all , be no gift or favor in the matter . would never have ask for anything from so poor -spirit a fellow for himself , but might do so if she like . it be precisely the proudest and most obstinate man who be the most liable to shiave they position and contradict themselves in this sudden manner ; everything be easier to they than to face the simple fact that they have be thoroughly defeat , and must begin life anew . and
and Tulliver , you perceive , though nothing more than a superior miller and maltster , be as proud and obstinate as if he have be a very lofy personage , in whom such disposition might be a source of that conspicuous , far -echoing tragedy , which sweep the stage in regal rob , and make the dullest chronicler sublime . the pride and obstinacy of miller and other insignificant people , whom you pass unnoticingly on the road every day , have they tragedy too ; but it be of that unwept , hidden sort that go on from generation to generation , and leave no record ,-- such tragedy , perhaps , as lie in the conflict of young soul , hungry for joy , under a lot make suddenly hard to they , under the dreariness of a home where the morning bring no promise with it , and where the unexpectant discontent of worn and disappointed parent weigh on the child like a damp , thick air , in which all the function of life be depresse ; or such tragedy as lie in the slow or sudden death that follow on a bruise passion , though it may be a death that find only a parish funeral . there be certain animal to which tenacity of position be a law of life , -- they can never flourish again , after a single wrench : and there be certain human being to whom predominance be a law of life , -- they can only sustain humiliation so long as they can refuse to believe in it , and , in they own conception , predominate still . be still predominat , in he own imagination , as he approach 's , through which he have to pass on he way homeward . but what be it that suggest to he , as he see the coach enter the town , to follow it to the coach - office , and get the clerk there to write a letter , require to come home the very next day ? 's own hand shake too much under he excitement for he to write himself , and he want the letter to be give to the coachman to deliver at 's school in the morning . there be a craving which he would not account for to himself , to have near he , without delay , -- she must come back by the coach to - morrow . to Tulliver , when he get home , he would admit no difficulty , and scold down she burst of grief on hearing that the lawsuit be lose , by angry assertion that there be nothing to grieve about . he say nothing to she that night about the bill of sale and the application to , for he have keep she in ignorance of the nature of that transaction , and have explain the necessity for take a inventory of the goods as a matter connect with he will . the possession of a wife conspicuously one be inferior in intellect be , like other high privileges , attend with a few inconvenience , and , among the rest , with the occasional necessity for use a little deception . the next day be again on horseback in the afternoon , on he way to 's office at 's . be to have see in the morning , and to have sound he in relation to 's affair . but he have not go half - way when he meet a clerk from 's office , who be bring a letter to . have be prevent by a sudden call of business from wait at he office to see , accord to appointment , but would be at he office at eleven to - morrow morning , and meanwhile have send some important information by letter . " oh ! " say , take the letter , but not open it . " then tell I will see he to - morrow at eleven " ; and he turn he horse . the clerk , struck with 's glistening , excited glance , look after he for a few moment , and then ride away . the reading of a letter be not the affair of a instant to ; he take in the sense of a statement very slowly through the medium of write or even print character ; so he have put the letter in he pocket , think he would open it in he armchair at home . but by - and - by it occur to he that there might be something in the letter must not know about , and if so , it would be better to keep it out of she sight altogether . he stop he horse , take out the letter , and read it . it be only a short letter ; the substance be , that have ascertain , on secret , but sure authority , that have be lately much straiten for money , and have part with he security ,-- among the rest , the mortgage on 's property , which he have transfer to ---- . in half a hour after this 's own wagoner find he lie by the roadside insensible , with a open letter near he , and he gray horse snuff uneasily about he . when reach home that even , in obedience to she father 's call , he be no longer insensible . about a hour before he have become conscious , and after vague , vacant look around he , have mutter something about " a letter , " which he presently repeat impatiently . at the instance of , the medical man , 's letter be bring and lay on the bed , and the previous impatience seem to be allay . the stricken man lay
lay for some time with he eye fix on the letter , as if he be try to knit up he thought by its help . but presently a new wave of memory seem to have come and sweep the other away ; he turn he eye from the letter to the door , and after look uneasily , as if strive to see something he eye be too dim for , he say , " the little wench . " he repeat the word impatiently from time to time , appear entirely unconscious of everything except this one importunate want , and give no sign of know he wife or any one else ; and poor , she feeble faculty almost paralyze by this sudden accumulation of trouble , go backward and forward to the gate to see if the coach be come , though it be not yet time . but it come at last , and set down the poor anxious girl , no longer the " little wench , " except to she father 's fond memory . " oh , mother , what be the matter ? " say , with pale lip , as she mother come toward she crying . she do not think she father be ill , because the letter have come at he dictation from the office at 's . but come now to meet she ; a medical man be the good angel of the troubled house , and run toward the kind old friend , whom she remember as long as she could remember anything , with a trembling , question look . " do not alarm yourself too much , my dear , " he say , take she hand . " you father have have a sudden attack , and have not quite recover he memory . but he have be ask for you , and it will do he good to see you . keep as quiet as you can ; take off you thing , and come upstairs with I . " obey , with that terrible beating of the heart which make existence seem simply a painful pulsation . the very quietness with which spoke have frightene she susceptible imagination . she father 's eyes be still turn uneasily toward the door when she enter and meet the strange , yearning , helpless look that have be seek she in vain . with a sudden flash and movement , he raise himself in the bed ; she rush toward he , and clasp he with agonized kiss . poor child ! it be very early for she to know one of those supreme moment in life when all we have hope or delighte in , all we can dread or endure , fall away from we regard as insignificant ; be lose , like a trivial memory , in that simple , primitive love which knit we to the being who have be nearest to we , in they time of helplessness or of anguish . but that flash of recognition have be too great a strain on the father 's bruise , enfeeble power . he sank back again in renew insensibility and rigidity , which last for many hour , and be only break by a flicker return of consciousness , in which he take passively everything that be give to he , and seem to have a sort of infantine satisfaction in 's near presence , -- such satisfaction as a baby have when it be return to the nurse 's lap . send for she sister , and there be much wailing and lifte up of hand below stair . both uncle and aunt see that the ruin of and she family be as complete as they have ever forebod it , and there be a general family sense that a judgment have fall on , which it would be a impiety to counteract by too much kindness . but hear little of this , scarcely ever leave she father 's bedside , where she sit opposite he with she hand on he . want to have fetch home , and seem to be think more of she boy even than of she husband ; but the aunt and uncle oppose this . be better at school , since say there be no immediate danger , he believe . but at the end of the second day , when have become more accustomed to she father 's fit of insensibility , and to the expectation that he would revive from they , the thought of have become urgent with _her_ too ; and when she mother sate crying at night and say , " my poor lad -- it be nothing but right he should come home , " say , " let I go for he , and tell he , mother ; I will go to - morrow morning if father do not know I and want I . it would be so hard for to come home and not know anything about it beforehand . " and the next morning go , as we have see . sit on the coach on they way home , the brother and sister talk to each other in sad , interrupt whisper . " they say have get a mortgage or something on the land , , " say . " it be the letter with that news in it that make father ill , they think . " " I believe that scoundrel be be plan all along to ruin my father , " say , leap from the vaguest impressions to a definite conclusion . " I will make he feel for it when I be a man . mind you never speak to again . " " oh , ! " say , in a tone of sad remonstrance ; but she have no spirit to dispute
dispute anything then , still less to vex by oppose he . 's , or when the coach set down and , it be five hour since she have start from home , and she be think with some trembling that she father have perhaps miss she , and ask for " the little wench " in vain . she think of no other change that might have happen . she hurry along the gravel - walk and enter the house before ; but in the entrance she be start by a strong smell of tobacco . the parlor door be ajar ; that be where the smell come from . it be very strange ; could any visitor be smoke at a time like this ? be she mother there ? if so , she must be tell that be come . , after this pause of surprise , be only in the act of open the door when come up , and they both look into the parlor together . there be a coarse , dingy man , of whose face have some vague recollection , sit in he father 's chair , smoke , with a jug and glass beside he . the truth flash on 's mind in a instant . to " have the bailiff in the house , " and " to be sell up , " be phrase which he have be use to , even as a little boy ; they be part of the disgrace and misery of " failing , " of lose all one 's money , and be ruin , -- sinke into the condition of poor work people . it seem only natural this should happen , since he father have lose all he property , and he think of no more special cause for this particular form of misfortune than the loss of the lawsuit . but the immediate presence of this disgrace be so much keener a experience to than the worst form of apprehension , that he feel at this moment as if he real trouble have only just begin ; it be a touch on the irritated nerve compare with its spontaneous dull aching . " how do you do , sy ? " say the man , take the pipe out of he mouth , with rough , embarrassed civility . the two young start face make he a little uncomfortable . but turn away hastily without speak ; the sight be too hateful . have not understand the appearance of this stranger , as have . she follow he , whisper : " who can it be , ? what be the matter ? " then , with a sudden undefined dread lest this stranger might have something to do with a change in she father , she rush upstairs , check herself at the bedroom door to throw off she bonnet , and enter on tiptoe . all be silent there ; she father be lie , heedless of everything around he , with he eye close as when she have leave he . a servant be there , but not she mother . " where be my mother ? " she whisper . the servant do not know . hasten out , and say to ; " be lie quiet ; let we go and look for my mother . I wonder where she be . " be not downstairs , not in any of the bedroom . there be but one room below the attic which have leave unsearched ; it be the storeroom , where she mother keep all she linen and all the precious " best thing " that be only unwrapped and bring out on special occasion . , precede , as they return along the passage , open the door of this room , and immediately say , " mother ! " be seat there with all she laid - up treasure . one of the linen chest be open ; the silver teapot be unwrapped from its many fold of paper , and the best china be lay out on the top of the close linen - chest ; spoon and skewer and ladle be spread in row on the shelf ; and the poor woman be shak she head and weeping , with a bitter tension of the mouth , over the mark , " , " on the corner of some tablecloth she hold in she lap . she drop they , and start up as speak . " oh , my boy , my boy ! " she say , clasp he round the neck . " to think as I should live to see this day ! we be ruin -- everything be go to be sell up -- to think as you father should ha ' marry I to bring I to this ! we have get nothing -- we shall be beggar -- we must go to the workhouse ---- " she kiss he , then seate herself again , and take another tablecloth on she lap , unfold it a little way to look at the pattern , while the child stand by in mute wretchedness , they mind quite fill for the moment with the word " beggar " and " workhouse . " " to think of ' these clot as I spun myself , " she go on , lift thing out and turn they over with a excitement all the more strange and piteous because the stout blond woman be usually so passive , -- if she have be ruffle before , it be at the surface merely , -- " and wove th'ey , and bring the piece home on he back , as I remember stand at the door and see he come , before I ever think of ' marry you father ! and the pattern as I choose myself
myself , and bleach so beautiful , and I mark th'ey so as nobody ever see such marking , -- they must cut the cloth to get it out , for it be a particular stitch . and they be all to be sell , and go into strange people 's house , and perhaps be cut with the knife , and wear out before I be dead . you will never have one of th'ey , my boy , " she say , look up at tom with she eyes full of tear , " and I mean th'ey for you . I want you to have all of ' this pattern . could have have the large check -- it never show so well when the dish be on it . " be touch to the quick , but there be a angry reaction immediately . he face flush as he say : " but will my aunt let they be sell , mother ? do they know about it ? they will never let you linen go , will they ? have not you send to they ? " " yes , I send directly they would put the baily in , and you aunt Pullet 's been -- and , oh dear , oh dear , she cry so and say you father 's disgrac my family and make it the talk of ' the country ; and she will buy the spot clot for herself , because she be never have so many as she want of ' that pattern , and they sha ' not go to strangers , but she be get more check a'ready nor she can do with . " ( here begin to lay back the tablecloth in the chest , fold and strok they automatically . ) " and you uncle have be too , and he say thing must be buy in for we to lie down on , but he must talk to you aunt ; and they be all come to consult . but I know they will none of th'ey take my chany , " she add , turn toward the cup and saucer , " for they all find fault with 'em when I buy th'ey , ' cause of ' the small gold sprig all over th'ey , between the flowers . but there be none of th'ey get better chany , not even you aunt Pullet herself ; and I buy it wi' my own money as I would save ever since I be turn fifteen ; and the silver teapot , too , -- you father never pay for 'em . and to think as he should ha ' marry I , and bring I to this . " burst out cry afresh , and she sob with she handkerchief at she eye a few moment , but then remove it , she say in a deprecating way , still half sobbing , as if she be call upon to speak before she could command she voice ,-- " and I _did_ say to he time and time , ' Whativer you do , do not go to law , ' and what more could I do ? I have have to sit by while my own fortin 's be spend , and what should ha ' be my child 's , too . you will have niver a penny , my boy -- but it be not you poor mother 's fault . " she put out one arm toward , look up at he piteously with she helpless , childish blue eye . the poor lad go to she and kiss she , and she cling to he . for the first time think of he father with some reproach . he natural inclination to blame , hitherto keep entirely in abeyance toward he father by the predisposition to think he always right , simply on the ground that he be 's father , be turn into this new channel by he mother 's plaint ; and with he indignation against there begin to mingle some indignation of another sort . perhaps he father might have help bring they all down in the world , and make people talk of they with contempt , but no one should talk long of with contempt . the natural strength and firmness of he nature be begin to assert itself , urge by the double stimulus of resentment against he aunt , and the sense that he must behave like a man and take care of he mother . " do not fret , mother , " he say tenderly . " I shall soon be able to get money ; I will get a situation of some sort . " " bless you , my boy ! " say , a little soothed . then , look round sadly , " but I should not ha ' mind so much if we could ha ' keep the thing wi' my name on th'ey . " have witness this scene with gather anger . the implied reproach against she father -- she father , who be lie there in a sort of live death -- neutralize all she pity for grief about tablecloth and china ; and she anger on she father 's account be heighten by some egoistic resentment at 's silent concurrence with she mother in shutt she out from the common calamity . she have become almost indifferent to she mother 's habitual depreciation of she , but she be keenly alive to any sanction of it , however passive , that she might suspect in . poor be by no means make up of unalloyed devotedness , but put forth large claim for herself where she love strongly . she burst out at last in a agitated , almost violent tone : " mother , how can you talk
talk so ; as if you car only for thing with _your_ name on , and not for what have my father 's name too ; and to care about anything but dear father himself !-- when he be lie there , and may never speak to we again . , you ought to say so too ; you ought not to let any one find fault with my father . " , almost chok with mingled grief and anger , leave the room , and take she old place on she father 's bed . she heart go out to he with a stronger movement than ever , at the thought that people would blame he . hate blame ; she have be blame all she life , and nothing have come of it but evil temper . she father have always defend and excuse she , and she love remembrance of he tenderness be a force within she that would enable she to do or bear anything for he sake . be a little shocked at 's outburst , -- tell _him_ as well as he mother what it be right to do ! she ought to have learn better than have those hectoring , assume manners , by this time . but he presently go into he father 's room , and the sight there touch he in a way that efface the slighter impressions of the previous hour . when see how he be move , she go to he and put she arm round he neck as he sit by the bed , and the two child forget everything else in the sense that they have one father and one sorrow . III the it be at eleven o'clock the next morning that the aunt and uncle come to hold they consultation . the fire be lighte in the large parlor , and poor , with a confused impression that it be a great occasion , like a funeral , unbag the bell - rope tassel , and unpin the curtain , adjust they in proper fold , look round and shak she head sadly at the polished top and leg of the table , which sister Pullet herself could not accuse of insufficient brightness . be not come , he be away on business ; but . appear punctually in that handsome new gig with the head to it , and the livery - servant drive it , which have throw so clear a light on several trait in she character to some of she female friend in 's . have be advance in the world as rapidly as have be go down in it ; and in 's house the linen and plate be begin to hold quite a subordinate position , as a mere supplement to the handsomer article of the same kind , purchase in recent year ,-- a change which have cause a occasional coolness in the sisterly intercourse between she and , who feel that be get " like the rest , " and there would soon be little of the true Dodson spirit survive except in herself , and , it might be hope , in those nephew who support the name on the family land , far away in the Wold . people who live at a distance be naturally less faulty than those immediately under we own eye ; and it seem superfluous , when we consider the remote geographical position of the , and how very little the Greek have to do with they , to inquire further why Homer call they " blameless . " be the first to arrive ; and when she have take she seat in the large parlor , come down to she with she comely face a little distort , nearly as it would have be if she have be cry . she be not a woman who could shed abundant tear , except in moment when the prospect of lose she furniture become unusually vivid , but she feel how unfitting it be to be quite calm under present circumstance . " oh , sister , what a world this be ! " she exclaim as she enter ; " what trouble , oh dear ! " be a thing - lip woman , who make small well - consider speeches on peculiar occasion , repeat they afterward to she husband , and ask he if she have not speak very properly . " yes , sister , " she say deliberately , " this be a change world , and we do not know to - day what may happen tomorrow . but it be right to be prepare for all thing , and if trouble 's send , to remember as it be not send without a cause . I be very sorry for you as a sister , and if the doctor order jelly for , I hope you will let I know . I will send it willingly ; for it be but right he should have proper attendance while he be ill . " " thank you , , " say , rather faintly , withdraw she fat hand from she sister 's thing one . " but there be be no talk of ' jelly yet . " then after a moment 's pause she add , " there be a dozen of ' cut jelly - glassis upstair -- I shall never put jelly into th'ey no more . " she voice be rather agitate as she utter the last word , but the sound of wheel divert she thought . and be come , and be almost immediately follow by and . enter cry , as a compendious mode , at all time , of express what be she view of life in general , and what , in brief , be the opinion she hold concern the particular case before
before she . have on she fuzziest front , and garment which appear to have have a recent resurrection from rather a creasy form of burial ; a costume select with the high moral purpose of instil perfect humility into and she child . " . , will not you come nearer the fire ? " say she husband , unwill to take the more comfortable seat without offer it to she . " you see I have seat myself here , , " return this superior woman ; " _you_ can roast yourself , if you like . " " well , " say , seat himself good - humoredly , " and how be the poor man upstairs ? " " think he a deal better this morning , " say ; " he take more notice , and speak to I ; but he be never know yet , -- look at the poor lad as if he be a stranger , though he say something once about and the pony . the doctor say he memory 's go a long way back , and he do not know because he be think of he when he be little . Eh dear , eh dear ! " " I doubt it be the water get on he brain , " say aunt Pullet , turn round from adjust she cap in a melancholy way at the pier - glass . " it be much if he ever get up again ; and if he do , he will most like be childish , as be , poor man ! they feed he with a spoon as if he have be a babby for three year . he would quite lose the use of he limb ; but then he would get a chair , and somebody to draw he ; and that be what you will not have , I doubt , . " " , " say , severely , " if I understand right , we have come together this morning to advise and consult about what be to be do in this disgrace as have fall upon the family , and not to talk of ' people as do not belong to we . be none of we blood , nor noways connect with we , as I have ever hear . " " , " say , in a pleading tone , draw on she glove again , and strok the finger in a agitated manner , " if you have get anything disrespectful to say of ' , I do beg of you as you will not say it to I . _I_ know what he be , " she add , with a sigh ; " he breath be short to that degree as you could hear he two room off . " " ! " say , with indignant disgust , " you _do_ talk of ' people 's complaint till it be quite undecent . but I say again , as I say before , I do not come away from home to talk about acquaintance , whether they would short breath or long . if we be not come together for one to hear what the other ' ull do to save a sister and she child from the parish , _i_ shall go back . can not act without the other , I suppose ; it be not to be expect as _i_ should do everything . " " well , , " say Pullet , " I do not see as you have be so very forrard at do . so far as I know , this be the first time as here you have be , since it be be know as the bailiff 's in the house ; and I be here yesterday , and look at all 's linen and thing , and I tell she I would buy in the spot tablecloth . I could not speak fairer ; for as for the teapot as she do not want to go out of ' the family , it stand to sense I can not do with two silver teapot , not if it _have not a straight spout , but the spot damask I be allays fond on . " " I wish it could be manage so as my teapot and chany and the best castor need not be put up for sale , " say poor , beseechingly , " and the sugar - tong the first thing ever I buy . " " but that can not be help , you know , " say . " if one of ' the family choose to buy them in , they can , but one thing must be bid for as well as another . " " and it be not to be look for , " say uncle Pullet , with unwonted independence of idea , " as you own family should pay more for thing nor they will fetch . they may go for a old song by auction . " " oh dear , oh dear , " say , " to think of ' my chany be sell I ' that way , and I buy it when I be marry , just as you do yours , and ; and I know you do not like mine , because of ' the sprig , but I be fond of it ; and there be never be a bit break , for I have wash it myself ; and there be the tulip on the cup , and the rose , as anybody might go and look at 'em for pleasure . you would not like _your_ chany to go for a old song and be broke to piece , though yours have get no color in it , ,-- it be all white and flute ,
, and do not cost so much as mine . and there be the castor , sister , I can not think but you would like to have the castor , for I have hear you say they be pretty . " " well , I have no objection to buy some of the best thing , " say , rather loftily ; " we can do with extra thing in we house . " " best thing ! " exclaim , with severity , which have gather intensity from she long silence . " it drive I past patience to hear you all talk of ' best thing , and buy in this , that , and the other , such as silver and chany . you must bring you mind to you circumstance , , and not be think of ' silver and chany ; but whether you shall get so much as a flock - bed to lie on , and a blanket to cover you , and a stool to sit on . you must remember , if you get th'ey , it will be because you friend have buy th'ey for you , for you be dependent upon _them for everything ; for you husband lie there helpless , and have not get a penny I ' the world to call he own . and it be for you own good I say this , for it be right you should feel what you state be , and what disgrase you husband 's bring on you own family , as you have get to look to for everything , and be humble in you mind . " pause , for speak with much energy for the good of other be naturally exhausting . , always borne down by the family predominance of sister , who have make she wear the yoke of a younger sister in very tender year , say pleadingly : " I be sure , sister , I have never ask anybody to do anything , only buy thing as it 'uld be a pleasure to 'em to have , so as they might not go and be spoil I ' strange house . I never ask anybody to buy the thing in for I and my child ; though there be the linen I spun , and I think when be bear ,-- I think one of ' the first thing when he be lie I ' the cradle , as all the thing I would buy wi' my own money , and be so careful of , 'uld go to he . but I have say nothing as I want my sister to pay they money for I . what my husband have do for _his_ sister 's unknown , and we should ha ' be better off this day if it have not be as he be lent money and never ask for it again . " " come , come , " say , kindly , " do not let we make thing too dark . what be done can not be undone . we shall make a shift among we to buy what be sufficient for you ; though , as . say , they must be useful , plain thing . we must not be think of ' what be unnecessary . a table , and a chair or two , and kitchen thing , and a good bed , and such - like . why , I have see the day when I should not ha ' know myself if I would lain on sack i'stead of ' the floor . we get a deal of ' useless thing about we , only because we have get the money to spend . " " , " say , " if you will be kind enough to let I speak , i'stead of ' take the word out of ' my mouth ,-- I be go to say , , as it be fine talk for you to say as you have never ask we to buy anything for you ; let I tell you , you _otch to have ask we . pray , how be you to be purvide for , if you own family do not help you ? you must go to the parish , if they do not . and you ought to know that , and keep it in mind , and ask we humble to do what we can for you , i'stead of ' say , and make a boast , as you have never ask we for anything . " " you talk of ' the , and what 's do for th'ey , " say uncle Pullet , who become unusually suggestive where advances of money be concerned . " have not _they be anear you ? they ought to do something as well as other folk ; and if he be lent 'em money , they ought to be make to pay it back . " " yes , to be sure , " say ; " I have be think so . how be it and . Moss be not here to meet we ? it be but right they should do they share . " " oh , dear ! " say , " I never send th'ey word about , and they live so back 'ard among the lane at , they niver hear anything only when come to market . but I niver give th'ey a thought . I wonder do not , though , for she be allays so fond of she aunt . " " why do not you child come in , ? " say , at the mention of . " they should hear what they aunt and uncle have get to say ; and , -- when it be I as have pay for half she schoo
schoo , she ought to think more of she aunt Pullet than of aunt Moss . I may go off sudden when I get home to - day ; there be no telling . " " if I would have _my way , " say , " the child 'uld ha ' be in the room from the first . it be time they know who they have to look to , and it be right as _somebody should talk to th'ey , and let th'ey know they condition I ' life , and what they be come down to , and make th'ey feel as they have get to suffer for they father 's fault . " " well , I will go and fetch 'em , sister , " say , resignedly . she be quite crush now , and think of the treasure in the storeroom with no other feeling than blank despair . she go upstairs to fetch and , who be both in they father 's room , and be on she way down again , when the sight of the storeroom door suggest a new thought to she . she go toward it , and leave the child to go down by themselves . the aunt and uncle appear to have be in warm discussion when the brother and sister enter , -- both with shrinking reluctance ; for though , with a practical sagacity which have be rouse into activity by the strong stimulus of the new emotion he have undergone since yesterday , have be turn over in he mind a plan which he mean to propose to one of he aunt or uncle , he feel by no means amicably toward they , and dread meet they all at once as he would have dread a large dose of concentrate physic , which be but just endurable in small draught . as for , she be peculiarly depresse this morning ; she have be call up , after brief rest , at three o'clock , and have that strange dreamy weariness which come from watch in a sick - room through the chill hour of early twilight and break day , -- in which the outside day - light life seem to have no importance , and to be a mere margin to the hour in the darkened chamber . they entrance interrupt the conversation . the shaking of hand be a melancholy and silent ceremony , till uncle Pullet observ , as approach he : " well , young sir , we have be talk as we should want you pen and ink ; you can write rarely now , after all you schooling , I should think . " " ay , ay , " say uncle , with admonition which he mean to be kind , " we must look to see the good of all this schooling , as you father 's sunk so much money in , now ,-- ' when land be gone and money be spend , then learn be most excellent . ' now be the time , , to let we see the good of ' you learn . let we see whether you can do better than I can , as have make my fortin without it . but I begin wi's do with little , you see ; I could live on a basin of ' porridge and a crust of ' bread - and - cheese . but I doubt high living and high learn ' ull make it harder for you , young man , nor it be for I . " " but he must do it , " interpose aunt , energetically , " whether it be hard or no . he have not get to consider what be hard ; he must consider as he be not to trusten to he friend to keep he in idleness and luxury ; he be get to bear the fruit of he father 's misconduct , and bring he mind to fare hard and to work hard . and he must be humble and grateful to he aunt and uncle for what they be do for he mother and father , as must be turn out into the street and go to the workhouse if they do not help th'ey . and he sister , too , " continue , look severely at , who have sit down on the sofa by she aunt , draw to she by the sense that she be 's mother , " she must make up she mind to be humble and work ; for there will be no servants to wait on she any more , -- she must remember that . she must do the work of ' the house , and she must respect and love she aunt as have do so much for she , and save they money to leave to they nephey and niece . " be still stand before the table in the centre of the group . there be a heighten color in he face , and he be very far from look humbled , but he be prepare to say , in a respectful tone , something he have previously meditate , when the door open and he mother re-enter . poor have in she hand a small tray , on which she have place she silver teapot , a specimen teacup and saucer , the castor , and sugar - tong . " see here , sister , " she say , look at , as she set the tray on the table , " I think , perhaps , if you look at the teapot again , -- it be a good while since you see it , -- you might like the pattern better ; it make beautiful tea , and there be a stand and everything ; you might use
use it for every day , or else lay it by for when she go to housekeep . I should be so loath for th'ey to buy it at the , " say the poor woman , she heart swell , and the tear come , --" my teapot as I buy when I be marry , and to think of its be scratch , and set before the traveller and folk , and my letter on it , -- see here , d.,-- and everybody to see th'ey . " " ah , dear , dear ! " say aunt Pullet , shak she head with deep sadness , " it be very bad , -- to think of ' the family initial go about everywhere -- it niver be so before ; you be a very unlucky sister , . but what be the use of ' buy the teapot , when there be the linen and spoon and everything to go , and some of th'ey with you full name , -- and when it be get that straight spout , too . " " as to disgrace of ' the family , " say , " that can not be help wi's buy teapot . the disgrace be , for one of ' the family to ha 's marry a man as have bring she to beggary . the disgrace be , as they be to be sell up . we can not hinder the country from know that . " have start up from the sofa at the allusion to she father , but see she action and flush face in time to prevent she from speaking . " be quiet , , " he say authoritatively , push she aside . it be a remarkable manifestation of self - command and practical judgament in a lad of fifteen , that when he aunt cease , he begin to speak in a quiet and respectful manner , though with a good deal of trembling in he voice ; for he mother 's word have cut he to the quick . " then , aunt , " he say , look straight at , " if you think it be a disgrace to the family that we should be sell up , would not it be better to prevent it altogether ? and if you and aunt Pullet , " he continue , look at the latter , " think of leave any money to I and , would not it be better to give it now , and pay the debt we be go to be sell up for , and save my mother from part with she furniture ? " there be silence for a few moment , for every one , include , be astonished at 's sudden manliness of tone . uncle be the first to speak . " ay , ay , young man , come now ! you show some notion of ' thing . but there be the interest , you must remember ; you aunt get five per cent on they money , and they would lose that if they advance it ; you have not think of ' that . " " I could work and pay that every year , " say , promptly . " I would do anything to save my mother from part with she thing . " " well do ! " say uncle , admiringly . he have be draw out , rather than reflec on the practicability of he proposal . but he have produce the unfortunate result of irritat he wife . " " yes , ! " say that lady , with angry sarcasm . " it be pleasant work for you to be give my money away , as you have pretend to leave at my own disposal . and my money , as be my own father 's gift , and not yours , ; and I have save it , and add to it myself , and have more to put out almost every year , and it be to go and be sunk in other folk ' furniture , and encourage 'em in luxury and extravagance as they 've no means of support ; and I be to alter my will , or have a codicil make , and leave two or three hundred less behind I when I die , -- I as have allays do right and be careful , and the eldest of ' the family ; and my money 's to go and be squander on they as have have the same chance as I , only they have be wicked and wasteful . , _you_ may do as you like , and you may let you husband rob you back again of ' the money he be give you , but that be not _my sperrit . " " , , how fiery you be ! " say . " I be sure you will have the blood in you head , and have to be cup . I be sorry for and she child , -- I be sure I think of th'ey of ' night dreadful , for I sleep very bad wi' this new medicine , -- but it be no use for I to think of ' do anything , if you will not meet I half - way . " " why , there be this to be consider , " say . " it be no use to pay off this debt and save the furniture , when there be all the law debt behind , as 'uld take every shilling , and more than could be make out of ' land and stock , for I have make that out from . we would need save we money to keep the poor man with , instead o ' spend it on furniture as
as he can neither eat nor drink . you _will be so hasty , , as if I do not know what be reasonable . " " then speak accordingly , ! " say he wife , with slow , loud emphasis , bend she head toward he significantly . 's countenance have fall during this conversation , and he lip quiver ; but he be determine not to give way . he would behave like a man . , on the contrary , after she momentary delight in 's speech , have relapse into she state of trembling indignation . she mother have be stand close by 's side , and have be cling to he arm ever since he have last spoken ; suddenly start up and stand in front of they , she eye flash like the eyes of a young lioness . " why do you come , then , " she burst out , " talk and interfere with we and scold we , if you do not mean to do anything to help my poor mother -- you own sister , -- if you 've no feeling for she when she be in trouble , and will not part with anything , though you would never miss it , to save she from pain ? keep away from we then , and do not come to find fault with my father , -- he be better than any of you ; he be kind , -- he would have help you _, if you have be in trouble . and I do not ever want to have any of you money , if you will not help my mother . we would rather not have it ! we will do without you . " , have hurl she defiance at aunt and uncle in this way , stand still , with she large dark eye glar at they , as if she be ready to await all consequence . be frightened ; there be something portentous in this mad outbreak ; she do not see how life could go on after it . be vex ; it be no _use_ to talk so . the aunt be silent with surprise for some moment . at length , in a case of aberration such as this , comment present itself as more expedient than any answer . " you have not see the end of ' you trouble wi' that child , , " say ; " she be beyond everything for boldness and unthankfulness . it be dreadful . I might ha's let alone pay for she schooling , for she be worse nor ever . " " it be no more than what I have allays say , " follow . " other folk may be surprised , but I be not . I have say over and over again , -- year ago I have say my word ; that child ' ull come to no good ; there be not a bit of we family in she . ' and as for she have so much schooling , I never think well of ' that . I would my reason when I say _I_ would not pay anything toward it . " " come , come , " say , " let 's waste no more time in talking , -- let 's go to business . , now , get the pen and ink ---- " while be speak , a tall dark figure be see hurrie past the window . " why , there be , " say . " the bad news must ha ' reach she , then " ; and she go out to open the door , eagerly follow she . " that be fortunate , " say . " she can agree to the list o' thing to be buy in . it be but right she should do she share when it be she own brother . " be in too much agitation to resist 's movement , as she draw she into the parlor automatically , without reflec that it be hardly kind to take she among so many person in the first painful moment of arrival . the tall , worn , dark - haired woman be a strong contrast to the sister as she enter in she shabby dress , with she shawl and bonnet look as if they have be hastily huddle on , and with that entire absence of self - consciousness which belong to keenly feel trouble . be cling to she arm ; and . seem to notice no one else except , whom she go straight up to and take by the hand . " oh , my dear child , " she burst out , " you 've no call to think well of ' I ; I be a poor aunt to you , for I be one of ' they as take all and give nothing . how be my poor brother ? " " think he will get better , " say . " sit down , aunt . do not fret . " " oh , my sweet child , I feel tear I ' two , " say , allow to lead she to the sofa , but still not seem to notice the presence of the rest . " we have three hundred pound of ' my brother 's money , and now he want it , and you all want it , poor thing !-- and yet we must be sell up to pay it , and there be my poor child , -- eight of th'ey , and the little un of all can not speak plain . and I feel as if I be a robber . but I be sure I have no think as my brother ---- " the poor woman be interrupt by
by a rise sob . " three hundred pound ! oh dear , dear , " say . , who , when she have say that she husband have do " unknown " thing for he sister , have not have any particular sum in she mind , and feel a wife 's irritation at have be keep in the dark . " what madness , to be sure ! " say . " a man with a family ! he would know right to lend he money I ' that way ; and without security , I will be bound , if the truth be know . " 's voice have arrest 's attention , and look up , she say : " yes , there _be security ; my husband give a note for it . we be not that sort of ' people , neither of we , as 'uld rob my brother 's child ; and we look to pay back the money , when the time get a bit better . " " well , but now , " say , gently , " have not you husband no way of ' raise this money ? because it 'uld be a little fortin , like , for these folk , if we can do without 's be make a bankrupt . you husband 's get stock ; it be but right he should raise the money , as it seem to I , -- not but what I be sorry for you , . " " oh , sir , you do not know what bad luck my husband 's have with he stock . the farm 's suffer so as never be for want of ' stock ; and we have sell all the wheat , and we be behind with we rent , -- not but what we would like to do what be right , and I would sit up and work half the night , if it 'uld be any good ; but there be they poor child , -- four of th'ey such little un ---- " " do not cry so , aunt ; do not fret , " whisper , who have keep hold of 's hand . " do let you have the money all at once ? " say , still lose in the conception of thing which have be " go on " without she knowledge . " no ; at twice , " say , rub she eye and make a effort to restrain she tear . " the last be after my bad illness four year ago , as everything go wrong , and there be a new note make then . what with illness and bad luck , I have be nothe but cumber all my life . " " yes , , " say , with decision , " yours be a very unlucky family ; the more be the pity for _my sister . " " I set off in the cart as soon as ever I hear o ' what have happen , " say , look at . " I should never ha's stay away all this while , if you would think well to let I know . and it be not as I be think all about ourselves , and nothing about my brother , only the money be so on my mind , I could not help speak about it . and my husband and I desire to do the right thing , sir , " she add , look at , " and we will make shift and pay the money , come what will , if that be all my brother 's get to trust to . we have be use to trouble , and do not look for much else . it be only the thought of ' my poor child pull I i ' two . " " why , there be this to be think on , , " say , " and it be right to warn you , -- if Tulliver be make a bankrupt , and he be get a note - of - hand of you husband 's for three hundred pound , you will be oblige to pay it ; th' assignee ' ull come on you for it . " " oh dear , oh dear ! " say , think of the bankruptcy , and not of 's concern in it . poor herself listen in trembling submission , while look with bewildered distress at to see if _he_ show any sign of understand this trouble , and car about poor aunt Moss . be only look thoughtful , with he eye on the tablecloth . " and if he be not make bankrupt , " continue , " as I say before , three hundred pound 'uld be a little fortin for he , poor man . we do not know but what he may be partly helpless , if he ever get up again . I be very sorry if it go hard with you , . , but my opinion be , look at it one way , it will be right for you to raise the money ; and look at it th' other way , you will be oblige to pay it . you will not think ill of ' I for speak the truth . " " uncle , " say , look up suddenly from he meditative view of the tablecloth , " I do not think it would be right for my aunt Moss to pay the money if it would be against my father 's will for she to pay it ; would it ? " look surprised for a moment or two before he say : " why , no , perhaps not , ; but then he would ha ' destroy the note
note , you know . we must look for the note . what make you think it 'uld be against he will ? " " why , " say , coloring , but try to speak firmly , in spite of a boyish tremor , " I remember quite well , before I go to school to , my father say to I one night , when we be sit by the fire together , and no one else be in the room ---- " hesitate a little , and then go on . " he say something to I about , and then he say : 'I have always be good to my sister , though she marry against my will , and I have lent money ; but I shall never think of distresse he to pay it ; I would rather lose it . my child must not mind be the poorer for that . ' and now my father 's ill , and not able to speak for himself , I should not like anything to be do contrary to what he say to I . " " well , but then , my boy , " say uncle , whose good feeling lead he to enter into 's wish , but who could not at once shake off he habitual abhorrence of such recklessness as destroy security , or alienate anything important enough to make a appreciable difference in a man 's property , " we should have to make away wi' the note , you know , if we be to guard against what may happen , suppose you father 's make bankrupt ---- " " , " interrupt he wife , severely , " mind what you be say . you be put yourself very forrard in other folk 's business . if you speak rash , do not say it be my fault . " " that be such a thing as I never hear of before , " say uncle Pullet , who have be make haste with he lozenge in order to express he amazement , -- " make away with a note ! I should think anybody could set the constable on you for it . " " well , but , " say , " if the note 's worth all that money , why can not we pay it away , and save my thing from go away ? we have no call to meddle with you uncle and aunt , , if you think you father 'uld be angry when he get well . " have not study the question of exchange , and be strain she mind after original idea on the subject . " Pooh , pooh , pooh ! you woman do not understand these thing , " say uncle . " there be no way of ' make it safe for and but destroy the note . " " then I hope you will help I do it , uncle , " say , earnestly . " if my father should not get well , I should be very unhappy to think anything have be do against he will that I could hinder . and I be sure he mean I to remember what he say that even . I ink to obey my father 's wish about he property . " even could not withhold she approval from 's word ; she feel that the blood be certainly speak in he , though , if he father have be a Dodson , there would never have be this wick alienation of money . would hardly have restrain herself from leaping on 's neck , if she aunt have not prevent she by herself rise and take 's hand , while she say , with rather a chok voice : " you will never be the poorer for this , my dear boy , if there be a above ; and if the money 's want for you father , and I ' ull pay it , the same as if there be ever such security . we will do as we would be do by ; for if my child have get no other luck , they have get a honest father and mother . " " well , " say , who have be meditat after 's word , " we should not be do any wrong by the creditor , suppose you father _be bankrupt . I have be think of ' that , for I have be a creditor myself , and see no end of ' cheating . if he mean to give you aunt the money before ever he get into this sad work of ' lawing , it be the same as if he would make away with the note himself ; for he would make up he mind to be that much poorer . but there be a deal of ' thing to be consider , young man , " add , look admonishingly at , " when you come to money business , and you may be take one man 's dinner away to make another man 's breakfast . you do not understand that , I doubt ? " " yes , I do , " say , decidedly . " I know if I owe money to one man , I have no right to give it to another . but if my father have make up he mind to give my aunt the money before he be in debt , he have a right to do it . " " well do , young man ! I do not think you would be so sharp , " say uncle , with much candor . " but perhaps you father _did_ make away with the note . let we go and see if we can find it in the chest . "
" " it be in my father 's room . let we go too , aunt , " whisper . , even between the fits of spasmodic rigidity which have recur at interval ever since he have be find fall from he horse , be usually in so apathetic a condition that the exit and entrances into he room be not feel to be of great importance . he have lain so still , with he eye close , all this morning , that tell she aunt Moss she must not expect she father to take any notice of they . they enter very quietly , and . take she seat near the head of the bed , while sit in she old place on the bed , and put she hand on she father 's without cause any change in he face . and have also enter , tread softly , and be busy select the key of the old oak chest from the bunch which have bring from he father 's bureau . they succeed in open the chest ,-- which stand opposite the foot of 's bed , -- and prop the lid with the iron holder , without much noise . " there be a tin box , " whisper ; " he ' most like put a small thing like a note in there . lift it out , ; but I will just lift up these deed , -- they be the deed of ' the house and mill , I suppose , -- and see what there be under th'ey . " have lift out the parchment , and have fortunately draw back a little , when the iron holder give way , and the heavy lid fell with a loud bang that resound over the house . perhaps there be something in that sound more than the mere fact of the strong vibration that produce the instantaneous effect on the frame of the prostrate man , and for the time completely shook off the obstruction of paralysis . the chest have belong to he father and he father 's father , and it have always be rather a solemn business to visit it . all long - know object , even a mere window fastening or a particular door - latch , have sound which be a sort of recognize voice to we ,-- a voice that will thrill and awake , when it have be use to touch deep - lie fibre . in the same moment , when all the eyes in the room be turn upon he , he start up and look at the chest , the parchment in 's hand , and Tom hold the tin box , with a glance of perfect consciousness and recognition . " what be you go to do with those deed ? " he say , in he ordinary tone of sharp questioning whenever he be irritate . " come here , . what do you do , go to my chest ? " obey , with some trembling ; it be the first time he father have recognize he . but instead of say anything more to he , he father continue to look with a grow distinctness of suspicion at and the deed . " what be be happen , then ? " he say sharply . " what be you meddl with my deed for ? be lay hold of everything ? why do not you tell I what you have be a - do ? " he add impatiently , as advanc to the foot of the bed before speak . " no , no , friend , " say , in a soothing tone . " nobody be get hold of anything as yet . we only come to look and see what be in the chest . you have be ill , you know , and we have have to look after thing a bit . but let 's hope you will soon be well enough to attend to everything yourself . " look around he meditatively , at , at , and at ; then suddenly appear aware that some one be seat by he side at the head of the bed he turn sharply round and see he sister . " Eh , ! " he say , in the half -sad , affectionate tone in which he have be will not to speak to she . " what ! you be there , be you ? how could you manage to leave the child ? " " oh , brother ! " say good , too impulsive to be prudent , " I be thankful I be come now to see you yourself again ; I think you would never know we any more . " " what ! have I have a stroke ? " say , anxiously , look at . " a fall from you horse -- shook you a bit , -- that be all , I think , " say . " but you will soon get over it , let 's hope . " fix he eye on the bed - clothes , and remain silent for two or three minute . a new shadow come over he face . he look up at first , and say in a lower tone , " you get the letter , then , my wench ? " " yes , father , " she say , kiss he with a full heart . she feel as if she father be come back to she from the dead , and she year to show he how she have always love he could be fulfil . " where be you mother ? " he say , so preoccupy that he receive the kiss as passively as some quiet animal might have receive it . " she be downstairs with my aunt
aunt , father . shall I fetch she ? " " ay , ay ; poor ! " and he eye turn toward as leave the room . " you will have to take care of th'ey both if I die , you know , . you will be badly off , I doubt . but you must see and pay everybody . and mind ,-- there be fifty pound o' 's as I put into the business , -- he give I a bit at a time , and he be get nothing to show for it . you must pay he first thing . " uncle involuntarily shook he head , and look more concerned than ever , but say firmly : " yes , father . and have not you a note from my uncle for three hundred pound ? we come to look for that . what do you wish to be do about it , father ? " " ah ! I be glad you think of ' that , my lad , " say . " I allays mean to be easy about that money , because of ' you aunt . you must not mind lose the money , if they can not pay it , -- and it be like enough they can not . the note 's in that box , mind ! I allays mean to be good to you , , " say , turn to he sister ; " but you know you aggravate I when you would have . " at this moment re-enter with she mother , who come in much agitate by the news that she husband be quite himself again . " well , , " he say , as she kiss he , " you must forgive I if you be worse off than you ever expect to be . but it be the fault of ' the law , -- it be none of ' mine , " he add angrily . " it be the fault of ' raskill . , you mind this : if ever you have get the chance , you make . if you do not , you be a good - for - nothing son . you might horse - whip he , but he would set the law on you , -- the law 's make to take care of ' raskill . " be get excited , and a alarming flush be on he face . want to say something soothing , but he be prevent by 's speak again to he wife . " they will make a shift to pay everything , , " he say , " and yet leave you you furniture ; and you sister will do something for you -- and will grow up -- though what he be to be I do not know -- I have do what I could -- I have give he a eddication -- and there be the little wench , she will get married -- but it be a poor tale - --- " the sanative effect of the strong vibration be exhaust , and with the last word the poor man fall again , rigid and insensible . though this be only a recurrence of what have happen before , it strike all present as if it have be death , not only from its contrast with the completeness of the revival , but because he word have all have reference to the possibility that he death be near . but with poor death be not to be a leap ; it be to be a long descent under thicken shadows . be send for ; but when he hear what have pass , he say this complete restoration , though only temporary , be a hopeful sign , prove that there be no permanent lesion to prevent ultimate recovery . among the thread of the past which the stricken man have gather up , he have omit the bill of sale ; the flash of memory have only light up prominent idea , and he sank into forgetfulness again with half he humiliation unlearned . but be clear upon two point , -- that he uncle 's note must be destroy ; and that 's money must be pay , if in no other way , out of he own and 's money now in the savings bank . there be subject , you perceive , on which be much quicker than on the nicety of classical construction , or the relation of a mathematical demonstration . to the the next day , at ten o'clock , be on he way to . 's , to see he uncle , who be to come home last night , he aunt have say ; and have make up he mind that he uncle be the right person to ask for advice about get some employment . he be in a great way of business ; he have not the narrow notion of uncle ; and he have risen in the world on a scale of advancement which accord with 's ambition . it be a dark , chill , misty morning , likely to end in rain , -- one of those morning when even happy people take refuge in they hope . and be very unhappy ; he feel the humiliation as well as the prospective hardship of he lot with all the keenness of a proud nature ; and with all he resolute dutifulness toward he father there mingl a irrepressible indignation against he which give misfortune the less endurable aspect of a wrong . since these be the consequence of go to law , he father be really blamable , as he aunt and uncle have always say he be ; and it be a significant indication of 's character , that though he think he aunt ought
ought to do something more for he mother , he feel nothing like 's violent resentment against they for show no eager tenderness and generosity . there be no impulse in that lead he to expect what do not present itself to he as a right to be demand . why should people give away they money plentifully to those who have not take care of they own money ? see some justice in severity ; and all the more , because he have confidence in himself that he should never deserve that just severity . it be very hard upon he that he should be put at this disadvantage in life by he father 's want of prudence ; but he be not go to complain and to find fault with people because they do not make everything easy for he . he would ask no one to help he , more than to give he work and pay he for it . poor tom be not without he hope to take refuge in under the chill damp imprisonment of the fog , which seem only like a part of he home trouble . at sixteen , the mind that have the strongest affinity for fact can not escape illusion and self - flattery ; and , in sketch he future , have no other guide in arrange he fact than the suggestion of he own brave self - reliance . both and , he know , have be very poor once ; he do not want to save money slowly and retire on a moderate fortune like he uncle , but he would be like he uncle -- get a situation in some great house of business and rise fast . he have scarcely see anything of he uncle for the last three year -- the two family have be get wider apart ; but for this very reason Tom be the more hopeful about apply to he . he uncle , he feel sure , would never encourage any spirited project , but he have a vague imposing idea of the resource at he uncle 's command . he have hear he father say , long ago , how Deane have make himself so valuable to & . that they be glad enough to offer he a share in the business ; that be what resolve _he_ would do . it be intolerable to think of be poor and look down upon all one 's life . he would provide for he mother and sister , and make every one say that he be a man of high character . he leape over the year in this way , and , in the haste of strong purpose and strong desire , do not see how they would be make up of slow day , hour , and minute . by the time he have cross the stone bridge over the and be enter 's , he be think that he would buy he father 's mill and land again when he be rich enough , and improve the house and live there ; he should prefer it to any smarter , newer place , and he could keep as many horsis and dog as he like . walk along the street with a firm , rapid step , at this point in he reverie he be start by some one who have cross without he notice , and who say to he in a rough , familiar voice : " why , , how be you father this morning ? " it be a publican of 's , one of he father 's customer . dislike be speak to just then ; but he say civilly , " he be still very ill , thank you . " " ay , it be be a sore chance for you , young man , have not it , -- this lawsuit turn out against he ? " say the publican , with a confused , beery idea of be good - natured . redden and pass on ; he would have feel it like the handling of a bruise , even if there have be the most polite and delicate reference to he position . " that be 's son , " say the publican to a grocer stand on the adjacent door -step . " ah ! " say the grocer , " I think I know he feature . he take after he mother 's family ; she be a Dodson . he be a fine , straight youth ; what be he be brotch up to ? " " oh ! to turn up he nose at he father 's customer , and be a fine gentleman , -- not much else , I think . " , rouse from he dream of the future to a thorough consciousness of the present , make all the greater haste to reach the warehouse office of & , where he expect to find he uncle . but this be 's morning at the band , a clerk tell he , and with some contempt for he ignorance ; be not to be find in on a morning . at the bank be admit into the private room where he uncle be , immediately after send in he name . be audit account ; but he look up as enter , and put out he hand , say , " well , , nothing fresh the matter at home , I hope ? how be you father ? " " much the same , thank you , uncle , " say , feel nervous . " but I want to speak to you , please , when you be at liberty . " " sit down , sit down , " say , relapse into he account , in which he and the managing - clerk remain so absorbed
absorbed for the next half - hour that begin to wonder whether he should have to sit in this way till the bank close , -- there see so little tendency toward a conclusion in the quiet , monotonous procedure of these sleek , prosperous man of business . would he uncle give he a place in the bank ? it would be very dull , prosy work , he think , write there forever to the loud ticking of a timepiece . he prefer some other way of get rich . but at last there be a change ; he uncle take a pen and write something with a flourish at the end . " you will just step up to 's now , , will you ? " say , and the clock suddenly become less loud and deliberate in 's ear . " well , , " say , when they be alone , turn he substantial person a little in he chair , and take out he snuff - box ; " what be the business , my boy ; what be the business ? " , who have hear from he wife what have pass the day before , think be come to appeal to he for some means of avert the sale . " I hope you will excuse I for trouble you , uncle , " say , coloring , but speak in a tone which , though , tremulous , have a certain proud independence in it ; " but I think you be the best person to advise I what to do . " " ah ! " say , reserve he pinch of snuff , and look at with new attention , " let we hear . " " I want to get a situation , uncle , so that I may earn some money , " say , who never fall into circumlocution . " a situation ? " say , and then take he pinch of snuff with elaborate justice to each nostril . think snuff - take a most provoking habit . " why , let I see , how old be you ? " say , as he throw himself backward again . " sixteen ; I mean , I be go in seventeen , " say , hope he uncle notice how much beard he have . " let I see ; you father have some notion of make you a engineer , I think ? " " but I do not think I could get any money at that for a long while , could I ? " " that be true ; but people do not get much money at anything , my boy , when they be only sixteen . you have have a good deal of schooling , however ; I suppose you be pretty well up in account , eh ? you understand book keep ? " " no , " say , rather falteringly . " I be in . but say I write a good hand , uncle . that be my write , " add , lay on the table a copy of the list he have make yesterday . " ah ! that be good , that be good . but , you see , the best hand in the world will not get you a better place than a copying - clerk 's , if you know nothing of book - keeping , -- nothing of account . and a copying - clerk be a cheap article . but what have you be learn at school , then ? " have not occupy himself with methods of education , and have no precise conception of what go forward in expensive school . " we learn , " say , pause a little between each item , as if he be turn over the book in he school - desk to assist he memory , -- " a good deal of ; and the last year I do Theme , one week in and one in ; and and history ; and ; and I begin , but I leave it off again ; and we have one day every week for . then I use to have drawing - lesson ; and there be several other book we either read or learn out of , -- , and and 's , the last half . " tap he snuff - box again and screw up he mouth ; he feel in the position of many estimable person when they have read the , and find how many commodity be import of which they know nothing ; like a cautious man of business , he be not go to speak rashly of a raw material in which he have have no experience . but the presumption be , that if it have be good for anything , so successful a man as himself would hardly have be ignorant of it . about latin he have a opinion , and think that in case of another war , since people would no longer wear hair - powder , it would be well to put a tax upon , as a luxury much run upon by the higher class , and not tell at all on the ship - own department . but , for what he know , the might be something less neutral . on the whole , this list of acquirement give he a sort of repulsion toward poor . " well , " he say at last , in rather a cold , sardonic tone , " you have have three year at these thing , -- you must be pretty strong in th'ey . have not you better take up some line where they will come in handy ? " colore , and burst out , with new energy : " I would rather
rather not have any employment of that sort , uncle . I do not like and those thing . I do not know what i could do with they unless I go as usher in a school ; and I do not know they well enough for that ! besides , I would have soon carry a pair of pannier . I do not want to be that sort of person . I should like to enter into some business where I can get on , -- a manly business , where I should have to look after thing , and get credit for what I do . and I shall want to keep my mother and sister . " " ah , young gentleman , " say , with that tendency to repress youthful hope which stout and successful man of fifty find one of they easiest duty , " that be sooner say than do , -- sooner say than do . " " but do not _you_ get on in that way , uncle ? " say , a little irritate that do not enter more rapidly into he view . " I mean , do not you rise from one place to another through you ability and good conduct ? " " ay , ay , sir , " say , spread himself in he chair a little , and enter with great readiness into a retrospect of he own career . " but I will tell you how I get on . it be not by get astride a stick and think it would turn into a horse if I sit on it long enough . I keep my eye and ears open , sir , and I be not too fond of my own back , and I make my master 's interest my own . why , with only look into what go on in the mill ,, I find out how there be a waste of five hundr a - year that might be hinder . why , sir , I have not more schooling to begin with than a charity boy ; but I see pretty soon that I could not get on far enough without mastering account , and I learn th'ey between work hour , after I have be unlading . look here . " open a book and point to the page . " I write a good hand enough , and I will match anybody at all sort of reckon by the head ; and I get it all by hard work , and pay for it out of my own earning , -- often out of my own dinner and supper . and I look into the nature of all the thing we have to do in the business , and pick up knowledge as I go about my work , and turn it over in my head . why , I be no mechanic ,-- I never pretend to be -- but I have think of a thing or two that the mechanic never think of , and it be make a fine difference in we return . and there be not a article ship or unship at we wharf but I know the quality of it . if I get place , sir , it be because I make myself fit for 'em . if you want to slip into a round hole , you must make a ball of yourself ; that be where it be . " tap he box again . he have be lead on by pure enthusiasm in he subject , and have really forget what bear this retrospective survey have on he listener . he have find occasion for say the same thing more than once before , and be not distinctly aware that he have not he port -wine before he . " well , uncle , " say , with a slight complaint in he tone , " that be what I should like to do . can not _I_ get on in the same way ? " " in the same way ? " say , eyeing tom with quiet deliberation . " there go two or three question to that , . that depend on what sort of material you be , to begin with , and whether you have be put into the right mill . but I will tell you what it be . you poor father go the wrong way to work in give you a education . it be not my business , and I do not interfere ; but it be as I think it would be . you have have a sort of learning that be all very well for a young fellow like we , who will have nothing to do but sign check all he life , and may as well have latin inside he head as any other sort of stuffing . " " but , uncle , " say , earnestly , " I do not see why the Latin need hinder I from get on in business . I shall soon forget it all ; it make no difference to I . I have to do my lesson at school , but I always think they would never be of any use to I afterward ; I do not care about they . " " ay , ay , that be all very well , " say ; " but it do not alter what I be go to say . you latin and rigmarole may soon dry off you , but you will be but a bare stick after that . besides , it be whiten you hand and take the rough work out of you . and what do you know ? why , you know nothing about book - keeping , to begin with , and not so much of reckon
reckon as a common shopman . you will have to begin at a low round of the ladder , let I tell you , if you mean to get on in life . it be no use forget the education you father 's be pay for , if you do not give yourself a new un . " bit he lip hard ; he feel as if the tear be rise , and he would rather die than let they . " you want I to help you to a situation , " go on ; " well , I 've no fault to find with that . I be willing to do something for you . but you youngster nowadays think you be to begin with live well and work easy ; you 've no notion of run afoot before you get horseback . now , you must remember what you be ,-- you be a lad of sixteen , train to nothing particular . there be heap of you sort , like so many pebble , make to fit in nowhere . well , you might be apprentice to some business , -- a chemist 's and druggist 's perhaps ; you might come in a bit there -- -- " be go to speak , but put up he hand and say : " ! hear what I have get to say . you do not want to be a 'prentice , -- I know , I know , -- you want to make more haste , and you do not want to stand behind a counter . but if you be a copy - clerk , you will have to stand behind a desk , and stare at you ink and paper all day ; there be not much out - look there , and you will not be much wiser at the end of the year than at the beginning . the world be not make of pen , ink , and paper , and if you be to get on in the world , young man , you must know what the world 's make off . now the best chance for you 'uld be to have a place on a wharf , or in a warehouse , where you would learn the smell of thing , but you would not like that , I will be bound ; you would have to stand cold and wet , and be shouldere about by rough fellows . you be too fine a gentleman for that . " pause and look hard at , who certainly feel some inward struggle before he could reply . " I would rather do what will be best for I in the end , sir ; I would put up with what be disagreeable . " " that be well , if you can carry it out . but you must remember it be not only lay hold of a rope , you must go on pulling . it be the mistake you lad make that have get nothing either in you brain or you pocket , to think you have get a better start in the world if you stick yourselves in a place where you can keep you coat clean , and have the shopwench take you for fine gentleman . that be not the way _i_ start , young man ; when I be sixteen , my jacket smelt of tar , and I be not afraid of handle cheese . that be the reason I can wear good broadcloth now , and have my leg under the same table with the head of the best firm in 's . " uncle tap he box , and seem to expand a little under he waistcoat and gold chain , as he square he shoulders in the chair . " be there any place at liberty that you know of now , uncle , that I should do for ? I should like to set to work at once , " say , with a slight tremor in he voice . " stop a bit , stop a bit ; we must not be in too great a hurry . you must bear in mind , if I put you in a place you be a bit young for , because you happen to be my nephew , I shall be responsible for you . and there be no better reason , you know , than you be my nephew ; because it remain to be see whether you be good for anything . " " I hope I shall never do you any discredit , uncle , " say , hurt , as all boy be at the statement of the unpleasant truth that people feel no ground for trust they . " I care about my own credit too much for that . " " well do , , well do ! that be the right spirit , and I never refuse to help anybody if they have a mind to do themselves justice . there be a young man of two - and - twenty I have get my eye on now . I shall do what I can for that young man ; he be get some pith in he . but then , you see , he be make good use of he time , -- a first - rate calculator , -- can tell you the cubic contents of anything in no time , and put I up the other day to a new market for swedish bark ; he be uncommonly know in manufacture , that young fellow . " " I would better set about learn book - keep , have not I , uncle ? " say , anxious to prove he readiness to exert himself . " yes , yes , you can not do amiss there . but
but --Ah , Spence , you be back again . well , there be nothing more to be say just now , I think , and I must go to business again . good - by . remember I to you mother . " put out he hand , with a air of friendly dismissal , and have not courage to ask another question , especially in the presence of . so he go out again into the cold damp air . he have to call at he uncle 's about the money in the , and by the time he set out again the mist have thicken , and he could not see very far before he ; but go along again , he be start , when he be within two yard of the project side of a shop - window , by the word " " in large letter on a hand - bill , place as if on purpose to stare at he . it be the catalogue of the sale to take place the next week ; it be a reason for hurrie faster out of the town . poor tom for no vision of the distant future as he make he way homeward ; he only feel that the present be very hard . it seem a wrong toward he that he uncle have no confidence in he , -- do not see at once that he should acquit himself well , which himself be as certain of as of the daylight . apparently he , , be likely to be hold of small account in the world ; and for the first time he feel a sinking of heart under the sense that he really be very ignorant , and could do very little . who be that enviable young man that could tell the cubic contents of thing in no time , and make suggestion about swedish bark ! have be use to be so entirely satisfied with himself , in spite of he breaking down in a demonstration , and construe _nunc illa promite vire as " now promise those man " ; but now he suddenly feel at a disadvantage , because he know less than some one else knew . there must be a world of thing connect with that swedish bark , which , if he only know they , might have help he to get on . it would have be much easier to make a figure with a spirited horse and a new saddle . two hour ago , as be walk to 's , he see the distant future before he as he might have see a tempting stretch of smooth sandy beach beyond a belt of flinty shingles ; he be on the grassy bank then , and think the shingles might soon be pass . but now he foot be on the sharp stone ; the belt of shingles have widen , and the stretch of sand have dwindle into narrowness . " what do my uncle say , ? " say , put she arm through 's as he be warm himself rather drearily by the kitchen fire . " do he say he would give you a situation ? " " no , he do not say that . he do not quite promise I anything ; he seem to think I could not have a very good situation . I be too young . " " but do not he speak kindly , ? " " Kindly ? Pooh ! what be the use of talk about that ? I would not care about he speak kindly , if I could get a situation . but it be such a nuisance and bother ; I have be at school all this while learn and thing , -- not a bit of good to I , -- and now my uncle say I must set about learn book - keeping and calculation , and those thing . he seem to make out I be good for nothing . " 's mouth twitch with a bitter expression as he look at the fire . " oh , what a pity we have not get ! " say , who could not help mingl some gayety with they sadness . " if he have tatch I book - keep by double entry and after the italian method , as he do , I could teach you , . " " _you_ teach ! yes , I dare say . that be always the tone you take , " say . " dear , I be only joke , " say , put she cheek against he coat - sleeve . " but it be always the same , , " say , with the little frown he put on when he be about to be justifiably severe . " you be always set yourself up above I and every one else , and I have want to tell you about it several time . you ought not to have speak as you do to my uncle and aunt ; you should leave it to I to take care of my mother and you , and not put yourself forward . you think you know better than any one , but you be almost always wrong . I can judge much better than you can . " poor tom ! he have just come from be lecture and make to feel he inferiority ; the reaction of he strong , self - assert nature must take place somehow ; and here be a case in which he could justly show himself dominant . 's cheek flush and she lip quiver with conflict resentment and affection , and a certain awe as well as admiration of 's firmer and more effective character . she do not answer immediately ; very angry word rise to she lip
lip , but they be drive back again , and she say at last : " you often think I be conceit , , when I do not mean what I say at all in that way . I do not mean to put myself above you ; I know you behave better than I do yesterday . but you be always so harsh to I , . " with the last word the resentment be rise again . " no , I be not harsh , " say , with severe decision . " I be always kind to you , and so I shall be ; I shall always take care of you . but you must mind what I say . " they mother come in now , and rush away , that she burst of tear , which she feel must come , might not happen till she be safe upstairs . they be very bitter tear ; everybody in the world seem so hard and unkind to ; there be no indulgence , no fondness , such as she imagine when she fashio the world afresh in she own thought . in book there be people who be always agreeable or tender , and delighted to do thing that make one happy , and who do not show they kindness by find fault . the world outside the book be not a happy one , feel ; it seem to be a world where people behave the best to those they do not pretend to love , and that do not belong to they . and if life have no love in it , what else be there for ? nothing but poverty and the companionship of she mother 's narrow grief , perhaps of she father 's heart - cut childish dependence . there be no hopelessness so sad as that of early youth , when the soul be make up of want , and have no long memory , no superadded life in the life of other ; though we who look on think lightly of such premature despair , as if we vision of the future lighten the blind sufferer 's present . , in she brown frock , with she eye redden and she heavy hair push back , look from the bed where she father lay to the dull wall of this sad chamber which be the centre of she world , be a creature full of eager , passionate longing for all that be beautiful and glad ; thirsty for all knowledge ; with a ear straining after dreamy music that die away and would not come near to she ; with a blind , unconscious yearning for something that would link together the wonderful impressions of this mysterious life , and give she soul a sense of home in it . no wonder , when there be this contrast between the outward and the inward , that painful collision come of it . tend to refute the popular prejudice against the present of a pocket - knife in that dark time of , the sale of the household furniture last beyond the middle of the second day . , who have begin , in he interval of consciousness , to manifest a irritability which often appear to have as a direct effect the recurrence of spasmodic rigidity and insensibility , have lain in this living death throughout the critical hour when the noise of the sale come nearest to he chamber . have decide that it would be a less risk to let he remain where he be than to remove he to 's cottage , -- a plan which the good have propose to , think it would be very bad if the master be " to wake up " at the noise of the sale ; and the wife and child have sit imprison in the silent chamber , watch the large prostrate figure on the bed , and trembl lest the blank face should suddenly show some response to the sound which fall on they own ear with such obstinate , painful repetition . but it be over at last , that time of importunate certainty and eye - strain suspense . the sharp sound of a voice , almost as metallic as the rap that follow it , have cease ; the tramping of footstep on the gravel have die out . 's blond face seem a ten year by the last thirty hour ; the poor woman 's mind have be busy divine when she favorite thing be be knock down by the terrible hammer ; she heart have be flutter at the thought that first one thing and then another have go to be identify as hers in the hateful publicity of the ; and all the while she have to sit and make no sign of this inward agitation . such thing bring line in well - round face , and broae the streak of white among the hair that once look as if they have be dip in pure sunshine . already , at three o'clock , , the good - hear , bad - tempered housemaid , who regard all people that come to the sale as she personal enemie , the dirt on whose foot be of a peculiarly vile quality , have begin to scrub and swill with a energy much assist by a continual low mutter against " folk as come to buy up other folk 's thing , " and make light of " scrazing " the top of mahogany table over which better folk than themselves have have to -- suffer a waste of tissue through evaporation . she be not scrubb indiscriminately , for there would be further dirt of the same atrocious kind make by people who have still to fetch away they purchase ; but she be bent on bring the parlor
parlor , where that " pipe-smok pig , " the bailiff , have sat , to such a appearance of scant comfort as could be give to it by cleanliness and the few article of furniture buy in for the family . she mistress and the young folk should have they tea in it that night , be determined . it be between five and six o'clock , near the usual teatime , when she come upstairs and say that be want . the person who want he be in the kitchen , and in the first moment , by the imperfect fire and candle light , have not even a indefinite sense of any acquaintance with the rather broad - set but active figure , perhaps two year older than himself , that look at he with a pair of blue eye set in a disc of freckle , and pull some curly red lock with a strong intention of respect . a low - crown oilskin - cover hat , and a certain shiny deposit of dirt on the rest of the costume , as of tablet prepare for writing upon , suggest a calling that have to do with boat ; but this do not help 's memory . " , , " say he of the red lock , with a smile which seem to break through a self - impos air of melancholy . " you do not know I again , I doubt , " he go on , as continue to look at he inquiringly ; " but I would like to talk to you by yourself a bit , please . " " there be a fire I ' the parlor , master , " say , who object to leave the kitchen in the crisis of toasting . " come this way , then , " say , wonder if this young fellow belong to & . 's , for he imagination run continually toward that particular spot ; and uncle Deane might any time be send for he to say that there be a situation at liberty . the bright fire in the parlor be the only light that show the few chair , the bureau , the carpetless floor , and the one table -- no , not the _one_ table ; there be a second table , in a corner , with a large and a few other book upon it . it be this new strange bareness that feel first , before he think of look again at the face which be also light up by the fire , and which steal a half - shy , question glance at he as the entirely strange voice say : " why ! you do not remember , then , as you gen the pocket - knife to , ? " the rough - handle pocket - knife be take out in the same moment , and the largest blade open by way of irresistible demonstration . " what ! ? " say , not with any cordial delight , for he feel a little ashamed of that early intimacy symbolize by the pocket - knife , and be not at all sure that 's motives for recalle it be entirely admirable . " ay , ay , , if it must be , ' cause there be so many Bob as you go arter the squerril with , that day as I plump right down from the bough , and bruise my shin a good un -- but I get the squerril tight for all that , a ' a scratter it be . a ' this littlish blade 's break , you see , but I would not haheve a new un put in , ' cause they might be cheatin ' I a ' givin ' I another knife instid , for there be not such a blade I ' the country ,-- it be get used to my hand , like . a ' there be niver nobody else gen I nothin ' but what I get by my own sharpness , only you , ; if it be not as gen I the terrier pup istid of ' drowndi not it , an' I have to jaw he a good un afore he would give it I . " speak with a sharp and rather treble volubility , and get through he long speech with surprising despatch , give the blade of he knife a affectionate rub on he sleeve when he have finish . " well , , " say , with a slight air of patronage , the foregoing reminscence have dispose he to be as friendly as be become , though there be no part of he acquaintance with that he remember better than the cause of they part quarrel ; " be there anything I can do for you ? " " why , no , , " answer , shut up he knife with a click and return it to he pocket , where he seem to be feel for something else . " I should not ha ' come back upon you now ye be I ' trouble , ang folk say as the master , as I use to frighten the bird for , a ' he flog I a bit for fun when he catch I eatin ' the turnip , as they say he will niver lift up he head no more ,-- I should not ha ' come now to ax you to gi' I another knife ' cause you gen I one afore . if a chap give I one black eye , that be enough for I ; I sha ' not ax he for another afore I sarve he out ; an' a good turn 's worth as much as a bad un , anyhow . I shall niver grow down'ard again
again , , a ' you war the little chap as I like the best when _I_ war a little chap , for all you leather I , and would not look at I again . there be , there , I could leather he as much as I ' a mind ; but lor ! you get tired o' leatherin ' a chap when you can niver make he see what you want he to shy at . I and see chaps as 'uld stand starin ' at a bough till they eye shoot out , afore they would see as a bird 's tail war not a leaf . it be poor work goin ' wi' such raff . but you war allay a rare un at shying , , an' I could trusten to you for droppin 's down wi' you stick in the nick of ' time at a runnin ' rat , or a stoat , or that , when I war a - beatin ' the bushes . " have draw out a dirty canva bag , and would perhaps not have pause just then if have not enter the room and dart a look of surprise and curiosity at he , whereupon he pull he red locks again with due respect . but the next moment the sense of the altered room come upon with a force that overpower the thought of 's presence . she eye have immediately glanced from he to the place where the bookcase have hung ; there be nothing now but the oblong unfaded space on the wall , and below it the small table with the and the few other book . " oh , ! " she burst out , clasp she hand , " where be the book ? I think my uncle say he would buy they . do not he ? be those all they have leave we ? " " I suppose so , " say , with a sort of desperate indifference . " why should they buy many book when they buy so little furniture ? " " oh , but , , " say , she eye fill with tear , as she rush up to the table to see what book have be rescue . " we dear old 's progress that you colore with you little paint ; and that picture of with a mantle on , look just like a turtle -- oh dear ! " go on , half sobb as she turn over the few book , " I think we should never part with that while we liv ; everything be go away from we ; the end of we life will have nothing in it like the beginning ! " turn away from the table and throw herself into a chair , with the big tear ready to roll down she cheek , quite blinded to the presence of , who be look at she with the pursuant gaze of a intelligent dumb animal , with perception more perfect than he comprehension . " well , , " say , feel that the subject of the book be unseasonable , " I suppose you just come to see I because we be in trouble ? that be very good - natured of you . " " I will tell you how it be , master , " say , begin to untwist he canva bag . " you see , I and be with a barge this two ' ear ; that be how I and be gettin ' my livin ' , -- if it be not when I be tentin ' the furnace , between whiles , at 's mill . but a fortn i't ago I would a rare bit of ' luck , -- I allay think I be a lucky chap , for I niver set a trap but what I catch something ; but this be not trap , it be a fire I ' 's mill , an' I douse it , else it 'uld set th ' oil alight , a ' the genelman gen I ten suvreign ; he gen I them himself last week . a ' he say first , I be a sperrit chap , -- but I know that afore , -- but then he out wi' the ten suvreign , a ' that war summat new . here they be , all but one ! " here empty the canva bag on the table . " a ' when I would get th'ey , my head be all of a boil like a kettle of ' broth , thinkin ' what sort of ' life I should take to , for there war a many trade I would think on ; for as for the barge , I be clean ti out with i't , for it pull the day out till they be as long as pig ' chitterling . An' I think first I have ha's ferret a ' dog , a ' be a rat - catcher ; an' then I think as I should like a bigger way of ' life , as I do not know so well ; for I and see to the bottom of ' rat - catching ; an' I think , a ' thought , till at last I settle I would be a packman , -- for they be knowin ' feller , the packman be , -- an' I would carry the lightest thing I could I ' my pack ; an' there would be a use for a feller 's tongue , as be no use neither wig rat nor barge . An' I should go about the country far a ' wide , a ' come round the woman wi' my tongue , a ' get my dinner hot at the public , -- lor
lor ! it 'uld be a lovely life ! " pause , and then say , with defiant decision , as if resolutely turn he back on that paradisaic picture : " but I do not mind about it , not a chip ! a ' I and change one of ' the suvreign to buy my mother a goose for dinner , an' I and buy a blue plush wescoat , a ' a sealskin cap , -- for if I mean to be a packman , I would do it respectable . but I do not mind about it , not a chip ! my yead be not a turnip , an' I shall p'r'aps have a chance of ' douse another fire afore long . I be a lucky chap . so I will thank you to take the nine suvreign , , and set yoursen up with 'em somehow , if it be true as the master 's broke . they may not go fur enough , but they will help . " be touch keenly enough to forget he pride and suspicion . " you be a very kind fellow , , " he say , color , with that little diffident tremor in he voice which give a certain charm even to 's pride and severity , " and I sha ' not forget you again , though I do not know you this evening . but I can not take the nine sovereign ; I should be take you little fortune from you , and they would not do I much good either . " " would not they , ? " say , regretfully . " now do not say so ' cause you think I want th'ey . I be not a poor chap . my mother get 's a good penn'orth wi's pick feather a ' thing ; a ' if she eat nothin ' but bread - a ' - water , it run to fat . An' I be such a lucky chap ; an' I doubt you be not quite so lucky , , -- th ' old master be not , anyhow , -- an' so you might take a slice of ' my luck , a ' no harm do . Lor ! I find a leg of ' pork I ' the river one day ; it have tumble out o' one of ' they round - stern , I will be bound . come , think better on it , , for old ' quinetance ' sake , else I shall think you bear I a grudge . " push the sovereign forward , but before could speak , clasp she hand , and look penitently at . say : " oh , I be so sorry , ; I never think you be so good . why , I think you be the kindest person in the world ! " have not be aware of the injurious opinion for which be perform a inward act of penitence , but he smile with pleasure at this handsome eulogy , -- especially from a young lass who , as he inform he mother that even , have " such uncommon eye , they look somehow as they make he feel nohow . " " no , indeed , I can not take they , " say ; " but do not think I feel you kindness less because I say no . I do not want to take anything from anybody , but to work my own way . and those sovereign would not help I much -- they would not really -- if I be to take they . let I shake hand with you instead . " put out he pink palm , and be not slow to place he hard , grimy hand within it . " let I put the sovereign in the bag again , " say ; " and you will come and see we when you have buy you pack , . " " it be like as if I would come out of ' make believe , of ' purpose to show them you , " say , with a air of discontent , as give he the bag again , " a - take th'ey back I ' this way . I _be a bit of a do , you know ; but it be not that sort of ' ,-- it be on 'y when a feller 's a big rogue , or a big flat , I like to let he in a bit , that be all . " " now , do not you be up to any trick , , " say , " else you will get transport some day . " " no , no ; not I , , " say , with a air of cheerful confidence . " there be no law again ' flea - bite . if I be not to take a fool in now and then , he would niver get any wiser . but , lor ! haheve a suvreign to buy you and summat , on 'y for a token -- just to match my pocket - knife . " while be speak he lay down the sovereign , and resolutely twist up he bag again . push back the gold , and say , " no , indeed , ; thank you heartily , but I can not take it . " and , take it between she finger , hold it up to and say , more persuasively : " not now , but perhaps another time . if ever or my father want help that you can give , we will let you know ; will not we , ? that be what you would like , -- to have we always depend on you as a
a friend that we can go to , -- be not it , ? " " yes , , and thank you , " say , reluctantly take the money ; " that be what I would like , anything as you like . An' I wish you good - by , , and good - luck , , and thank you for shaking hand wi' I , _though you would not take the money . " 's entrance , with very black look , to inquire if she should not bring in the tea now , or whether the toast be to get harden to a brick , be a seasonable check on 's flux of word , and hasten he part bow . how a to Stratagem the day pass , and show , at least to the eyes of the medical man , stronger and stronger symptom of a gradual return to he normal condition ; the paralytic obstruction be , little by little , lose its tenacity , and the mind be rise from under it with fitful struggle , like a liive creature make its way from under a great snowdrift , that slide and slide again , and shut up the newly make opening . time would have seem to creep to the watcher by the bed , if it have only be measure by the doubtful , distant hope which keep count of the moment within the chamber ; but it be measure for they by a fast - approach dread which make the nights come too quickly . while be slowly become himself again , he lot be hasten toward its moment of most palpable change . the taxing - master have do they work like any respectable gunsmith conscientiously prepare the musket , that , duly point by a brave arm , will spoil a life or two . Allocaturs , filing of bills in , decree of sale , be legal chain - shot or bomb - shell that can never hit a solitary mark , but must fall with widespread shattering . so deeply inherent be it in this life of ours that man have to suffer for each other 's sins , so inevitably diffusive be human suffering , that even justice make its victim , and we can conceive no retribution that do not spread beyond its mark in pulsation of unmerited pain . by the beginning of the second week in , the bills be out advertise the sale , under a decree of , of 's farming and other stock , to be follow by a sale of the mill and land , hold in the proper after - dinner hour at the . the miller himself , unaware of the lapse of time , fancie himself still in that first stage of he misfortunes when expedient might be think of ; and often in he conscious hour talk in a feeble , disjoint manner of plan he would carry out when he " get well . " the wife and child be not without hope of a issue that would at least save from leave the old spot , and seek a entirely strange life . for uncle have be induce to interest himself in this stage of the business . it would not , he acknowledge , be a bad speculation for & to buy , and carry on the business , which be a good one , and might be increase by the addition of steam power ; in which case might be retain as manager . , would say nothing decide about the matter ; the fact that hold the mortgage on the land might put it into he head to bid for the whole estate , and further , to outbid the cautious firm of & , who do not carry on business on sentimental grounds . be obliged to tell something to that effect , when he ride over to the mill to inspect the book in company with ; for she have observe that " if & . would only think about it , 's father and grandfather have be carry on long before the oil - mill of that firm have be so much as think of . " , in reply , doubt whether that be precisely the relation between the two mill which would determine they value as investments . as for uncle , the thing lay quite beyond he imagination ; the good - natured man feel sincere pity for the family , but he money be all lock up in excellent mortgage , and he could run no risk ; that would be unfair to he own relative ; but he have make up he mind that should have some new flannel waistcoat which he have himself renounce in favor of a more elastic commodity , and that he would buy a pound of tea now and then ; it would be a journey which he benevolence delighte in , to carry the tea and see she pleasure on be assure it be the best black . , it be clear that be kindly dispose toward the Tulliver . one day he have bring , who be come home for the holiday , and the little blond angel - head have press itself against 's darker cheek with many kiss and some tear . these fair slim daughter keep up a tender spot in the heart of many a respectable partner in a respectable firm , and perhaps 's anxious , pity question about she poor cousins help to make uncle Deane more prompt in find a temporary place in the warehouse , and in put he in the way of get evening lesson in book - keeping and calculation . that might have cheer the lad and feed he hope a little , if there have not come at the same time the
the much - dread blow of finding that he father must be a bankrupt , after all ; at least , the creditor must be ask to take less than they due , which to 's untechnical mind be the same thing as bankruptcy . he father must not only be say to have " lose he property , " but to have " fail , " -- the word that carry the worst obloquy to 's mind . for when the defendant 's claim for cost have be satisfied , there would remain the friendly bill of , and the deficiency at the bank , as well as the other debt which would make the asset shrink into unequivocal disproportion ; " not more than ten or twelve shilling in the pound , " predict , in a decided tone , tighten he lip ; and the word fall on like a scalding liquy , leave a continual smart . he be sadly in want of something to keep up he spirit a little in the unpleasant newness of he position ,-- suddenly transport from the easy carpet _ennui_ of study - hour at 's , and the busy idleness of castle - build in a " last half " at school , to the companionship of sack and hide , and bawl man thunder down heavy weights at he elbow . the first step toward get on in the world be a chill , dusty , noisy affair , and imply go without one 's tea in order to stay in . and have a evening lesson from a one- armed elderly clerk , in a room smell strongly of bad tobacco . 's young pink - and - white face have its color very much deaden by the time he take off he hat at home , and sit down with keen hunger to he supper . no wonder he be a little cross if he mother or speak to he . but all this while Mr . be brood over a scheme by which she , and no one else , would avert the result most to be dread , and prevent Wakem from entertain the purpose of bidding for the mill . imagine a truly respectable and amiable hen , by some portentous anomally , take to reflection and invent combination by which she might prevail on not to wr she neck , or send she and she chick to market ; the result could hardly be other than much cackling and flutter . , see that everything have go wrong , have begin to think she have be too passive in life ; and that , if she have apply she mind to business , and take a strong resolution now and then , it would have be all the better for she and she family . , it appear , have think of go to speak to on this business of the mill ; and yet , Tulliver reflect , it would have be quite the shortest method of secure the right end . it would have be of no use , to be sure , for to go , -- even if he have be able and willing , -- for he have be " go to law against " and abuse he for the last ten year ; be always likely to have a spite against he . and now that . Tulliver have come to the conclusion that she husband be very much in the wrong to bring she into this trouble , she be inclin to think that he opinion of be wrong too . to be sure , thWakey have " put the baily in the house , and sell they up " ; but she suppose he do that to please the man that lent the money , for a lawyer have more folk to please than one , and he be not likely to put , who have go to law with he , above everybody else in the world . the attorney might be a very reasonable man ; why not ? he have marry a , and at the time have hear of that marriage , the summer when she wear she blue satin spencer , and have not yet any thought of , she know no harm of . and certainly toward herself , whom he know to have be a , it be out of all possibility that he could entertain anything but good - will , when it be once bring home to he observation that she , for she part , have never want to go to law , and indeed be at present dispose to take 's view of all subjects rather than she husband 's . in fact , if that attorney see a respectable matron like herself dispose " to give he good word , " why should not he listen to she representation ? for she would put the matter clearly before he , which have never be do yet . and he would never go and bid for the mill on purpose to spite she , a innocent woman , who think it likely enough that she have dance with he in they youth at 's , for at those big dance she have often and often danced with young man whose name she have forgote . hide these reasoning in she own bosom ; for when she have throw out a hint to and that she would not mind go to speak to herself , they have say , " no , no , no , " and " Pooh , pooh , " and " let thWakey alone , " in the tone of man who be not likely to give a candid attention to a more definite exposition of she project ; still less dared she mention the plan to and , for
for " the child be always so against everything they mother say " ; and , she observe , be almost as much set against as he father be . but this unusual concentration of thought naturally give a unusual power of device and determination : and a day or two before the sale , to be hold at the , when there be no longer any time to be lose , she carry out she plan by a stratagem . there be pickle in question , a large stock of pickle and ketchup which possess , and which , the grocer , would certainly purchase if she could transact the business in a personal interview , so she would walk with to . 's that morning ; and when urge that she might let the pickle be at present , -- he do not like she to go about just yet , -- she appear so hurt at this conduct in she son , contradict she about pickle which she have make after the family receipt inherit from he own grandmother , who have die when he mother be a little girl , that he give way , and they walk together until she turn toward , where retail he grocery , not far from the office of . that gentleman be not yet come to he office ; would sit down by the fire in he private room and wait for he ? she have not long to wait before the punctual attorney enter , knitt he brow with a examine glance at the stout blond woman who rise , curtsy deferentially , -- a tallish man , with a aquiline nose and abundant iron - gray hair . you have never see before , and be possibly wonder whether he be really as eminend a rascal , and as crafty , bitter a enemy of honest humanity in general , and of in particular , as he be represent to be in that eidolon or portrait of he which we have see to exist in the miller 's mind . it be clear that the irascible miller be a man to interpret any chance - shot that graze he as a attempt on he own life , and be liable to entanglement in this puzzling world , which , due consideration have to he own infallibility , require the hypothesis of a very active diabolical agency to explain they . it be still possible to believe that the attorney be not more guilty toward he than a ingenious machine , which perform its work with much regularity , be guilty toward the rash man who , venture too near it , be catch up by some fly - wheel or other , and suddenly convert into unexpected mince -meat . but it be really impossible to decide this question by a glance at he person ; the line and light of the human countenance be like other symbol , -- not always easy to read without a key . on a _a priori_ view of 's aquiline nose , which offend , there be not more rascality than in the shape of he stiff shirt - collar , though this too along with he nose , might have become fraught with damnatory meaning when once the rascality be ascertain . " . , I think ? " say . " yes , sir ; as . " " pray be seat . you have some business with I ? " " well , sir , yes , " say , begin to feel alarmed at she own courage , now she be really in presence of the formidable man , and reflec that she have not settle with herself how she should begin . feel in he waistcoat pocket , and look at she in silence . " I hope , sir , " she begin at last ,-- " I hope , sir , you be not a - think as _I_ bear you any ill - will because of ' my husband 's lose he lawsuit , and the baily be put in , and the linen be sell , -- oh dear !-- for I be not bring up in that way . I be sure you remember my father , sir , for he be close friend with , and we allays go to the dance there , the , -- nobody could be more look on , -- and justly , for there be four of we , and you be quite aware as and be my sister . and as for go to law and lose money , and have sale before you be dead , I never see anything of ' that before I be married , nor for a long while after . and I be not to be answerable for my bad luck I ' marry out of ' my own family into one where the goings - on be different . and as for be draw in t ' abuse you as other folk abuse you , sir , _that I niver be , and nobody can say it of I . " shook she head a little , and look at the hem of she pocket - handkerchief . " I have no doubt of what you say , , " say , with cold politeness . " but you have some question to ask I ? " " well , sir , yes . but that be what I have say to myself , -- I have say you would have some nat'ral feeling ; and as for my husband , as have not be himself for this two month , I be not a - defend he , in no way , for be so hot about ' erigation , -- not but what there be worse man , for he never wronge nobody of
of a shilling nor a penny , not willingly ; and as for he fieriness and law , what could I do ? and he struck as if it be with death when he get the letter as say you have the hold upo ' the land . but I can not believe but what you will behave as a gentleman . " " what do all this mean , ? " say rather sharply . " what do you want to ask I ? " " why , sir , if you will be so good , " say . , start a little , and speak more hurriedly , -- " if you will be so good not to buy the mill a ' the land , -- the land would not so much matter , only my husband ull ' be like mad at you have it . " something like a new thought flash across 's face as he say , " who tell you I mean to buy it ? " " why , sir , it be none o' my invent , and I should never ha ' think of it ; for my husband , as ought to know about the law , he allay use to say as lawyer have never no call to buy anything ,-- either lands or house , -- for they allays get th'ey into they hand other way . An' I should think that 'uld be the way with you , sir ; and I niver say as you would be the man to do contrairy to that . " " ah , well , who be it that _did_ say so ? " say Wakem , open he desk , and move thing about , with the accompaniment of a almost inaudible whistle . " why , sir , it be and , as have all the management ; and think as & . 'uld buy the mill and let work it for th'ey , if you do not bid for it and raise the price . and it 'uld be such a thing for my husband to stay where he be , if he could get he living : for it be he father 's before he , the mill be , and he grandfather build it , though I be not fond of ' the noise of it , when first I be marry , for there be no mill in we family , -- not the Dodson 's , -- and if I would know as the mills have so much to do with the law , it would not have be I as 'uld have be the first Dodson to marry one ; but I go into it blindfold , that I do , erigation and everything . " " what ! & . would keep the mill in they own hand , I suppose , and pay you husband wage ? " " oh dear , sir , it be hard to think of , " say poor , a little tear make its way , " as my husband should take wage . but it 'uld look more like what use to be , to stay at the mill than to go anywhere else ; and if you will only think -- if you be to bid for the mill and buy it , my husband might be strike worse than he be before , and niver get better again as he be get now . " " well , but if i buy the mill , and allow you husband to act as my manager in the same way , how then ? " say . " oh , sir , I doubt he could niver be get to do it , not if the very mill stood still to beg and pray of he . for you name 's like poison to he , it be so as never be ; and he look upon it as you have be the ruin of he all along , ever since you set the law on he about the road through the meadow , -- that be eight year ago , and he be be go on ever since -- as I have allays tell he he be wrong ---- " " he be a pig - head , foul - mouthed fool ! " burst out , forgett himself . " oh dear , sir ! " say , frightene at a result so different from the one she have fix she mind on ; " I would not wish to contradict you , but it be like enough he be change he mind with this illness , -- he be forget a many thing he use to talk about . and you would not like to have a corpse on you mind , if he be to die ; and they _do_ say as it be allays unlucky when Dorlcote mill change hand , and the water might all run away , and _than _-- not as I be wish you any ill - luck , sir , for I forget to tell you as I remember you wedding as if it be yesterday ; be a miss Clint , I know _that ;_ and my boy , as there be not a nicer , handsomer , straighter boy nowhere , go to school with you son ---- " rose , open the door , and call to one of he clerk . " you must excuse I for interrupt you , . Tulliver ; I have business that must be attend to ; and I think there be nothing more necessary to be say . " " but if you _would bear it in mind , sir , " say , rise , " and not run against I and my child ; and I be not deny
deny 's be in the wrong , but he be be punished enough , and there be worse man , for it be be give to other folk have be he fault . he be do nobody any harm but himself and he family , -- the more be the pity , -- and I go and look at the bare shelf every day , and think where all my thing use to stand . " " yes , yes , I will bear it in mind , " say , hastily , look toward the open door . " and if you would please not to say as I have be to speak to you , for my son 'uld be very angry with I for demean myself , I know he would , and I have trouble enough without be scold by my child . " poor 's tremble a little , and she could make no answer to the attorney 's " good morning , " but curtsy and walk out in silence . " which day be it that be to be sell ? where be the bill ? " say thWakey to he clerk when they be alone . " next be the day ,-- at six o'clock . " " oh , just run to 's the auctioneer , and see if he be at home . I have some business for he ; ask he to come up . " although , when enter he office that morning , he have have no intention of purchase , he mind be already make up . have suggest to he several determining motive , and he mental glance be very rapid ; he be one of those man who can be prompt without be rash , because they motives run in fix track , and they have no need to reconcile conflict aim . to suppose that have the same sort of inveterate hatred toward that have toward he would be like suppose that a pike and a roach can look at each other from a similar point of view . the roach necessarily abhors the mode in which the pike get he living , and the pike be likely to think nothing further even of the most indignant roach than that he be excellent good eating ; it could only be when the roach chok he that the pike could entertain a strong personal animosity . if have ever seriously injur or thwart the attorney , thWakey would not have refuse he the distinction of be a special object of he vindictiveness . but when call a rascal at the market dinner - table , the attorney 's client be not a whit inclin to withdraw they business from he ; and if , when himself happen to be present , some jocose cattle - feeder , stimulate by opportunity and brandy , make a thrust at he by alluding to old lady ' will , he maintain perfect _sang froid , and know quite well that the majority of substantial man then present be perfectly contente with the fact that " be " ; that be to say , a man who always know the stepping - stone that would carry he through very muddy bit of practice . a man who have make a large fortune , have a handsome house among the tree at , and decidedly the finest stock of port -wine in the neighborhood of 's , be likely to feel himself on a level with public opinion . and I be not sure that even honest himself , with he general view of law as a cockpit , might not , under opposite circumstance , have see a fine appropriateness in the truth that " thWakey be " ; since I have understand from person verse in history , that mankind be not dispose to look narrowly into the conduct of great victor when they victory be on the right side . Tulliver , then , could be no obstruction to ; on the contrary , he be a poor devil whom the lawyer have defeat several time ; a hot - tempere fellow , who would always give you a handle against he . 's conscience be not uneasy because he have use a few trick against the miller ; why should he hate that unsuccessful plaintiff , that pitiable , furious bull entangle in the mesh of a net ? still , among the various excess to which human nature be subject , moralist have never numbe that of be too fond of the people who openly revile we . the successful yellow candidate for the borough of , perhaps , feel no pursuant meditative hatre toward the editor who console he subscriber with vituperative rhetoric against yellow man who sell they country , and be the demon of private life ; but he might not be sorry , if law and opportunity favor , to kick that editor to a deeper shade of he favorite color . Prosperous man take a little vengeance now and then , as they take a diversion , when it come easily in they way , and be no hindrance to business ; and such small unimpassioned revenge have a enormous effect in life , run through all degree of pleasant infliction , block the fit man out of place , and blacken character in unpremeditated talk . still more , to see people who have be only insignificantly offensive to we reduce in life and humiliate , without any special effort of ours , be apt to have a soothing , flattering influence . Providence or some other prince of this world , it appear , have undertake the task of retribution for we ; and really , by a agreeable constitution of thing , we enemy somehow _do not prosper . thWakey be not without this parenthetic vindictiveness toward
toward the uncomplimentary miller ; and now have put the notion into he head , it present itself to he as a pleasure to do the very thing that would cause Tulliver the most deadly mortification , -- and a pleasure of a complex kind , not make up of crude malice , but mingl with it the relish of self - approbation . to see a enemy humiliate give a certain contentment , but this be jejune compare with the highly blent satisfaction of see he humiliate by you benevolent action or concession on he behalf . that be a sort of revenge which fall into the scale of virtue , and be not without a intention of keep that scale respectably fill . he have once have the pleasure of put a old enemy of he into one of the 's alm - house , to the rebuilding of which he have give a large subscription ; and here be a opportunity of provide for another by make he he own servant . such thing give a completeness to prosperity , and contribute element of agreeable consciousness that be not dream of by that short-sighted , overheate vindictiveness which go out its way to wreak itself in direct injury . and , with he rough tongue file by a sense of obligation , would make a better servant than any chance - fellow who be cap - in - hand for a situation . be know to be a man of proud honesty , and be too acute not to believe in the existence of honesty . he be give too observing individual , not to judge of they accord to maxim , and no one know better than he that all man be not like himself . besides , he intend to overlook the whole business of land and mill pretty closely ; he be fond of these practical rural matters . but there be good reason for purchase , quite apart from any benevolent vengeance on the miller . it be really a capital investment ; besides , & . be go to bid for it . and be on friendly dining term , and the attorney like to predominate over a ship - owner and mill - owner who be a little too loud in the town affair as well as in he table - talk . for be not a mere man of business ; he be consider a pleasant fellow in the upper circle of . 's -- chat amusingly over he port-wine , do a little amateur farming , and have certainly be a excellent husband and father ; at church , when he go there , he sit under the handsomest of mural monument erect to the memory of he wife . most man would have marry again under he circumstance , but he be say to be more tender to he deform son than most man were to they best - shapen offspring . not that have not other son beside ; but toward they he hold only a chiaroscuro parentage , and provide for they in a grade of life duly beneath he own . in this fact , indeed , there lay the clenching motive to the purchase of . while be talk , it have occur to the rapid -minded lawyer , among all the other circumstance of the case , that this purchase would , in a few year to come , furnish a highly suitable position for a certain favorite lad whom he mean to bring on in the world . these be the mental condition on which have undertake to act persuasively , and have fail ; a fact which may receive some illustration from the remark of a great philosopher , that fly - fisher fail in prepare they bait so as to make it allur in the right quarter , for want of a due acquaintance with the subjectivity of fishes . on the wreck it be a clear frosty day on which first come downstairs . the bright sun on the chestnut bough and the roof opposite he window have make he impatiently declare that he would be cage up no longer ; he think everywhere would be more cheery under this sunshine than he bedroom ; for he know nothing of the bareness below , which make the flood of sunshine importunate , as if it have a unfeeling pleasure in show the empty place , and the mark where well - know object once have be . the impression on he mind that it be but yesterday when he receive the letter from be so continually imply in he talk , and the attempt to convey to he the idea that many week have pass and much have happen since then have be so soon sweep away by recurrent forgetfulness , that even have begin to despair of prepare he to meet the fact by previous knowledge . the full sense of the present could only be impart gradually by new experience , -- not by mere word , which must remain weaker than the impression leave by the _old experience . this resolution to come downstairs be hear with trembling by the wife and child . say must not go to . at the usual hour , he must wait and see he father downstairs ; and comply , though with a intense inward shrink from the painful scene . the heart of all three have be more deeply deject than ever during the last few day . for & . have not buy the mill ; both mill and land have be knock down to , who have be over the premise , and have laid before and , in 's presence , he willingness to employ , in case of he recovery , as a manager of the business . this proposition have occasion much family debating
debating . Uncles and aunt be almost unanimously of opinion that such a offer ought not to be reject when there be nothing in the way but a feeling in 's mind , which , as neither aunt nor uncle share it , be regard as entirely unreasonable and childish , -- indeed , as a transferring toward of that indignation and hatre which ought properly to have direct against himself for he general quarrelsomeness , and he special exhibition of it in go to law . here be a opportunity for to provide for he wife and daughter without any assistance from he wife 's relation , and without that too evident descent into pauperism which make it annoy to respectable people to meet the degraded member of the family by the wayside . , consider , must be make to feel , when he come to he right mind , that he could never humble himself enough ; for _that have come which she have always foreseen would come of he insolence in time past " to they as be the best friend he would get to look to . " and be less stern in they view , but they both of they think have do enough harm by he hot - tempered crotchet and ought to put they out of the question when a livelihood be offer he ; thWakey show a right feeling about the matter ,--_he_ have no grudge against . have protest against entertaine the proposition . he should not like he father to be under ; he think it would look mean - spirit ; but he mother 's main distress be the utter impossibility of ever " turn round about , " or get he to hear reason ; no , they would all have to go and live in a pigsty on purpose to spite , who speak " so as nobody could be fairer . " indeed , 's mind be reduce to such confusion by live in this strange medium of unaccountable sorrow , against which she continually appeal by ask , " oh dear , what _have_ I do to deserve worse than other woman ? " that begin to suspect she poor mother 's wit be quite go . " , " she say , when they be out of they father 's room together , " we _must try to make father understand a little of what have happene before he go downstairs . but we must get my mother away . she will say something that will do harm . ask to fetch she down , and keep she engage with something in the kitchen . " be equal to the task . have declare she intention of staying till the master could get about again , " wage or no wage , " she have find a certain recompense in keep a strong hand over she mistress , scold she for " moithering " herself , and go about all day without change she cap , and look as if she be " mush . " altogether , this time of trouble be rather a Saturnalian time to ; she could scold she betters with unreproved freedom . on this particular occasion there be drying clothes to be fetch in ; she wish to know if one pair of hand could do everything in - door and out , and observe that _she should have think it would be good for to put on she bonnet , and get a breath of fresh air by do that needful piece of work . poor go submissively downstairs ; to be order about by a servant be the last remnant of she household dignity , -- she would soon have no servant to scold she . be rest in he chair a little after the fatigue of dressing , and and be seat near he , when enter to ask if he should help master downstairs . " ay , ay , Luke ; stop a bit , sit down , " say point he stick toward a chair , and look at he with that pursuant gaze which convalescent person often have for those who have tend they , remind one of a infant gazing about after its nurse . for have be a constant night - watcher by he master 's bed . " how be the water now , eh , ? " say . " Dix have not be chok you up again , eh ? " " no , sir , it be all right . " " ay , I think not ; he will not be in a hurry at that again , now 's be to settle he . that be what I say to yesterday -- I say -- - - " lean forward , rest he elbow on the armchair , and look on the ground as if in search of something , strive after vanish image like a man struggle against a doze . look at in mute distress , they father 's mind be so far off the present , which would by - and - by thrust itself on he wandering consciousness ! be almost ready to rush away , with that impatience of painful emotion which make one of the difference between youth and maiden , man and woman . " , " say , lay she hand on he , " do not you remember that be dead ? " " dead ? " say , sharply , look in she face with a strange , examine glance . " yes , he die of apoplexy nearly a year ago . I remember hear you say you have to pay money for he ; and he leave he daughter badly off ; one of they be under - teacher at 's , where I have be to school , you know
know . " " ah ? " say she father , doubtfully , still look in she face . but as soon as begin to speak he turn to look at _him_ with the same inquiring glance , as if he be rather surprised at the presence of these two young people . whenever he mind be wander in the far past , he fall into this oblivion of they actual face ; they be not those of the lad and the little wench who belong to that past . " it be a long while since you have the dispute with , father , " say . " I remember you talk about it three year ago , before I go to school at 's . I have be at school there three year ; do not you remember ? " throw himself backward again , lose the childlike outward glance under a rush of new idea , which divert he from external impressions . " ay , ay , " he say , after a minute or two , " I have pay a deal of ' money -- I be determine my son should have a good eddication ; I would no myself , and I have feel the miss of it . and he will want no other fortin , that be what I say -- if be to get the better of I again -- -- " the thought of rouse new vibration , and after a moment 's pause he begin to look at the coat he have on , and to feel in he side - pocket . then he turn to , and say in he old sharp way , " where have they put 's letter ? " it be close at hand in a drawer , for he have often ask for it before . " you know what there be in the letter , father ? " say , as he give it to he . " to be sure I do , " say , rather angrily . " what of ' that ? if can not take to the property , somebody else can ; there 's plenty of ' people in the world besides . but it be hinder -- my not be well -- go and tell them to get the horse in the gig , Luke ; I can get down to . 's well enough -- 's expect I . " " no , dear father ! " burst out entreatingly ; " it be a very long while since all that ; you have be ill a great many week , -- more than two month ; everything be change . " look at they all three alternately with a start gaze ; the idea that much have happene of which he know nothing have often transiently arrest he before , but it come upon he now with entire novelty . " yes , father , " say , in answer to the gaze . " you need not trouble you mind about business until you be quite well ; everything be settle about that for the present , -- about the mill and the land and the debt . " " what be settle , then ? " say he father , angrily . " do not you take on too much bout it , sir , " say . " you would ha ' pay iverybody if you could , -- that be what I say to ,-- I say you would ha ' pay iverybody if you could . " feel , after the manner of content hard - work man whose life have be spend in servitude , that sense of natural fitness in rank which make he master 's downfall a tragedy to he . he be urge , in he slow way , to say something that would express he share in the family sorrow ; and these word , which he have use over and over again to when he want to decline the full payment of he fifty pound out of the child 's money , be the most ready to he tongue . they be just the word to lay the most painful hold on he master 's bewilder mind . " pay everybody ? " he say , with vehement agitation , he face flushing , and he eye light up . " why -- what -- have they make I a _bankrupt ?_ " " oh , father , dear father ! " say , who think that terrible word really represent the fact ; " bear it well , because we love you ; you child will always love you . will pay they all ; he say he will , when he be a man . " she feel she father begin to tremble ; he voice tremble too , as he say , after a few moment : " ay , my little wench , but I shall never live twice o'er . " " but perhaps you will live to see I pay everybody , father , " say , speak with a great effort . " ah , my lad , " say , shak he head slowly , " but what be break can never be whole again ; it 'uld be you do , not mine . " then look up at he , " you be only sixteen ; it be a up - hill fight for you , but you must not throw it at you father ; the raskill have be too many for he . I have give you a good eddication , -- that will start you . " something in he throat half chok the last word ; the flush , which have alarme he child because it have so often precede a recurrence of paralysis , have subsid
subsid , and he face look pale and tremulous . say nothing ; he be still struggle against he inclination to rush away . he father remain quiet a minute or two , but he mind do not seem to be wander again . " have they sell I up , then ? " he say more clamly , as if he be possess simply by the desire to know what have happen . " everything be sell , father ; but we do not know all about the mill and the land yet , " say , anxious to ward off any question lead to the fact that be the purchaser . " you must not be surprised to see the room look very bare downstair , father , " say ; " but there be you chair and the bureau ; _they be not go . " " let we go ; help I down , , -- I will go and see everything , " say , lean on he stick , and stretch out he other hand toward . " ay , sir , " say , as he give he arm to he master , " you will make up you mind t o't a bit better when you have see iverything ; you will get used to't . that be what my mother say about she shortness of ' breath , -- she say she be make friend with i't now , though she fight again ' it sore when it just come on . " run on before to see that all be right in the dreary parlor , where the fire , dull by the frosty sunshine , see part of the general shabbiness . she turn she father 's chair , and push aside the table to make a easy way for he , and then stand with a beat heart to see he enter and look round for the first time . advanc before he , carry the leg - rest , and stand beside on the hearth . of those two young heart 's suffer the most unmixed pain , for , with all she keen susceptibility , yet feel as if the sorrow make larger room for she love to flow in , and give breathing - space to she passionate nature . no true boy feel that ; he would rather go and slay the lion , or perform any round of heroic labors , than endure perpetual appeal to he pity , for evils over which he can make no conquest . pause just inside the door , rest on , and look round he at all the bare place , which for he be fill with the shadows of departed object , -- the daily companion of he life . he faculty seem to be renew they strength from get a footing on this demonstration of the sense . " ah ! " he say slowly , move toward he chair , " they have sell I up -- they have sell I up . " then seat himself , and lay down he stick , while leave the room , he look round again . " they have leave the big , " he say . " it be get everything in ,-- when I be bear and marry ; bring it I , . " the be lay open before he at the fly - leaf , and while he be read with slowly travel eye enter the room , but stand in mute surprise to find she husband down already , and with the great before he . " ah , " he say , look at a spot where he finger rest , " my mother be ; she die when she be forty - seven , -- hers be not a long - liv family ; we be we mother 's child , and I be , -- we shall go to we last bed before long . " he seem to be pause over the record of he sister 's birth and marriage , as if it be suggest new thought to he ; then he suddenly look up at , and say , in a sharp tone of alarm : " they have not come upo ' Moss for the money as I lent he , have they ? " " no , father , " say ; " the note be burnt . " turn he eye on the page again , and presently say : " ah -- -- it be eighteen year since I marry she -- - - " " next , " say , go up to he side and look at the page . she husband fix he eye earnestly on she face . " poor , " he say , " you be a pretty lass then ,-- everybody say so , -- and I use to think you keep you good look rarely . but you be sorely a ; do not you bear I ill - will -- I mean to do well by you -- we promise one another for better or for worse ---- " " but I never think it 'uld be so for worse as this , " say poor , with the strange , scared look that have come over she of late ; " and my poor father give I away -- and to come on so all at once ---- " " oh , mother ! " say , " do not talk in that way . " " no , I know you will not let you poor mother speak -- that be be the way all my life -- you father never mind what I say -- it 'uld have be of ' no use for I to beg and pray -- and it 'uld be no use now , not
not if I be to go down of ' my hand and knee ---- " " do not say so , , " say , whose pride , in these first moment of humiliation , be in abeyance to the sense of some justice in he wife 's reproach . " it there be anything left as I could do to make you amend , I would not say you nay . " " then we might stay here and get a living , and I might keep among my own sister , -- and I be such a good wife to you , and never cross you from week 's end to week 's end -- and they all say so -- they say it 'uld be nothing but right , only you be so turn against . " " mother , " say , severely , " this be not the time to talk about that . " " let she be , " say . " say what you mean , . " " why , now the mill and the land be all 's , and he be get everything in he hand , what be the use o's set you face against he , when he say you may stay here , and speak as fair as can be , and say you may manage the business , and have thirty shilling a - week , and a horse to ride about to market ? and where have we get to put we head ? we must go into one of ' the cottage in the village , -- and I and my child bring down to that , -- and all because you must set you mind against folk till there be no turning you . " have sink back in he chair trembl . " you may do as you like wi' I , , " he say , in a low voice ; " I have be the bringing of you to poverty -- this world 's too many for I -- I be nuy but a bankrupt ; it be no use stand up for anything now . " " , " say , " I do not agree with my mother or my uncle , and I do not think you ought to submit to be under . I get a pound a - week now , and you can find something else to do when you get well . " " say no more , , say no more ; I have have enough for this day . give I a kiss , , and let we bear one another no ill - will ; we shall never be young again -- this world be be too many for I . " add to the family Register that first moment of renunciation and submission be follow by day of violent struggle in the miller 's mind , as the gradual access of bodily strength bring with it increase ability to embrace in one view all the conflict condition under which he find himself . feeble limb easily resign themselves to be tether , and when we be subdue by sickness it seem possible to we to fulfil pledge which the old vigor come back and break . there be time when poor think the fulfilment of he promise to be something quite too hard for human nature ; he have promise she without know what she be go to say , -- she might as well have ask he to carry a ton weight on he back . but again , there be many feeling argue on she side , besides the sense that life have be make hard to she by have marry he . he see a possibility , by much pinching , of save money out of he salary toward pay a second dividend to he creditor , and it would not be easy elsewhere to get a situation such as he could fill . he have lead a easy life , order much and work little , and have no aptitude for any new business . he must perhaps take to day - labor , and he wife must have help from she sister , -- a prospect doubly bitter to he , now they have let all 's precious thing be sell , probably because they like to set she against he , by make she feel that he have bring she to that pass . he listen to they admonitory talk , when they come to urge on he what he be bound to do for poor 's sake , with averted eye , that every now and then flash on they furtively when they back be turn . nothing but the dread of need they help could have make it a easier alternative to take they advice . but the strongest influence of all be the love of the old premise where he have run about when he be a boy , just as have do after he . the Tulliver have live on this spot for generation , and he have sit listen on a low stool on winter evening while he father talk of the old half - timber mill that have be there before the last great flood which damage it so that he grandfather pull it down and build the new one . it be when he get able to walk about and look at all the old object that he feel the strain of he clinging affection for the old home as part of he life , part of himself . he could not bear to think of himself live on any other spot than this , where he know the sound of every gate door , and feel that the shape and color of every roof and weather - stain and broken hillock be good , because
because he grow sense have be feed on they . we instruct vagrancy , which be hardly time to linger by the hedgerow , but run away early to the tropic , and be at home with palm and banyan , -- which be nourished on book of travel and stretch the theatre of its imagination to the ,--can hardly get a dim notion of what a old - fashioned man like felt for this spot , where all he memory centred , and where life seem like a familiar smooth - handle tool that the finger clutch with loving ease . and just now he be live in that freshen memory of the far - off time which come to we in the passive hour of recovery from sickness . " ay , , " he say one afternoon , as he stand look over the orchard gate , " I remember the day they plan those apple- tree . my father be a huge man for planting , -- it be like a merry - make to he to get a cart full of ' young tree ; and I use to stand I ' the cold with he , and follow he about like a dog . " then he turn round , and lean against the gate - post , look at the opposite building . " the old mill 'uld miss I , I think , . there be a story as when the mill change hand , the river 's angry ; I have hear my father say it many a time . there be no telling whether there may not be summat _in_ the story , for this be a puzzling world , and 's get a finger in it -- it be be too many for I , I know . " " ay , sir , " say , with soothe sympathy , " what wi' the rust on the wheat , a ' the firin ' of ' the rick a ' that , as I have see I ' my time , -- thing often look comical ; there be the bacon fat wi' we last pig run away like butter , -- it leave nuy but a scratchin '. " " it be just as if it be yesterday , now , " go on , " when my father begin the malting . I remember , the day they finish the malt - house , I think summat great be to come of it ; for we ' a plum -pudding that day and a bit of a feast , and I say to my mother , -- she be a fine dark - eyed woman , my mother be , -- the little wench ' ull be as like she as two pea . " here put he stick between he leg , and take out he snuff - box , for the greater enjoyment of this anecdote , which drop from he in fragment , as if he every other moment lose narration in vision . " I be a little chap no higher much than my mother 's knee , -- she be sore fond of we child , and I , -- and so I say to she , ' mother ,' I say , ' shall we have plum -pudding _every day because of ' the malt - house ? she use to tell I of ' that till she die day . she be but a young woman when she die , my mother be . but it be forty good year since they finish the malt - house , and it be not many day out of 'em all as I have not look out into the yard there , the first thing in the morning , -- all weathers , from year 's end to year 's end . I should go off my head in a new place . I should be like as if I would lose my way . it be all hard , whichever way I look at it , -- the harness ' ull gall I , but it 'uld be summat to draw along the old road , instead of a new un . " " ay , sir , " say , " you would be a deal better here nor in some new place . I can not abide new place mysen : thing be allays awk'ard , -- narrow - wheel waggin , belike , and the stile all another sort , a ' oat - cake I ' some place , tow 'rt th ' head of ' the , there . it be poor work , change you country -side . " " but I doubt , Luke , they will be for get rid of ' , and make you do with a lad ; and I must help a bit wi' the mill . you will have a worse place . " " Ne 'er mind , sir , " say , " I sha ' not plague mysen . I and be wi' you twenty year , a ' you can not get twenty year wi' whistlin ' for 'em , no more nor you can make the tree grow : you mun wait till send th'ey . I can not abide new victual nor new face , _I_ can not , -- you niver know but what they will gripe you . " the walk be finish in silence after this , for have disburthen himself of thought to a extent that leave he conversational resource quite barren , and have relapse from he recollection into a painful meditation on the choice of hardship before he . notice that he be unusually absent that even at tea ; and afterward he sit lean forward in he chair , look at the ground , move he
he lip , and shake he head from time to time . then he look hard at , who be knitt opposite he , then at , who , as she bend over she sew , be intensely conscious of some drama go forward in she father 's mind . suddenly he take up the poker and break the large coal fiercely . " dear heart , , what can you be think of ? " say he wife , look up in alarm ; " it be very wasteful , break the coal , and we have get hardly any large coal left , and I do not know where the rest be to come from . " " I do not think you be quite so well to - night , be you , father ? " say ; " you seem uneasy . " " why , how be it do not come ? " say , impatiently . " dear heart , be it time ? I must go and get he supper , " say . , lay down she knitting , and leave the room . " it be nigh upon half - past eight , " say . " he will be here soon . go , go and get the big , and open it at the beginning , where everything be set down . and get the pen and ink . " obey , wonder ; but she father give no further order , and only sit listening for 's footfall on the gravel , apparently irritate by the wind , which have risen , and be roaring so as to dry all other sound . there be a strange light in he eye that rather frightene Maggie ; _she begin to wish that would come , too . " there he be , then , " say Tulliver , in a excited way , when the knock come at last . go to open the door , but she mother come out of the kitchen hurriedly , say , " stop a bit , Maggie ; I will open it . " Tulliver have begin to be a little frightened at she boy , but she be jealous of every office other do for he . " you supper 's ready by the kitchen - fire , my boy , " she say , as he take off he hat and coat . " you shall have it by yourself , just as you like , and I will not speak to you . " " I think my father want , mother , " say ; " he must come into the parlor first . " enter with he usual sadden evening face , but he eye fall immediately on the open and the inkstand , and he glance with a look of anxious surprise at he father , who be say ,-- " come , come , you be late ; I want you . " " be there anything the matter , father ? " say . " you sit down , all of you , " say , peremptorily . " and , , sit down here ; I have get something for you to write I ' the . " they all three sit down , look at he . he begin to speak slowly , look first at he wife . " I have make up my mind , , and I will be as good as my word to you . there will be the same grave make for we to lie down in , and we must not be bear one another ill - will . I will stop in the old place , and I will serve under , and I will serve he like a honest man ; there be no Tulliver but what be honest , mind that , , " -- here he voice rose , --" they will have it to throw up against I as I pay a dividend , but it be not my fault ; it be because there be raskill in the world . they have be too many for I , and I must give in . I will put my neck in harness , -- for you have a right to say as I have bring you into trouble , , -- and I will serve he as honest as if he be no raskill ; I be a honest man , though I shall never hold my head up no more . I be a tree as be break -- a tree as be break . " he pause and look on the ground . then suddenly raise he head , he say , in a louder yet deeper tone : " but I will not forgive he ! I know what they say , he never mean I any harm . that be the way prop up the rascal . he be be at the bottom of everything ; but he be a fine gentleman , -- I know , I know . I should not ha ' go to law , they say . but who make it so as there be no arbitratin ' , and no justice to be get ? it signify nothing to he , I know that ; he be one of ' they fine gentlemen as get money by do business for poorer folk , and when he be make beggar of 'em he will give 'em charity . I will not forgive he ! I wish he might be punish with shame till he own son 'uld like to forget he . I wish he may do summat as they would make he work at the treadmill ! but he will not , -- he be too big a raskill to let the law lay hold on he . and you mind
mind this , ,-- you never forgive he neither , if you mean to be my son . there will maybe come a time when you may make he feel ; it will never come to I ; I and get my head under the yoke . now write -- write it I ' the . " " oh , father , what ? " say , sinke down by he knee , pale and trembling . " it be wick to curse and bear malice . " " it be not wick , I tell you , " say she father , fiercely . " it be wick as the raskill should prosper ; it be the 's do . do as I tell you , . . " " what be I to write ? " say , with gloomy submission . " write as you father , , take service under , the man as have help to ruin he , because I would promise my wife to make she what amend I could for she trouble , and because I want to die in th' old place where I be bear and my father be bear . put that I ' the right word -- you know how -- and then write , as I do not forgive Wakem for all that ; and for all I will serve he honest , I wish evil may befall he . write that . " there be a dead silence as 's pen move along the paper ; look scared , and tremble like a leaf . " now let I hear what you have write , " say , read aloud slowly . " now write -- write as you will remember what be do to you father , and you will make he and he feel it , if ever the day come . and sign you name . " " oh no , father , dear father ! " say , almost chok with fear . " you should not make write that . " " be quiet , ! " say . " I _shall_ write it . " the of Humiliation_ chapter I a Variation of to Bossuet Journeying down the on a summer 's day , you have perhaps feel the sunshine make dreary by those ruin villag which stud the bank in certain part of its course , tell how the swift river once rise , like a angry , destroy , swee down the feeble generation whose breath be in they nostril , and make they dwelling a desolation . contrast , you may have think , between the effect produce on we by these dismal remnant of commonplace house , which in they best day be but the sign of a sordid life , belong in all its detail to we own vulgar era , and the effect produce by those ruin on the castle , which have crumble and mellow into such harmony with the green and rocky steep that they seem to have a natural fitness , like the mountain -pine ; nay , even in the day when they be build they must have have this fitness , as if they have be raise by a earth - bear race , who have inherit from they mighty parent a sublime instinct of form . and that be a day of romance ; if those robber - baron be somewhat grim and drunken ogre , they have a certain grandeur of the wild beast in they , -- they be forest boar with tusk , tearing and rending , not the ordinary domestic grunter ; they represent the demon force forever in collision with beauty , virtue , and the gentle use of life ; they make a fine contrast in the picture with the wander minstrel , the soft - lip princess , the pious recluse , and the timid Israelite . that be a time of color , when the sunlight fall on glancing steel and float banner ; a time of adventure and fierce struggle , -- nay , of living , religious art and religious enthusiasm ; for be not cathedral build in those day , and do not great emperor leave they western palace to die before the infidel stronghold in the sacred ? therefore it be that these Rhine castle thrill I with a sense of poetry ; they belong to the grand historic life of humanity , and raise up for I the vision of a echo . but these dead - tint , hollow - eyed , angular skeleton of villag on the oppress I with the feeling that human life -- very much of it -- be a narrow , ugly , grovell existence , which even calamity do not elevate , but rather tend to exhibit in all its bare vulgarity of conception ; and I have a cruel conviction that the life these ruin be the trace of be part of a gross sum of obscure vitality , that will be sweep into the same oblivion with the generation of ant and beaver . perhaps something akin to this oppressive feeling may have weigh upon you in watch this old - fashioned family life on the bank of the , which even sorrow hardly suffice to lift above the level of the tragi-comic . it be a sordid life , you say , this of the Tulliver and Dodson , irradiate by no sublime principle , no romantic vision , no active , self - renounce faith ; move by none of those wild , uncontrollable passion which create the dark shadow of misery and crime ; without that primitive , rough simplicity of want , that hard , submissive , ill - pay toil , that childlike spell - out of what nature have write , which give its poetry to peasant life . here one
one have conventional worldly notion and habits without instruction and without polish , surely the most prosaic form of human life ; proud respectability in a gig of unfashionable build ; worldliness without side - dish . Observe these people narrowly , even when the iron hand of misfortune have shake they from they unquestioning hold on the world , one see little trace of religion , still less of a distinctively christian creed . they belief in the , so far as it manifest itself at all , seem to be rather a pagan kind ; they moral notion , though hold with strong tenacity , seem to have no standard beyond hereditary custom . you could not live among such people ; you be stifle for want of a outlet toward something beautiful , great , or noble ; you be irritate with these dull man and woman , as a kind of population out of keep with the earth on which they live , -- with this rich plain where the great river flow forever onward , and link the small pulse of the old English town with the beating of the world 's mighty heart . a vigorous superstition , that lash it be god or lash its own back , seem to be more congruous with the mystery of the human lot , than the mental condition of these emmet - like Dodsons and Tullivers . I share with you this sense of oppressive narrowness ; but it be necessary that we should feel it , if we care to understand how it act on the life of and , -- how it have act on young nature in many generation , that in the onward tendency of human thing have risen above the mental level of the generation before they , to which they have be nevertheless tie by the strongest fibre of they heart . the suffering , whether of martyr or victim , which belong to every historical advance of mankind , be represent in this way in every town , and by hundred of obscure heart ; and we need not shrink from this comparison of small thing with great ; for do not science tell we that it be highest striving be after the ascertainment of a unity which shall bind the smallest thing with the greatest ? in natural science , I have understood , there be nothing petty to the mind that have a large vision of relation , and to which every single object suggest a vast sum of condition . it be surely the same with the observation of human life . certainly the religious and moral idea of the Dodsons and Tullivers be of too specific a kind to be arrive at deductively , from the statement that they be part of the Protestant population of Great . they theory of life have its core of soundness , as all theories must have on which decent and prosperous family have be rear and have flourish ; but it have the very slightest tincture of theology . if , in the maiden day of the sister , they Bible open more easily at some part than other , it be because of dry tulip - petal , which have be distribute quite impartially , without preference for the historical , devotional , or doctrinal . they religion be of a simple , semi-pagan kind , but there be no heresy in it , -- if heresy properly mean choice , -- for they do not know there be any other religion , except that of chapel - goer , which appear to run in family , like asthma . how _should they know ? the vicar of they pleasant rural parish be not a controversialist , but a good hand at whist , and one who have a joke always ready for a blooming female parishioner . the religion of the Dodson consist in rever whatever be customary and respectable ; it be necessary to be baptize , else one could not be bury in the church - yard , and to take the sacrament before death , as a security against more dimly understood peril ; but it be of equal necessity to have the proper pall - bearer and well - cure ham at one 's funeral , and to leave a unimpeachable will . a Dodson would not be tax with the omission of anything that be become , or that belong to that eternal fitness of thing which be plainly indicate in the practice of the most substantial parishioners , and in the family tradition , -- such as obedience to parent , faithfulness to kindred , industry , rigid honesty , thrift , the thorough scouring of wooden and copper utensil , the hoarding of coin likely to disappear from the currency , the production of first - rate commodity for the market , and the general preference of whatever be home - make . the Dodson be a very proud race , and they pride lay in the utter frustration of all desire to tax they with a breach of traditional duty or propriety . a wholesome pride in many respects , since it identify honor with perfect integrity , thoroughness of work , and faithfulness to admit rule ; and society owe some worthy quality in many of she member to mother of the class , who make they butter and they fromenty well , and would have feel disgraced to make it otherwise . to be honest and poor be never a motto , still less to seem rich though be poor ; rather , the family badge be to be honest and rich , and not only rich , but richer than be suppose . to live respect , and have the proper bearer at you funeral , be a achievement of the end of existence that would
would be entirely nullified if , on the reading of you will , you sank in the opinion of you fellow - man , either by turn out to be poorer than they expect , or by leave you money in a capricious manner , without strict regard to degree of kin . the right thing must always be do toward kindred . the right thing be to correct they severely , if they be other than a credit to the family , but still not to alienate from they the smallest rightful share in the family shoebuckle and other property . a conspicuous quality in the character be its genuineness ; its vice and virtue alike be phase of a proud honest egoism , which have a hearty dislike to whatever make against its own credit and interest , and would be frankly hard of speech to inconveniend " kin , " but would never forsake or ignore they ,-- would not let they want bread , but only require they to eat it with bitter herb . the same sort of traditional belief run in the vein , but it be carry in richer blood , have element of generous imprudence , warm affection , and hot - tempere rashness . 's grandfather have be hear to say that he be descende from one , a wonderfully clever fellow , who have ruin himself . it be likely enough that the clever be a high liver , ride spirit horse , and be very decidedly of he own opinion . on the other hand , nobody have ever hear of a who have ruin himself ; it be not the way of that family . if such be the views of life on which the Dodsons and Tullivers have be rear in the praiseworthy past of and high price , you will infer from what you already know concern the state of society in 's , that there have be no highly modifying influence to act on they in they maturer life . it be still possible , even in that later time of anti-Catholic preaching , for people to hold many pagan idea , and believe themselves good church - people , notwithstand ; so we need hardly feel any surprise at the fact that , through a regular church - goer , record he vindictiveness on the fly - leaf of he . it be not that any harm could be say concern the vicar of that charme rural parish to which belong ; he be a man of excellent family , a irreproachable bachelor , of elegant pursuit , -- have take honor , and hold a fellowship . regard he with dutiful respect , as he do everything else belong to the church - service ; but he consider that church be one thing and common - sense another , and he want nobody to tell _him_ what commonsense be . certain seed which be require to find a nidus for themselves under unfavorable circumstance have be supply by nature with a apparatus of hook , so that they will get a hold on very unreceptive surface . the spiritual seed which have be scatter over have apparently be destitute of any corresponding provision , and have slipp off to the wind again , from a total absence of hook . chapter ii the be Pierce by the there be something sustain in the very agitation that accompany the first shocks of trouble , just as a acute pain be often a stimulus , and produce a excitement which be transient strength . it be in the slow , change life that follow ; in the time when sorrow have become stale , and have no longer a emotive intensity that counteract its pain ; in the time when day follow day in dull , unexpectant sameness , and trial be a dreary routine , -- it be then that despair threaten ; it be then that the peremptory hunger of the soul be feel , and eye and ear be strained after some unlearned secret of we existence , which shall give to endurance the nature of satisfaction . this time of utmost need be come to , with she short span of thirteen year . to the usual precocity of the girl , she add that early experience of struggle , of conflict between the inward impulse and outward fact , which be the lot of every imaginative and passionate nature ; and the year since she hammer the nail into she wooden Fetish among the worm -eaten shelf of the attic have be fill with so eager a life in the triple world of reality , books , and , that be strangely old for she year in everything except in she entire want of that prudence and self - command which be the quality that make manly in the midst of he intellectual boyishness . and now she lot be begin to have a still , sad monotony , which throw she more than ever on she inward self . she father be able to attend to business again , he affair be settle , and he be act as 's manager on the old spot . go to and for every morning and evening , and become more and more silent in the short interval at home ; what be there to say ? one day be like another ; and 's interest in life , drive back and crush on every other side , be concentrate itself into the one channel of ambitious resistance to misfortune . the peculiarity of he father and mother be very irksome to he , now they be laid bare of all the softening accompaniment of a easy , prosperous home ; for have very clear , prosaic eye , not apt to be dim by mist of feeling or imagination . poor ,
, it seem , would never recover she old self , she placid household activity ; how could she ? the object among which she mind have move complacently be all gone , -- all the little hope and scheme and speculation , all the pleasant little care about she treasure which have make the world quite comprehensible to she for a quarter of a century , since she have make she first purchase of the sugar - tong , have be suddenly snatch away from she , and she remain bewilder in this empty life . why that should have happen to she which have not happen to other woman remain a insoluble question by which she express she perpetual ruminat comparison of the past with the present . it be piteous to see the comely woman get thinner and more worn under a bodily as well as mental restlessness , which make she often wander about the empty house after she work be do , until , become alarmed about she , would seek she , and bring she down by tell she how it vex that she be injure she health by never sit down and rest herself . yet amidst this helpless imbecility there be a touching trait of humble , self - devote maternity , which make feel tenderly toward she poor mother amidst all the little wear grief cause by she mental feebleness . she would let do none of the work that be heaviest and most soiling to the hand , and be quite peevish when attempt to relieve she from she grate - brushing and scour : " let it alone , my dear ; you hand 's ull get as hard as hard , " she would say ; " it be you mother 's place to do that . I can not do the sewing -- my eye fail I . " and she would still brush and carefully tend 's hair , which she have become reconcile to , in spite of its refusal to curl , now it be so long and massy . be not she pet child , and , in general , would have be much better if she have be quite different ; yet the womanly heart , so bruise in its small personal desire , find a future to rest on in the life of this young thing , and the mother pleas herself with wear out she own hand to save the hand that have so much more life in they . but the constant presence of she mother 's regretful bewilderment be less painful to Maggie than that of she father 's sullen , incommunicative depression . as long as the paralysis be upon he , and it seem as if he might always be in a childlike condition of dependence , -- as long as he be still only half awaken to he trouble ,-- have feel the strong tide of pitying love almost as a inspiration , a new power , that would make the most difficult life easy for he sake ; but now , instead of childlike dependence , there have come a taciturn , hard concentration of purpose , in strange contrast with he old vehement communicativeness and high spirit ; and this last from day to day , and from week to week , the dull eye never brighten with any eagerness or any joy . it be something cruelly incomprehensible to youthful nature , this sombre sameness in middle - aged and elderly people , whose life have result in disappointment and discontent , to whose face a smile become so strange that the sad line all about the lip and brow seem to take no notice of it , and it hurrie away again for want of a welcome . " why will they not kindle up and be glad sometimes ? " think young elasticity . " it would be so easy if they only like to do it . " and these leae clouds that never part be apt to create impatience even in the filial affection that stream forth in nothing but tenderness and pity in the time of more obvious affliction . linger nowhere away from home ; he hurrie away from market , he refuse all invitations to stay and chat , as in old time , in the house where he call on business . he could not be reconcile with he lot . there be no attitude in which he pride do not feel its bruise ; and in all behavior toward he , whether kind or cold , he detect a allusion to the change in he circumstance . even the day on which come to ride round the land and inquire into the business be not so black to he as those market - day on which he have meet several creditor who have accept a composition from he . to save something toward the repayment of those creditor be the object toward which he be now bend all he thought and effort ; and under the influence of this all - compelling demand of he nature , the somewhat profuse man , who hate to be stint or to stind any one else in he own house , be gradually metamorphose into the keen - ey grudger of morsel . could not economize enough to satisfy he , in they food and firing ; and he would eat nothing himself but what be of the coarsest quality . , though depresse and strongly repell by he father 's sullenness , and the dreariness of home , enter thoroughly into he father 's feeling about pay the creditor ; and the poor lad bring he first quarter 's money , with a delicious sense of achievement , and give it to he father to put into the tin box which hold the savings . the
the little store of sovereign in the tin box seem to be the only sight that bring a faint beam of pleasure into the miller 's eye , -- faint and transient , for it be soon dispell by the thought that the time would be long -- perhaps longer than he life , -- before the narrow savings could remove the hateful incubus of debt . a deficit of more than five hundred pound , with the accumulate interest , see a deep pit to fill with the savings from thirty shilling a - week , even when 's probable savings be to be add . on this one point there be entire community of feeling in the four widely differ being who sit round the die fire of stick , which make a cheap warmth for they on the verge of bedtime . carry the proud integrity of the in she blood , and have be bring up to think that to wrong people of they money , which be another phrase for debt , be a sort of moral pillory ; it would have be wickedness , to she mind , to have run counter to she husband 's desire to " do the right thing , " and retrieve he name . she have a confused , dreamy notion that , if the creditor be all pay , she plate and linen ought to come back to she ; but she have a inbred perception that while people owe money they be unable to pay , they could not rightly call anything they own . she murmure a little that Tulliver so peremptorily refuse to receive anything in repayment from and ; but to all he requirement of household economy she be submissive to the point of denying herself the cheapest indulgence of mere flavor ; she only rebellion be to smuggle into the kitchen something that would make rather a better supper than usual for . these narrow notions about debt , hold by the old fashioned Tulliver , may perhaps excite a smile on the face of many reader in these day of wide commercial view and wide philosophy , accord to which everything right itself without any trouble of ours . the fact that my tradesman be out of pocket by I be to be look at through the serene certainty that somebody else 's tradesman be in pocket by somebody else ; and since there must be bad debt in the world , why , it be mere egoism not to like that we in particular should make they instead of we fellow- citizen . I be tell the history of very simple people , who have never have any illuminating doubt as to personal integrity and honor . under all this grim melancholy and narrow concentration of desire , retain the feeling toward he " little wench " which make she presence a need to he , though it would not suffice to cheer he . she be still the desire of he eyes ; but the sweet spring of fatherly love be now mingle with bitterness , like everything else . when lay down she work at night , it be she habit to get a low stool and sit by she father 's knee , lean she cheek against it . how she wish he would streak she head , or give some sign that he be soothe by the sense that he have a daughter who love he ! but now she get no answer to she little caress , either from she father or from ,-- the two idol of she life . be weary and abstract in the short interval when he be at home , and she father be bitterly preoccupy with the thought that the girl be grow up , be shoot up into a woman ; and how be she to do well in life ? she have a poor chance for marrying , down in the world as they be . and he hate the thought of she marry poorly , as she aunt have do ; _that would be a thing to make he turn in he grave , -- the little wench so pull down by child and toil , as she aunt Moss be . when uncultured mind , confin to a narrow range of personal experience , be under the pressure of continue misfortune , they inward life be apt to become a perpetually repeat round of sad and bitter thought ; the same word , the same scene , be revolv over and over again , the same mood accompany they ; the end of the year find they as much what they be at the beginning as if they be machine set to a recurrent series of movement . the sameness of the day be break by few visitor . Uncles and aunt pay only short visit now ; of course , they could not stay to meal , and the constraint cause by 's savage silence , which seem to add to the hollow resonance of the bare , uncarpeted room when the aunt be talk , heighten the unpleasantness of these family visit on all side , and tend to make they rare . as for other acquaintance , there be a chill air surround those who be down in the world , and people be glad to get away from they , as from a cold room ; human being , mere man and woman , without furniture , without anything to offer you , who have cease to count as anybody , present a embarrassing negation of reason for wishing to see they , or of subject on which to converse with they . at that distant day , there be a dreary isolation in the civilized christian society of these realm for family that have drop below they original level , unless
unless they belong to a sectarian church , which get some warmth of brotherhood by walling in the sacred fire . iii a voice from the one afternoon , when the chestnut be come into flower , have bring she chair outside the front door , and be seat there with a book on she knee . she dark eye have wander from the book , but they do not seem to be enjoy the sunshine which pierce the screen of jasmine on the project porch at she right , and throw leafy shadow on she pale round cheek ; they see rather to be search for something that be not disclose by the sunshine . it have be a more miserable day than usual ; she father , after a visit of 's have have a paroxysm of rage , in which for some trifling fault he have beat the boy who serve in the mill . once before , since he illness , he have have a similar paroxysm , in which he have beat he horse , and the scene have leave a lasting terror in 's mind . the thought have risen , that some time or other he might beat she mother if she happen to speak in she feeble way at the wrong moment . the keenest of all dread with she be lest she father should add to he present misfortune the wretchedness of do something irretrievably disgraceful . the batter school - book of 's which she hold on she knee could give she no fortitude under the pressure of that dread ; and again and again she eye have fill with tear , as they wander vaguly , see neither the chestnut - tree , nor the distant horizon , but only future scene of home - sorrow . suddenly she be rouse by the sound of the opening gate and of footstep on the gravel . it be not who be enter , but a man in a sealskin cap and a blue plush waistcoat , carry a pack on he back , and follow closely by a bullterrier of brindled coat and defiant aspect . " oh , , it be you ! " say , start up with a smile of pleased recognition , for there have be no abundance of kind act to efface the recollection of 's generosity ; " I be so glad to see you . " " thank you , , " say , lift he cap and show a delighted face , but immediately relieive himself of some accompany embarrassment by look down at he dog , and say in a tone of disgust , " get out wi' you , you thunderin ' sawney ! " " my brother be not at home yet , , " say ; " he be always at be in the daytime . " " well , , " say , " I should be glad to see , but that be not just what I be come for , -- look here ! " be in the act of deposite he pack on the door - step , and with it a row of small book fasten together with string . apparently , however , they be not the object to which he wish to call 's attention , but rather something which he have carry under he arm , wrap in a red handkerchief . " see here ! " he say again , lay the red parcel on the other and unfold it ; " you will not think I be a -makin ' too free , , I hope , but I light on these book , and I think they might make up to you a bit for they as you have lose ; for I hear you speak o' picturs , -- a ' as for picturs , _look_ here ! " the opening of the red handkerchief have disclose a superannuated " " and six or seven number of a " , " in royal octavo ; and the emphatic request to look refer to a portrait of the in all the majesty of he depressed cranium and voluminous neckcloth . " there be all sort of ' genelmen here , " go on , turn over the leaf with some excitement , " wus ' all sort of ' none , -- a ' some bald a ' some wig wig ,-- Parlament genelman , I reckon . a ' here , " he add , open the " , " --" _here 's lady for you , some wig curly hair and some wig smooth , a ' some a - smile wi' they head o' one side , a ' some as if they be goin ' to cry ,-- look here , -- a -sittin ' on the ground out of ' door , dress like the ladie I 'n see get out of ' the carriage at the ball in there . my eyes ! I wonder what the chap wear as go a - courtin ' 'em ! I set up till the clock be go twelve last night , a - lookin ' at th'ey ,-- I do , -- till they star at I out of ' the picturs as if they would know when I speak to th'ey . but , lor ! I should not know what to say to th'ey . they will be more fittin ' company for you , ; and the man at the book - stall , he say they ban iverything for picturs ; he say they be a fust - rate article . " " and you have buy they for I , ? " say , deeply touch by this simple kindness . " how very , very good of you ! but I be afraid you give a great deal
deal of money for they . " " not I ! " say . " I would ha ' hageve three time the money if they will make up to you a bit for they as be sell away from you , . for I and niver forget how you look when you fret about the book bein's go ; it be stuck by I as if it be a pictur hingin ' before I . a ' when I see would the book open upo ' the stall , wi' the lady lookin ' out of it wi's eye a bit like you 'n when you be frettin ' , -- you will excuse my takin ' the liberty , ,-- I think I would make free to buy it for you , a ' then I buy the book full of ' genelman to match ; an' then " -- here take up the small string packet of book --" I think you might like a bit more print as well as the picturs , an' I get these for a sayso , -- they be cram -full of ' print , an' I think they would do no harm comin ' along wi' these bettermost book . An' I hope you will not say I nay , a ' tell I as you will not have 'em , like do wi' the suvreign . " " no , indeed , , " say , " I be very thankful to you for think of I , and be so good to I and . I do not think any one ever do such a kind thing for I before . I have not many friend who care for I . " " haHeve a dog , !-- they be better friend nor any , " say , lay down he pack again , which he have take up with the intention of hurrie away ; for he feel considerable shyness in talk to a young lass like , though , as he usually say of himself , " he tongue overrin he " when he begin to speak . " I can not give you , ' cause he would break he heart to go away from I -- eh , , what do you say , you riff - raff ? " ( Mumps decline to express himself more diffusely than by a single affirmative movement of he tail . ) " but I would get you a pup , , a ' welcome . " " no , thank you , . we have a yard dog , and I may not keep a dog of my own . " " Eh , that be a pity ; else there be a pup ,-- if you do not mind about it not be thoroughbreed ; its mother act in the punch show , -- a uncommon sensible bitch ; she mean more sense wi' she bark nor half the chap can put into they talk from breakfast to sundown . there be one chap carry pots ,-- a poor , low trade as any on the road , -- he say , ' why 's nuy but a mongrel ; there be nuy to look at in she . ' but I say to he , ' why , what be you yoursen but a mongrel ? there be not much pickin ' o' _your_ feyther a ' mother , to look at you . ' not but I like a bit of ' breed myself , but I can not abide to see one cur grinnin ' at another . I wish you good evenin ' , , " say , abruptly take up he pack again , under the consciousness that he tongue be act in a undisciplined manner . " will not you come in the evening some time , and see my brother , ? " say . " yes , , thank you -- another time . you will give my duty to he , if you please . Eh , he be a fine grow chap , be ; he take to growin ' I ' the leg , a ' _i_ do not . " the pack be down aagain , now , the hook of the stick have somehow go wrong . " you do not call a cur , I suppose ? " say , divine that any interest she show in would be gratify to he master . " no , , a fine way off that , " say , with pity smile ; " be as fine a cross as you will see anywhere along the Floss , an' I and be up it wi' the barge time enow . why , the gentry stop to look at he ; but you will not catch a - look at the gentry much ,-- he mind he own business , he do . " the expression of 's face , which seem to be tolerate the superfluous existence of object in general , be strongly confirmatory of this high praise . " he look dreadfully surly , " say . " would he let I pat he ? " " ay , that would he , and thank you . he know he company , do . he be not a dog as ' ull be catch wi's gingerbread ; he would smell a thief a good deal stronger nor the gingerbread , he would . Lor , I talk to he by th 's hour together , when I be walk I ' lone place , and if I and do a bit of ' mischief , I allays tell he . I and get no secret but what know th'ey . he know about my big thumb , he do . " " you big thumb -- what be that , ? "
" say . " that be what it be , , " say , quickly , exhibit a singularly broad specimen of that difference between the man and the monkey . " it tell I ' measure out the flannel , you see . I carry flannel , ' cause it be light for my pack , an' it be dear stuff , you see , so a big thumb tell . I clap my thumb at the end of ' the yard and cut of ' the hither side of it , and the old woman be not up to't . " " but , " say , look serious , " that be cheat ; I do not like to hear you say that . " " do not you , ? " say regretfully . " then I be sorry I say it . but I be so use to talk to , a ' he do not mind a bit of ' cheate , when it be they skinflint woman , as haggle a ' haggle , ang 'uld like to get they flannel for nothing , a ' 'uld niver ask theirselves how I get my dinner out o not . I niver cheat anybody as do not want to cheat I , , -- lor , I be a honest chap , I be ; only I must haheve a bit of ' sport , a ' now I do not go wi ' thg ferret , I and get no varmint to come over but they haggl woman . I wish you good evening , . " " good - by , . thank you very much for bring I the book . and come again to see . " " yes , , " say , move on a few step ; then turn half round he say , " I will leave off that trick wi' my big thumb , if you do not think well on I for it , ; but it 'uld be a pity , it would . I could not find another trick so good , -- a ' what 'uld be the use o' havin ' a big thumb ? it might as well ha ' be narrow . " , thus exalt into 's exalting , laugh in spite of herself ; at which she worshipper 's blue eye twinkle too , and under these favoring auspices he touch he cap and walk away . the day of chivalry be not go , notwithstand 's grand dirge over they ; they live still in that far - off worship pay by many a youth and man to the woman of whom he never dream that he shall touch so much as she little finger or the hem of she robe . , with the pack on he back , have as respectful a adoration for this dark - eyed maiden as if he have be a knight in armor call aloud on she name as he prick on to the fight . that gleam of merriment soon die away from 's face , and perhaps only make the return gloom deeper by contrast . she be too dispirit even to like answer question about 's present of book , and she carry they away to she bedroom , lay they down there and seate herself on she one stool , without care to look at they just yet . she lean she cheek against the window - frame , and think that the light - hear have a lot much happier than hers . 's sense of loneliness , and utter privation of joy , have deepen with the brightness of advancing spring . all the favorite outdoor nook about home , which seem to have do they part with she parent in nurturing and cherish she , be now mix up with the home - sadness , and gather no smile from the sunshine . every affection , every delight the poor child have have , be like a ach nerve to she . there be no music for she any more , -- no piano , no harmonize voice , no delicious string instrument , with they passionate cry of imprison spirit send a strange vibration through she frame . and of all she school - life there be nothing leave she now but she little collection of school - book , which she turn over with a sickening sense that she know they all , and they be all barren of comfort . even at school she have often wished for book with _more_ in they ; everything she learn there seem like the end of long thread that snap immediately . and now -- without the indirect charm of school - emulation -- be mere bran ; so be the hard , dry question on ; there be no flavor in they , no strength . sometimes think she could have be contente with absorb fancie ; if she could have have all 's novel and all 's poem !-- then , perhaps , she might have find happiness enough to dull she sensibility to she actual daily life . and yet they be hardly what she want . she could make dream - worlds of she own , but no dream - world would satisfy she now . she want some explanation of this hard , real life , -- the unhappy - look father , seat at the dull breakfast - table ; the childish , bewilder mother ; the little sordid task that fill the hour , or the more oppressive emptiness of weary , joyless leisure ; the need of some tender , demonstrative love ; the cruel sense that do not mind what she think or feel , and that they be no longer playfellow together ; the privation of all pleasant thing that have come
come to _her_ more than to other , -- she want some key that would enable she to understand , and in understanding , to endure , the heavy weight that have fall on she young heart . if she have be teach " real learning and wisdom , such as great man knew , " she think she should have hold the secret of life ; if she have only book , that she might learn for herself what wise man kknow ! Saints and martyrs have never interested so much as sage and poets . she know little of saint and martyr , and have gather , as a general result of she teaching , that they be a temporary provision against the spread of , and have all die at . in one of these meditation it occur to she that she have forget 's school - book , which have be send home in he trunk . but she find the stock unaccountably shrink down to the few old one which have be well thumb , -- the and , a , a torn , the well - wear , 's logic , and the exasperat . , , , and would surely be a considerable step in masculine wisdom , -- in that knowledge which make man contente , and even glad to live . not that the yearning for effectual wisdom be quite unmixed ; a certain mirage would now and then rise on the desert of the future , in which she seem to see herself honore for she surprising attainment . and so the poor child , with she soul 's hunger and she illusion of self - flattery , begin to nibble at this thick - rinded fruit of the tree of knowledge , fill she vacant hour with , geometry , and the form of the syllogism , and feel a gleam of triumph now and then that she understanding be quite equal to these peculiarly masculine study . for a week or two she go on resolutely enough , though with a occasional sinking of heart , as if she have set out toward the promise Land alone , and find it a thirsty , trackless , uncertain journey . in the severity of she early resolution , she would take out into the field , and then look off she book toward the sky , where the lark be twinkl , or to the reed and bushes by the river , from which the waterfowl rust forth on its anxious , awkward flight , -- with a start sense that the relation between and this living world be extremely remote for she . the discouragement deepen as the day go on , and the eager heart gain faster and faster on the patient mind . somehow , when she sit at the window with she book , she eye _would fix themselves blankly on the outdoor sunshine ; then they would fill with tear , and sometimes , if she mother be not in the room , the study would all end in sobbing . she rebel against she lot , she faint under its loneliness , and fit even of anger and hatre toward she father and mother , who be so unlike what she would have they to be ; toward , who check she , and meet she think or feel always by some thwart difference , -- would flow out over she affections and conscience like a lava stream , and frighten she with a sense that it be not difficult for she to become a demon . then she brain would be busy with wild romance of a flight from home in search of something less sordid and dreary ; she would go to some great man -- , perhaps -- and tell he how wretch and how clever she be , and he would surely do something for she . but , in the middle of she vision , she father would perhaps enter the room for the evening , and , surprise that she sit still without notice he , would say complainingly , " come , be I to fetch my slipper myself ? " the voice pierce through like a sword ; there be another sadness besides she own , and she have be think of turn she back on it and forsak it . this afternoon , the sight of 's cheerful freckled face have give she discontent a new direction . she think it be part of the hardship of she life that there be laid upon she the burthan of larger wants than other seem to feel , -- that she have to endure this wide , hopeless yearning for that something , whatever it be , that be greatest and best on this earth . she wish she could have be like , with he easily satisfied ignorance , or like , who have something to do on which he could fix he mind with a steady purpose , and disregard everything else . poor child ! as she lean she head against the window - frame , with she hand clasp tighter and tighter , and she foot beat the ground , she be as lonely in she trouble as if she have be the only gril in the civilized world of that day who have come out of she school - life with a soul untrained for inevitable struggle , with no other part of she inherit share in the hard - win treasure of think which generation of painful toil have lay up for the race of man , than shred and patch of feeble literature and false history , with much futile information about and other king of doubtful example , but unhappily quite without that knowledge of the irreversible law within and without she , which , govern the habit ,
, become morality , and develop the feeling of submission and dependence , become religion , -- as lonely in she trouble as if every other girl besides herself have be cherish and watch over by elder mind , not forgetful of they own early time , when need be keen and impulse strong . at last 's eye glance down on the book that lay on the window - shelf , and she half forsook she reverie to turn over listlessly the leave of the " , " but she soon push this aside to examine the little row of book tie together with string . " Beauty of the Spectator , " " , " " economy of human life , " " 's , " -- she know the sort of matter that be inside all these ; the " , " -- that seem to be a hymnbook , and she lay it down again ; but a ?_--to name have come across she in she reading , and she feel the satisfaction , which every one know , of get some idea to attach to a name that stray solitary in the memory . she take up the little , old , clumsy book with some curiosity ; it have the corner turn down in many place , and some hand , now forever quiet , have make at certain passage strong pen-and - ink mark , long since browne by time . turn from leaf to leaf , and read where the quiet hand point : " know that the love of thyself doth hurt thee more than anything in the world .... if thou seekest this or that , and wouldst be here or there to enjoy thy own will and pleasure , thou shal never be quiet nor free from care ; for in everything somewhat will be want , and in every place there will be some that will cross thee .... both above and below , which way soever thout dost turn thee , everywhere thou shalt find the ; and everywhere of necessity thou must have patience , if thou will have inward peace , and enjoy a everlasting crown .... if thou desirest to mount unto this height , thou must set out courageously , and lay the axe to the root , that thou mayest pluck up and destroy that hide inordinate inclination to thyself , and unto all private and earthly good . on this sin , that a man inordinately loveth himself , almost all dependeth , whatsoever be thoroughly to be overcome ; which evil be once overcome and subdue , there will presently ensue great peace and tranquillity .... it be but little thou sufferest in comparison of they that have suffer so much , be so strongly temp , so grievously afflict , so many way try and exercise . thou oughtest therefore to call to mind the more heavy suffering of other , that thou mayest the easier bear thy little adversity . and if they seem not little unto thee , beware lest thy impatience be the cause thereon .... bless be those ear that receive the whisper of the divine voice , and listen not to the whispering of the world . bless be those ear which hearke not unto the voice which soundeth outwardly , but unto the Truth , which teacheth inwardly . " a strange thrill of awe pass through while she read , as if she have be wake in the night by a strain of solemn music , tell of being whose soul have be astir while hers be in stupor . she go on from one brown mark to another , where the quiet hand seem to point , hardly conscious that she be read , see rather to listen while a low voice say ; " why dost thou here gaze about , since this be not the place of thy rest ? in heaven ought to be thy dwell , and all earthly thing be to be look on as they forward thy journey thither . all thing pass away , and thou together with they . beware thou cleavest not unto they , lest thou be entangle and perish .... if a man should give all he substance , yet it be as nothing . and if he should do great penance , yet be they but little . and if he should attain to all knowledge , he be yet far off . and if he should be of great virtue , and very fervent devotion , yet be there much want ; to wit , one thing , which be most necessary for he . what be that ? that have leave all , he leave himself , and go wholly out of himself , and retain nothing of self - love .... I have often say unto thee , and now again I say the same , Forsake thyself , resign thyself , and thou shalt enjoy much inward peace .... then shall all vain imagination , evil perturbation , and superfluous care fly away ; then shall immoderate fear leave thee , and inordinate love shall die . " draw a long breath and push she heavy hair back , as if to see a sudden vision more clearly . here , then , be a secret of life that would enable she to renounce all other secret ; here be a sublime height to be reache without the help of outward thing ; here be insight , and strength , and conquest , to be win by means entirely within she own soul , where a supreme teacher be wait to be hear . it flash through she like the suddenly apprehend solution of a problem , that all the misery of she young life have come from fix she heart on she own pleasure ,
, as if that be the central necessity of the universe ; and for the first time she see the possibility of shift the position from which she look at the gratification of she own desire , -- of take she stand out of herself , and look at she own life as a insignificant part of a divinely guide whole . she read on and on in the old book , devour eagerly the dialogue with the invisible , the pattern of sorrow , the source of all strength ; return to it after she have be call away , and read till the sun go down behind the willows . with all the hurry of a imagination that could never rest in the present , she sit in the deepening twilight form plan of self -humiliation and entire devotedness ; and in the ardor of first discovery , renunciation seem to she the entrance into that satisfaction which she have so long be crave in vain . she have not perceive -- how could she until she have liv longer ?--to inmost truth of the old monk 's out - pouring , that renunciation remain sorrow , though a sorrow borne willingly . be still pante for happiness , and be in ecstasy because she have find the key to it . she know nothing of doctrine and system , of mysticism or quietism ; but this voice out of the far - off middle age be the direct communication of a human soul 's belief and experience , and come to as a unquestioned message . I suppose that be the reason why the small old - fashioned book , for which you need only pay sixpence at a book - stall , work miracle to this day , turn bitter water into sweetness ; while expensive sermon and treatise , newly issue , leave all thing as they be before . it be write down by a hand that wait for the heart 's prompt ; it be the chronicle of a solitary , hide anguish , struggle , trust , and triumph , not write on velvet cushion to teach endurance to those who be tread with bleed foot on the stone . and so it remain to all time a last record of human need and human consolation ; the voice of a brother who , age ago , feel and suffer and renounce , -- in the cloister , perhaps , with serge gown and tonsure head , with much chanting and long fast , and with a fashion of speech different from ours , -- but under the same silent far - off heaven , and with the same passionate desire , the same striving , the same failure , the same weariness . in write the history of unfashionable family , one be apt to fall into a tone of emphasis which be very far from be the tone of good society , where principle and belief be not only of a extremely moderate kind , but be always presuppose , no subject be eligible but such as can be touch with a light and graceful irony . but then good society have its claret and its velvet carpet , its dinner - engagement six week deep , it be opera and its faery ball - room ; ride off its _ennui on thoroughbred horsis ; lounge at the club ; have to keep clear of crinoline vortice ; get its science do by , and its religion by the superior clergy who be to be meet in the best house , -- how should it have time or need for belief and emphasis ? but good society , float on gossamer wing of light irony , be of very expensive production ; require nothing less than a wide and arduous national life condense in unfragrant deafening factory , cramp itself in mine , sweate at furnace , grind , hammer , weave under more or less oppression of carbonic acid , or else , spread over sheepwalk , and scatter in lonely house and hut on the clayey or chalky corn -land , where the rainy day look dreary . this wide national life be base entirely on emphasis , -- the emphasis of want , which urge it into all the activity necessary for the maintenance of good society and light irony ; it spend it be heavy year often in a chill , uncarpeted fashion , amidst family discord unsoften by long corridor . under such circumstance , there be many among its myriad of soul who have absolutely need a emphatic belief , life in this unpleasurable shape demand some solution even to unspeculative mind , -- just as you inquire into the stuffing of you couch when anything gall you there , whereas eider - down and perfect french spring excite no question . some have a emphatic belief in alcohol , and seek they _ekstasis_ or outside standing - ground in gin ; but the rest require something that good society call " enthusiasm , " something that will present motives in a entire absence of high prize ; something that will give patience and feed human love when the limb ache with weariness , and human look be hard upon we ; something , clearly , that lie outside personal desire , that include resignation for ourselves and active love for what be not ourselves . now and then that sort of enthusiasm find a far -echoing voice that come from a experience spring out of the deepest need ; and it be by be bring within the long lingering vibration of such a voice that , with she girl 's face and unnoted sorrow , find a effort and a hope that help she through year of loneliness , make out a faith for herself without the aid of establish authority and appoint guide
guide ; for they be not at hand , and she need be press . from what you know of she , you will not be surprised that she throw some exaggeration and wilfulness , some pride and impetuosity , even into she self - renunciation ; she own life be still a drama for she , in which she demand of herself that she part should be play with intensity . and so it come to pass that she often lose the spirit of humility by be excessive in the outward act ; she often strove after too high a flight , and come down with she poor little half - fledge wing dabble in the mud . for example , she not only determined to work at plain sewing , that she might contribute something toward the fund in the tin box , but she go , in the first instance , in she zeal of self - mortification , to ask for it at a linen shop in . 's , instead of get it in a more quiet and indirect way ; and could see nothing but what be entirely wrong and unkind , nay , persecut , in 's reproof of she for this unnecessary act . " I do not like _my_ sister to do such thing , " say , " _I 'll_ take care that the debt be pay , without you lower yourself in that way . " surely there be some tenderness and bravery mingl with the worldliness and self - assertion of that little speech ; but hold it as dross , overlook the grains of gold , and take 's rebuke as one of she outward crossis . be very hard to she , she use to think , in she long night - watchings , -- to she who have always love he so ; and then she strove to be contente with that hardness , and to require nothing . that be the path we all like when we set out on we abandonment of egoism , -- the path of martyrdom and endurance , where the palm - branch grow , rather than the steep highway of tolerance , just allowance , and self - blame , where there be no leafy honor to be gather and wear . the old book , , , and -- that wrinkle fruit of the tree of knowledge -- have be all laid by ; for have turn she back on the vain ambition to share the thought of the wise . in she first ardor she fling away the book with a sort of triumph that she have risen above the need of they ; and if they have be she own , she would have burn they , believe that she would never repent . she read so eagerly and constantly in she three book , the , a , and the " " ( no longer reject as a " hymn - book " ) , that they fill she mind with a continual stream of rhythmic memory ; and she be too ardently learn to see all nature and life in the light of she new faith , to need any other material for she mind to work on , as she sit with she well - ply needle , make shirt and other complicated stitching , falsely call " plain , " -- by no means plain to , since wristband and sleeve and the like have a capability of be sew in wrong side outward in moment of mental wandering . hange diligently over she sew , be a sight any one might have be pleased to look at . that new inward life of hers , notwithstand some volcanic upheaving of imprison passion , yet shine out in she face with a tender soft light that mingl itself as add loveliness with the gradually enrich color and outline of she blossoming youth . she mother feel the change in she with a sort of puzzled wonder that should be " grow up so good " ; it be amazing that this once " contrairy " child be become so submissive , so backward to assert she own will . use to look up from she work and find she mother 's eye fix upon she ; they be watch and wait for the large young glance , as if she elder frame get some needful warmth from it . the mother be get fond of she tall , brown girl , -- the only bit of furniture now on which she could bestow she anxiety and pride ; and , in spite of she own ascetic wish to have no personal adornment , be obliged to give way to she mother about she hair , and submit to have the abundant black lock plait into a coronet on the summit of she head , after the pitiable fashion of those antiquated time . " let you mother have that bit of ' pleasure , my dear , " say ; " I would trouble enough with you hair once . " so Maggie , glad of anything that would soothe she mother , and cheer they long day together , consent to the vain decoration , and show a queenly head above she old frock , steadily refuse , however , to look at herself in the glass . like to call the father 's attention to 's hair and other unexpected virtue , but he have a brusk reply to give . " I know well enough what she would be , before now ,-- it be nothing new to I . but it be a pity she be not make of ' commoner stuff ; she will be throw away , I doubt , -- there will be nobody to marry she as be fit for she . " and
and 's graces of mind and body feed he gloom . he sit patiently enough while she read he a chapter , or say something timidly when they be alone together about trouble be turn into a blessing . he take it all as part of he daughter 's goodness , which make he misfortune the sadder to he because they damage she chance in life . in a mind charge with a eager purpose and a unsatisfied vindictiveness , there be no room for new feeling ; do not want spiritual consolation -- he want to shake off the degradation of debt , and to have he revenge . wheat and Tares_ chapter I in the the family sit - room be a long room with a window at each end ; one look toward the croft and along the to the bank of the , the other into the mill - yard . be sit with she work against the latter window when she see enter the yard , as usual , on he fine black horse ; but not alone , as usual . some one be with he , -- a figure in a cloak , on a handsome pony . have hardly time to feel that it be come back , before they be in front of the window , and he be raise he hat to she ; while he father , catch the movement by a side - glance , look sharply round at they both . hurry away from the window and carry she work upstairs ; for sometimes come in and inspect the book , and feel that the meeting with would be rob of all pleasure in the presence of the two fathers . some day , perhaps , she could see he when they could just shake hand , and she could tell he that she remember he goodness to , and the thing he have say to she in the old day , though they could never be friend any more . it be not at all agitat to to see again ; she retain she childish gratitude and pity toward he , and remember he cleverness ; and in the early week of she loneliness she have continually recal the image of he among the people who have be kind to she in life , often wish she have he for a brother and a teacher , as they have fancie it might have be , in they talk together . but that sort of wishing have be banish along with other dream that savor of seek she own will ; and she think , besides , that might be alte by he life abroad , -- he might have become worldly , and really not care about she say anything to he now . and yet he face be wonderfully little altered , -- it be only a larger , more manly copy of the pale , small - featured boy 's face , with the gray eye , and the boyish waive brown hair ; there be the old deformity to awake the old pity ; and after all she meditations , feel that she really _should like to say a few word to he . he might still be melancholy , as he always use to be , and like she to look at he kindly . she wonder if he remember how he use to like she eye ; with that think glance toward the square look - glass which be condemn to hang with it be face toward the wall , and she half start from she seat to reach it down ; but she check herself and snatch up she work , try to repress the rise wish by force she memory to recall snatch of hymn , until she see and he father return along the road , and she could go down again . it be far on in now , and be inclin to lengthen the daily walk which be she one indulgence ; but this day and the follow she be so busy with work which must be finish that she never go beyond the gate , and satisfy she need of the open air by sit out of door . one of she frequent walks , when she be not oblige to go to . 's , be to a spot that lay beyond what be call the " , " -- a insignificant rise of ground crown by tree , lie along the side of the road which run by the gate of . Insignificant I call it , because in height it be hardly more than a bank ; but there may come moment when make a mere bank a means toward a fateful result ; and that be why I ask you to imagine this high bank crown with tree , make a uneven wall for some quarter of a mile along the left side of and the pleasant field behind it , bounde by the murmuring Ripple . just where this line of bank slop down again to the level , a by - road turn off and lead to the other side of the rise , where it be break into very capricious hollow and mounds by the working of a exhausted stone - quarry , so long exhaust that both mounds and hollow be now clothed with bramble and tree , and here and there by a stretch of grass which a few sheep keep close - nibbled . in she childish day hold this place , call the , in very great awe , and need all she confidence in 's bravery to reconcile she to a excursion thither ,-- vision of robber and fierce animal haunt every hollow . but now it have the charm for she which any broken ground , any mimic rock and ravine , have
have for the eye that rest habitually on the level ; especially in summer , when she could sit on a grassy hollow under the shadow of a branching ash , stoop aslant from the steep above she , and listen to the hum of insect , like tiniest bell on the garment of Silence , or see the sunlight pierce the distant bough , as if to chase and drive home the truant heavenly blue of the wild hyacinth . in this time , too , the dog - rose be in they glory , and that be a additional reason why should direct she walk to the , rather than to any other spot , on the first day she be free to wander at she will , -- a pleasure she love so well , that sometimes , in she ardor of renunciation , she think she ought to deny herself the frequent indulgence in it . you may see she now , as she walk down the favorite turn and enter the Deeps by a narrow path through a group of Scotch fir , she tall figure and old lavender gow visible through a hereditary black silk shawl of some wide - mesh net - like material ; and now she be sure of be unseen she take off she bonnet and tie it over she arm . one would certainly suppose she to be farther on in life than she seventeenth year -- perhaps because of the slow resign sadness of the glance from which all search and unrest seem to have depart ; perhaps because she broad - chest figure have the mould of early womanhood . youth and health have withstood well the involuntary and voluntary hardship of she lot , and the night in which she have lain on the hard floor for a penance have leave no obvious trace ; the eye be liquid , the brown cheek be firm and round , the full lip be red . with she dark coloring and jet cry surmount she tall figure , she seem to have a sort of kinship with the grand Scotch fir , at which she be look up as if she love they well . yet one have a sense of uneasiness in look at she ,-- a sense of opposing element , of which a fierce collision be imminent ; surely there be a hushed expression , such as one often see in older face under borderless cap , out of keep with the resistant youth , which one expect to flash out in a sudden , passionate glance , that will dissipate all the quietude , like a damp fire leap out again when all seem safe . but herself be not uneasy at this moment . she be clamly enjoy the free air , while she look up at the old fir - tree , and think that those break end of branch be the record of past storms , which have only make the red stem soar higher . but while she eye be still turn upward , she become conscious of a move shadow cast by the evening sun on the grassy path before she , and look down with a start gesture to see , who first raise he hat , and then , blush deeply , come forward to she and put out he hand . , too , colore with surprise , which soon give way to pleasure . she put out she hand and look down at the deformed figure before she with frank eye , fill for the moment with nothing but the memory of she child 's feeling , -- a memory that be always strong in she . she be the first to speak . " you start I , " she say , smile faintly ; " I never meet any one here . how come you to be walk here ? do you come to meet _me ?_ " it be impossible not to perceive that feel herself a child again . " yes , I do , " say , still embarrasse ; " I wish to see you very much . I watch a long while yesterday on the bank near you house to see if you would come out , but you never come . then I watch again to - day , and when I see the way you take , I keep you in sight and come down the bank , behind there . I hope you will not be displease with I . " " no , " say , with simple seriousness , walk on as if she mean to accompany she , " I be very glad you come , for I wish very much to have a opportunity of speak to you . I have never forget how good you be long ago to , and I too ; but I be not sure that you would remember we so well . and I have have a great deal of trouble since then , and I think _that make one think more of what happen before the trouble come . " " I can not believe that you have think of I so much as I have think of you , " say , timidly . " do you know , when I be away , I make a picture of you as you look that morning in the study when you say you would not forget I . " draw a large miniature - case from he pocket , and open it . see she old self lean on a table , with she black lock hang down behind she ear , look into space , with strange , dreamy eye . it be a water - color sketch , of real merit as a portrait . " oh dear , " say , smile
smile , and flush with pleasure , " what a queer little girl I be ! I remember myself with my hair in that way , in that pink frock . I really _was_ like a gypsy . I dare say I be now , " she add , after a little pause ; " be I like what you expect I to be ? " the word might have be those of a coquette , but the full , bright glance turn on be not that of a coquette . she really do hope he like she face as it be now , but it be simply the rising again of she innate delight in admiration and love . meet she eye and look at she in silence for a long moment , before he say quietly , " no , . " the light die out a little from 's face , and there be a slight trembling of the lip . she eyelid fall lower , but she do not turn away she head , and continue to look at she . then he say slowly : " you be very much more beautiful than I think you would be . " " be I ? " say , the pleasure return in a deeper flush . she turn she face away from he and take some step , look straight before she in silence , as if she be adjust she consciousness to this new idea . girl be so accustom to think of dress as the main ground of vanity , that , in abstain from the look - glass , have think more of abandon all care for adornment than of renounce the contemplation of she face . compare herself with elegant , wealthy young lady , it have not occur to she that she could produce any effect with she person . seem to like the silence well . he walk by she side , watch she face , as if that sight leave no room for any other wish . they have pass from among the fir - tree , and have now come to a green hollow almost surround by a amphitheatre of the pale pink dog - rose . but as the light about they have brighten , 's face have lose it be glow . she stand still when they be in the hollow , and look at again , she say in a serious , sad voice : " I wish we could have be friend , -- I mean , if it would have be good and right for we . but that be the trial I have to bear in everything ; I may not keep anything I use to love when I be little . the old boonks go ; and be different , and my father . it be like death . I must part with everything I care for when I be a child . and I must part with you ; we must never take any notice of each other again . that be what I want to speak to you for . I want to let you know that and I can not do as we like about such thing , and that if I behave as if I have forget all about you , it be not out of envy or pride -- or -- or any bad feeling . " speak with more and more sorrowful gentleness as she go on , and she eye begin to fill with tear . the deepening expression of pain on 's face give he a stronger resemblance to he boyish self , and make the deformity appeal more strongly to she pity . " I know ; I see all that you mean , " he say , in a voice that have become feebler from discouragement ; " I know what there be to keep we apart on both side . but it be not right , , -- do not you be angry with I , I be so use to call you in my thought , -- it be not right to sacrifice everything to other people 's unreasonable feeling . I would give up a great deal for _my father ; but I would not give up a friendship or -- or a attachment of any sort , in obedience to any wish of he that I do not recognize as right . " " I do not know , " say , musingly . " often , when I have be angry and discontent , it have see to I that I be not bound to give up anything ; and I have go on thinking till it have see to I that I could think away all my duty . but no good have ever come of that ; it be a evil state of mind . I be quite sure that whatever I might do , I should wish in the end that I have go without anything for myself , rather than have make my father 's life harder to he . " " but would it make he life harder if we be to see each other sometimes ? " say . he be go to say something else , but check himself . " oh , I be sure he would not like it . do not ask I why , or anything about it , " say , in a distressed tone . " my father feel so strongly about some thing . he be not at all happy . " " no more be I , " say , impetuously ; " I be not happy . " " why ? " say , gently . " at least -- I ought not to ask -- but I be very , very sorry . " turn to walk on , as
as if he have not patience to stand still any longer , and they go out of the hollow , win amongst the tree and bushes in silence . after that last word of 's , could not bear to insist immediately on they parting . " I have be a great deal happier , " she say at last , timidly , " since I have give up think about what be easy and pleasant , and be discontent because I could not have my own will . we life be determine for we ; and it make the mind very free when we give up wishing , and only think of bear what be laid upon we , and do what be give we to do . " " but I can not give up wishing , " say , impatiently . " it seem to I we can never give up long and wish while we be thoroughly alive . there be certain thing we feel to be beautiful and good , and we _must hunger after they . how can we ever be satisfied without they until we feeling be deaden ? I delight in fine picture ; I long to be able to paint such . I strive and strive , and can not produce what I want . that be pain to I , and always _will be pain , until my faculty lose they keenness , like aged eye . then there be many other thing I long for , " -- here hesitate a little , and then say , -- " thing that other man have , and that will always be deny I . my life will have nothing great or beautiful in it ; I would rather not have liv . " " oh , , " say , " I wish you do not feel so . " but she heart begin to beat with something of 's discontent . " well , then , " say he , turn quickly round and fix he gray eye entreatingly on she face , " I should be contente to live , if you would let I see you sometimes . " then , check by a fear which she face suggest , he look away again and say more calmly , " I have no friend to whom I can tell everything , no one who care enough about I ; and if I could only see you now and then , and you would let I talk to you a little , and show I that you care for I , and that we may always be friend in heart , and help each other , then I might come to be glad of life . " " but how can I see you , ? " say , falteringly . ( could she really do he good ? it would be very hard to say " good - by " this day , and not speak to he again . here be a new interest to vary the day ; it be so much easier to renounce the interest before it come . ) " if you would let I see you here sometimes , -- walk with you here , -- I would be contente if it be only once or twice in a month . that could injure no one 's happiness , and it would sweeten my life . besides , " go on , with all the inventive astuteness of love at one - and - twenty , " if there be any enmity between those who belong to we , we ought all the more to try and quench it by we friendship ; I mean , that by we influence on both side we might bring about a healing of the wound that have be make in the past , if I could know everything about they . and I do not believe there be any enmity in my own father 's mind ; I think he have prove the contrary . " shook she head slowly , and be silent , under conflict thought . it seem to she inclination , that to see now and then , and keep up the bond of friendship with he , be something not only innocent , but good ; perhaps she might really help he to find contentment as she have find it . the voice that say this make sweet music to ; but athwart it there come a urgent , monotonous warning from another voice which she have be learn to obey , -- the warning that such interview imply secrecy ; imply do something she would dread to be discover in , something that , if discover , must cause anger and pain ; and that the admission of anything so near doubleness would act as a spiritual blight . yet the music would swell out again , like chime borne onward by a recurrent breeze , persuade she that the wrong lay all in the fault and weakness of other , and that there be such a thing as futile sacrifice for one to the injury of another . it be very cruel for that he should be shrink from , because of a unjustifiable vindictiveness toward he father , -- poor , whom some people would shrink from only because he be deform . the idea that he might become she lover or that she meet he could cause disapproval in that light , have not occur to she ; and see the absence of this idea clearly enough , see it with a certain pang , although it make she consent to he request the less unlikely . there be bitterness to he in the perception that be almost as frank and unconstrain toward he as when she be a child . " I can not say
say either yes or no , " she say at last , turn round and walk toward the way she come ; " I must wait , lest I should decide wrongly . I must seek for guidance . " " may I come again , then , to - morrow , or the next day , or next week ? " " I think I have better write , " say , falter again . " I have to go to 's sometimes , and I can put the letter in the post . " " oh no , " say eagerly ; " that would not be so well . my father might see the letter -- and -- he have not any enmity , I believe , but he view thing differently from I ; he think a great deal about wealth and position . pray let I come here once more . Tell_ I when it shall be ; or if you can not tell I , I will come as often as I can till I do see you . " " I think it must be so , then , " say , " for I can not be quite certain of come here any particular evening . " feel a great relief in adjourn the decision . she be free now to enjoy the minute of companionship ; she almost think she might linger a little ; the next time they meet she should have to pain by tell he she determination . " I can not help think , " she say , look smilingly at he , after a few moment of silence , " how strange it be that we should have meet and talk to each other , just as if it have be only yesterday when we part at . and yet we must both be very much altered in those five year , -- I think it be five year . how be it you seem to have a sort of feeling that I be the same ? I be not quite so sure that you would be the same ; I know you be so clever , and you must have see and learn so much to fill you mind ; I be not quite sure you would care about I now . " " I have never have any doubt that you would be the same , whenever I migh see you , " say ,-- " I mean , the same in everything that make I like you better than any one else . I do not want to explain that ; I do not think any of the strongest effect we nature be susceptible of can ever be explain . we can neither detect the process by which they be arrive at , nor the mode in which they act on we . the greatest of painter only once paint a mysteriously divine child ; he could not have tell how he do it , and we can not tell why we feel it to be divine . I think there be store lay up in we human nature that we understanding can make no complete inventory of . certain strains of music affect I so strangely ; I can never hear they without they change my whole attitude of mind for a time , and if the effect would last , I might be capable of heroism . " " ah ! I know what you mean about music ; _I_ feel so , " say , clasp she hand with she old impetuosity . " at least , " she add , in a sadden tone , " I use to feel so when I have any music ; I never have any now except the organ at church . " " and you long for it , ? " say , look at she with affectionate pity . " ah , you can have very little that be beautiful in you life . have you many book ? you be so fond of they when you be a little girl . " they be come back to the hollow , round which the dog - rose grew , and they both pause under the charm of the faery evening light , reflect from the pale pink cluster . " no , I have give up book , " say , quietly , " except a very , very few . " have already take from he pocket a small volume , and be look at the back as he say : " ah , this be the second volume , I see , else you might have like to take it home with you . I put it in my pocket because I be study a scene for a picture . " have look at the back too , and see the title ; it revive a old impression with overmastering force . " ' the , ' " she say , take the book from 's hand . " oh , I begin that once ; I read to where be walk with , and I could never get to read the rest . I go on with it in my own head , and I make several endings ; but they be all unhappy . I could never make a happy end out of that beginning . poor ! I wonder what be the real end . for a long while I could not get my mind away from the , -- I use to feel the wind blow on I from the rough sea . " speak rapidly , with glistening eye . " take that volume home with you , , " say , watch she with delight . " I do not want it now . I shall make a picture of you instead , --
-- you , among the fir and the slant shadow . " have not hear a word he have say ; she be absorb in a page at which she have open . but suddenly she close the book , and give it back to , shak she head with a backward movement , as if to say " avaunt " to float vision . " do keep it , , " say , entreatingly ; " it will give you pleasure . " " no , thank you , " say , put it aside with she hand and walk on . " it would make I in love with this world again , as I use to be ; it would make I long to see and know many thing ; it would make I long for a full life . " " but you will not always be shut up in you present lot ; why should you starve you mind in that way ? it be narrow asceticism ; I do not like to see you persist in it , . Poetry and art and knowledge be sacred and pure . " " but not for I , not for I , " say , walk more hurriedly ; " because I should want too much . I must wait ; this life will not last long . " " do not hurry away from I without say ' good - by , ' , " say , as they reach the group of Scotch fir , and she continue still to walk along without speak . " I must not go any farther , I think , must I ? " " oh no , I forget ; good - by , " say , pause , and put out she hand to he . the action bring she feel back in a strong current to ; and after they have stand look at each other in silence for a few moment , with they hand clasp , she say , withdraw she hand : " I be very grateful to you for think of I all those year . it be very sweet to have people love we . what a wonderful , beautiful thing it seem that should have make you heart so that you could care about a queer little girl whom you only know for a few week ! I remember say to you that I think you care for I more than do . " " ah , , " say , almost fretfully , " you would never love I so well as you love you brother . " " perhaps not , " say , simply ; " but then , you know , the first thing I ever remember in my life be stand with by the side of the Floss , while he hold my hand ; everything before that be dark to I . but I shall never forget you , though we must keep apart . " " do not say so , , " say . " if I keep that little girl in my mind for five year , do not I earn some part in she ? she ought not to take herself quite away from I . " " not if i be free , " say ; " but I be not , I must submit . " she hesitate a moment , and then add , " and I want to say to you , that you have better not take more notice of my brother than just bow to he . he once tell I not to speak to you again , and he do not change he mind -- oh dear , the sun be set . I be too long away . good - by . " she give he she hand once more . " I shall come here as often as I can till I see you again , . have some feeling for _me_ as well as for other . " " yes , yes , I have , " say , hurrie away , and quickly disappear behind the last fir - tree ; though 's gaze after she remain immovable for minute as if he see she still . go home , with a inward conflict already begin ; go home to do nothing but remember and hope . you can hardly help blame he severely . he be four or five year older than , and have a full consciousness of he feeling toward she to aid he in foresee the character he contemplate interview with she would bear in the opinion of a third person . but you must not suppose that he be capable of a gross selfishness , or that he could have be satisfied without persuade himself that he be seek to infuse some happiness into 's life , -- seek this even more than any direct end for himself . he could give she sympathy ; he could give she help . there be not the slightest promise of love toward he in she manner ; it be nothing more than the sweet girlish tenderness she have show he when she be twelve . perhaps she would never love he ; perhaps no woman ever _could love he . well , then , he would endure that ; he should at least have the happiness of see she , of feel some nearness to she . and he clutch passionately the possibility that she _might love he ; perhaps the feeling would grow , if she could come to associate he with that watchful tenderness which she nature would be so keenly alive to . if any woman could love he , surely be that woman ; there be such wealth of love in she , and there be no one to claim it all
all . then , the pity of it , that a mind like hers should be wither in it be very youth , like a young forest - tree , for want of the light and space it be form to flourish in ! could he not hinder that , by persuade she out of she system of privation ? he would be she guardian angel ; he would do anything , bear anything , for she sake -- except not see she . the of 's 's life - struggle have lain almost entirely within she own soul , one shadowy army fight another , and the slain shadow forever rise again , be engage in a dustier , noisier warfare , grapple with more substantial obstacle , and gain more definite conquest . so it have be since the day of , and of Hector , Tamer of horse ; inside the gate , the woman with stream hair and uplift hand offer prayer , watch the world 's combat from afar , fill they long , empty day with memory and fear ; outside , the man , in fierce struggle with thing divine and human , quench memory in the stronger light of purpose , lose the sense of dread and even of wound in the hurrie ardor of action . from what you have see of , I think he be not a youth of whom you would prophesy failure in anything he have thoroughly wish ; the wager be likely to be on he side , notwithstand he small success in the classic . for have never desire success in this field of enterprise ; and for get a fine flourishing growth of stupidity there be nothing like pour out on a mind a good amount of subject in which it feel no interest . but now 's strong will bound together he integrity , he pride , he family regrets , and he personal ambition , and make they one force , concentrate he effort and surmount discouragement . he uncle , who watch he closely , soon begin to conceive hope of he , and to be rather proud that he have bring into the employment of the firm a nephew who appear to be make of such good commercial stuff . the real kindness of place he in the warehouse first be soon evident to , in the hints he uncle begin to throw out , that after a time he might perhaps be trust to travel at certain season , and buy in for the firm various vulgar commodity with which I need not shock refin ear in this place ; and it be doubtless with a view to this result that , when he expect to take he wine alone , would tell to step in and sit with he a hour , and would pass that hour in much lecturing and catechise concern article of export and import , with a occasional excursus of more indirect utility on the relative advantage to the merchant of of have goods bring in they own and in foreign bottom ,-- a subject on which , as a ship - owner , naturally throw off a few spark when he get warm with talk and wine . already , in the second year , 's salary be raise ; but all , except the price of he dinner and clothes , go home into the tin box ; and he shunn comradeship , lest it should lead he into expense in spite of himself . not that be mould on the spoony type of the Industrious apprentice ; he have a very strong appetite for pleasure , -- would have like to be a Tamer of horse and to make a distinguished figure in all neighbor eye , dispense treat and benefit to other with well - judge liberality , and be pronounce one of the finest young fellow of those part ; nay , he determine to achieve these thing sooner or later ; but he practical shrewdness tell he that the means no such achievement could only lie for he in present abstinence and self - denial ; there be certain milestone to be pass , and one of the first be the payment of he father 's debt . have make up he mind on that point , he strode along without swerving , contract some rather saturnine sternness , as a young man be likely to do who have a premature call upon he for self - reliance . feel intensely that common cause with he father which spring from family pride , and be bent on be irreproachable as a son ; but he grow experience cause he to pass much silent criticism on the rashness and imprudence of he father 's past conduct ; they disposition be not in sympathy , and 's face show little radiance during he few home hour . have a awe of he , against which she struggle as something unfair to she consciousness of wider thought and deeper motive ; but it be of no use to struggle . a character at unity with itself -- that perform what it intend , subdue every counteracting impulse , and have no vision beyond the distinctly possible -- be strong by its very negation . you may imagine that 's more and more obvious unlikeness to he father be well fit to conciliate the maternal aunt and uncle ; and 's favorable report and prediction to concern 's qualification for business begin to be discuss amongst they with various acceptance . he be likely , it appear , to do the family credit without cause it any expense and trouble . have always think it strange if 's excellent complexion , so entirely that of the Dodson , do not argue a certainty that he would turn out well ; he juvenile error
error of run down the peacock , and general disrespect to he aunt , only indicate a tinge of Tulliver blood which he have doubtless outgrown . , who have contract a cautious liking for ever since he spirit and sensible behavior when the execution be in the house , be now warm into a resolution to further he prospect actively , -- some time , when a opportunity offer of do so in a prudent manner , without ultimate loss ; but . observ that she be not give to speak without book , as some people be ; that those who say least be most likely to find they word make good ; and that when the right moment come , it would be see who could do something better than talk . uncle Pullet , after silent meditation for a period of several lozenge , come distinctly to the conclusion , that when a young man be likely to do well , it be better not to meddle with he . , meanwhile , have show no disposition to rely on any one but himself , though , with a natural sensitiveness toward all indication of favorable opinion , he be glad to see he uncle look in on he sometimes in a friendly way during business hour , and glad to be invite to dine at he house , though he usually prefer declining on the ground that he be not sure of be punctual . but about a year ago , something have occur which induce to test he uncle 's friendly disposition . , who rarely return from one of he round without see and , await he on the bridge as he be come home from . 's one evening , that they might have a little private talk . he take the liberty of ask if have ever think of make money by trade a bit on he own account . Trading , how ? wish to know . why , by send out a bit of a cargo to foreign port ; because have a particular friend who have offer to do a little business for he in that way in goods , and would be glad to serve on the same footing . be interested at once , and begge for full explanation , wonder he have not think of this plan before . he be so well pleased with the prospect of a speculation that might change the slow process of addition into multiplication , that he at once determined to mention the matter to he father , and get he consent to appropriate some of the savings in the tin box to the purchase of a small cargo . he would rather not have consult he father , but he have just pay he last quarter 's money into the tin box , and there be no other resource . all the savings be there ; for would not consent to put the money out at interest lest he should lose it . since he have speculate in the purchase of some corn , and have lose by it , he could not be easy without keep the money under he eye . approach the subject carefully , as he be seat on the hearth with he father that evening , and listen , lean forward in he arm - chair and look up in 's face with a sceptical glance . he first impulse be to give a positive refusal , but he be in some awe of 's wish , and since he have the sense of be a " unlucky " father , he have lose some of he old peremptoriness and determination to be master . he take the key of the bureau from he pocket , get out the key of the large chest , and fetch down the tin box ,-- slowly , as if he be try to defer the moment of a painful parting . then he seat himself against the table , and open the box with that little padlock - key which he finger in he waistcoat pocket in all vacant moment . there they be , the dingy bank - note and the bright sovereign , and he count they out on the table -- only a hundred and sixteen pound in two year , after all the pinching . " how much do you want , then ? " he say , speak as if the word bur not he lip . " suppose I begin with the thirty - six pound , father ? " say . separate this sum from the rest , and keep he hand over it , say : " it be as much as I can save out o' my pay in a year . " " yes , father ; it be such slow work , save out of the little money we get . and in this way we might double we savings . " " ay , my lad , " say the father , keep he hand on the money , " but you might lose it , -- you might lose a year of ' my life , -- and I have not get many . " be silent . " and you know I would not pay a dividend with the first hundred , because I want to see it all in a lump , -- and when I see it , I be sure o not . if you trust to like , it be sure to be against I . it be 's get the luck in he hand ; and if I lose one year , I shall never pick it up again ; death ' ull o'ertake I . " 's voice tremble , and be silent for a few minute before he say : " I will give it up
up , father , since you object to it so strongly . " but , unwill to abandon the scheme altogether , he determine to ask he uncle to venture twenty pound , on condition of receive five per cent . of the profit . that be really a very small thing to ask . so when call the next day at the wharf to know the decision , propose that they should go together to he uncle 's to open the business ; for he diffident pride clung to he , and make he feel that 's tongue would relieve he from some embarrassment . , at the pleasant hour of four in the afternoon of a hot day , be naturally count he wall - fruit to assure himself that the sum total have not vari since yesterday . to he enter , in what appear to very questionable companionship , -- that of a man with a pack on he back , -- for be equip for a new journey , -- and of a huge brindled bull - terrier , who walk with a slow , sway movement from side to side , and glance from under he eye - lid with a surly indifference which might after all be a cover to the most offensive designs . 's spectacle , which have be assist he in count the fruit , make these suspicious detail alarmingly evident to he . " Heigh ! heigh ! keep that dog back , will you ? " he shoute , snatch up a stake and hold it before he as a shield when the visitor be within three yard of he . " get out wi' you , , " say , with a kick . " he be as quiet as a lamb , sir , " -- a observation which corroborate by a low growl as he retreat behind he master 's leg . " why , what ever do this mean , ? " say . " have you bring information about the scoundrel as cut my tree ? " if come in the character of " information , " see reason for tolerate some irregularity . " no , sir , " say ; " I come to speak to you about a little matter of business of my own . " " ay -- well ; but what have this dog get to do with it ? " say the old gentleman , get mild again . " it be my dog , sir , " say the ready . " a ' it be I as put up to the bit of ' business ; for 's be a friend of ' mine iver since I be a little chap ; fust thing iver I do be frightenin ' the bird for th ' old master . a ' if a bit of ' luck turn up , I be allays thinkin ' if I can let have a pull at it . a ' it be a downright roarin ' shame , as when he be get the chance of ' make a bit of ' money wi' send goods out , -- ten or twelve per zent clear , when freight a ' commission 's pay , -- as he should not lay hold of ' the chance for want of ' money . a ' when there be the goods , -- lor ! they be make of ' purpose for folk as want to send out a little carguy ; light , an's take up no room , -- you may pack twenty pound so as you can not see the passill ; an' they be manifactur as please fool , so I reckon they be not like to want a market . An' I would go to a ' buy in the goods for along wi' my own . a ' there be the shupercargo of ' the bit of a vessel as be goin ' to take th'ey out . I know he partic'lar ; he be a solid man , a ' get a family I ' the town here . , he name be , -- a ' a briny chap he be too , -- a ' if you do not believe I , I can take you to he . " uncle stand open - mouth with astonishment at this unembarrassed loquacity , with which he understanding could hardly keep pace . he look at , first over he spectacle , then through they , then over they again ; while , doubtful of he uncle 's impression , begin to wish he have not bring this singular , or mouthpiece . 's talk appear less seemly , now some one besides himself be listen to it . " you seem to be a know fellow , " say , at last . " ay , sir , you say true , " return , nodd he head aside ; " I think my head be all alive inside like a old cheese , for I be so full of ' plan , one knock another over . if I have not Mump to talk to , I should get top - heavy a ' tumble in a fit . I suppose it be because I niver go to school much . that be what I jaw my old mother for . I say , ' you should ha ' send I to school a bit more ,' I say , ' a ' then I could ha ' read I ' the book like fun , a ' kep ' my head cool a ' empty . ' Lor , she be fine a ' comfor 'ble now , my old mother be ; she ate she bake meat a ' tater as often as she like . for I be gettin's so
so full of ' money , I must haheve a wife to spend it for I . but it be botherin , ' a wife be , -- and might not like she . " uncle , who regard himself as a jocose man since he have retire from business , be begin to find amusing , but he have still a disapproving observation to make , which keep he face serious . " ah , " he say , " I should think you be at a loss for way of ' spend you money , else you would not keep that big dog , to eat as much as two . it be shameful -- shameful ! " but he speak more in sorrow than in anger , and quickly add : " but , come now , let 's hear more about this business , . I suppose you want a little sum to make a venture with . but where be all you own money ? you do not spend it all -- eh ? " " no , sir , " say , coloring ; " but my father be unwilling to risk it , and I do not like to press he . if I could get twenty or thirty pound to begin with , I could pay five per cent for it , and then I could gradually make a little capital of my own , and do without a loan . " " ay -- ay , " say , in a approve tone ; " that be not a bad notion , and I will not say as I would not be you man . but it ' ull be as well for I to see this Salt , as you talk on . and then -- here be this friend of ' yours offer to buy the goods for you . perhaps you have get somebody to stand surety for you if the money 's put into you hand ? " add the cautious old gentleman , look over he spectacle at . " I do not think that be necessary , uncle , " say . " at least , I mean it would not be necessary for I , because I know well ; but perhaps it would be right for you to have some security . " " you get you percentage out of ' the purchase , I suppose ? " say , look at . " no , sir , " say , rather indignantly ; " I do not offer to get a apple for , of ' purpose to haheve a bite out of it myself . when I play folk trick , there will be more fun in th'ey nor that . " " well , but it be nothing but right you should have a small percentage , " say . " I have no opinion of ' transaction where folk do thing for nothing . it allays look bad . " " well , then , " say , whose keenness see at once what be imply , " I will tell you what I get byot , a ' it be money in my pocket in the end , -- I make myself look big , wi' makin ' a bigger purchase . that be what I be think on . Lor ! I be a ' cute chap ,-- I be . " " , ! " say a severe voice from the open parlor window , " pray be you come in to tea , or be you go to stand talk with packman till you get murder in the open daylight ? " " murder ? " say ; " what be the woman talk of ? here be you nephey come about a bit of ' business . " " murder , -- yes , -- it be not many ' size ago since a packman murder a young woman in a lone place , and steal she thimble , and throw she body into a ditch . " " Nay , nay , " say , soothingly , " you be think of ' the man wi' no leg , as drive a dog - cart . " " well , it be the same thing , , only you be fond of ' contradict what I say ; and if my nephey be come about business , it 'uld be more fitting if you would bring he into the house , and let he aunt know about it , instead of ' whisper in corner , in that plotting , underminding way . " " well , well , " say , " we will come in now . " " you need not stay here , " say the lady to , in a loud voice , adapt to the moral , not the physical , distance between they . " we do not want anything . I do not deal wig packman . mind you shut the gate after you . " " stop a bit ; not so fast , " say ; " I have not do with this young man yet . come in , ; come in , " he add , step in at the french window . " , " say , in a fatal tone , " if you be go to let that man and he dog in on my carpet , before my very face , be so good as to let I know . a wife 's get a right to ask that , I hope . " " do not you be uneasy , mum , " say , touch he cap . he see at once that . be a bit of game worth run down , and long to be at the sport ; " we will stay out
out upo ' the gravel here ,-- and I will . know he company , -- he do . I might hish at he by th 's hour together , before he would fly at a real gentlewoman like you . it be wonderful how he know which be the good - look lady ; and 's partic'lar fond of th'ey when they have good shape . Lor ! " add , lay down he pack on the gravel , " it be a thousand pity such a lady as you should not deal with a packman , I ' stead of ' goin ' into these newfangled shop , where there be half - a - dozen fine gent wi' they chin prop up wi' a stiff stock , a -looking like bottle wi' ornamental stopper , a ' all get to get they dinner out of a bit of ' calico ; it stan 's to reason you must pay three time the price you pay a packman , as be the nat'ral way of ' gettin ' goods , -- a ' pay no rent , a ' be not force to throttle himself till the lie be squeeze out on he , whether he will or no . but lor ! mum , you know what it be better nor I do ,--_you_ can see through they shopman , I will be bound . " " yes , I reckon I can , and through the packman too , " observe , intend to imply that 's flattery have produce no effect on _her ;_ while she husband , stand behind she with he hand in he pocket and leg apart , wink and smile with conjugal delight at the probability of he wife 's be circumvent . " ay , to be sure , mum , " say . " why , you must ha ' deal wi' no end of ' packman when you war a young lass -- before the master here have the luck to set eye on you . I know where you liv , I do , -- see th's house many a time , -- close upon 's , -- a stone house wi' step ---- " " ah , that it have , " say , pour out the tea . " you know something of ' my family , then ? be you akin to that packman with a squint in he eye , as use to bring th' irish linen ? " " look you there now ! " say , evasively . " do not I know as you would remember the best bargain you have make in you life be make wig packman ? why , you see even a squintin ' packman 's better nor a shopman as can see straight . Lor ! if I would have the luck to call at the stone house wi' my pack , as lie here , " -- stoop and thump the bundle emphatically with he fist , -- " a ' th ' handsome young lass all stannin ' out on the stone step , it uld ' ha ' be summat like openin ' a pack , that would . it be on 'y the poor house now as a packman call on , if it be not for the sake of ' the sarvant - maid . they be paltry time , these are . why , mum , look at the print cotton now , a ' what they be when you wear 'em , -- why , you would not put such a thing on now , I can see . it must be first - rate quality , the manifactur as you would buy ,-- summat as 'ud wear as well as you own faiture . " " yes , better quality nor any you be like to carry ; you have get nothing first - rate but brazenness , I will be bound , " say , with a triumphant sense of she insurmountable sagacity . " , be you go ever to sit down to you tea ? , there be a cup for you . " " you speak true there , mum , " say . " my pack be not for lady like you . the time have go by for that . Bargains pick up dirt cheap ! a bit of ' damage here a ' there , as can be cut out , or else niver see I ' the wearin ' , but not fit to offer to rich folk as can pay for the look of ' thing as nobody see . I be not the man as 'uld offer t ' open my pack to you _, mum ; no , no ; I be a imperent chap , as you say ,-- these time make folk imperent , -- but I be not up to the mark of ' that . " " why , what good do you carry in you pack ? " say . " - color thing , I suppose , -- shawl a ' that ? " " all sort , mum , all sort , " say ,-- thump he bundle ; " but let we say no more about that , if _you_ please . I be here ' 's business , an' I be not the man to take up the time wi' my own . " " and pray , what _is_ this business as be to be keep from I ? " say , who , solicite by a double curiosity , be obliged to let the one - half wait . " a little plan o' 's here , " say good - nature ; " and not altogether a bad 'un , I think . a little plan for make money ; that be the right sort
sort of ' plan for young folk as have get they fortin to make , eh , ? " " but I hope it be not a plan where he expect iverything to be do for he by he friend ; that be what the young folk think of mostly nowadays . and pray , what have this packman get to do wi' what go on in we family ? can not you speak for yourself , , and let you aunt know thing , as a nephey should ? " " this be , aunt , " say , bridl the irritation that 's voice always produce . " I have know he ever since we be litle boy . he be a very good fellow , and always ready to do I a kindness . and he have have some experience in send goods out ,-- a small part of a cargo as a private speculation ; and he think if I could begin to do a little in the same way , I might make some money . a large interest be get in that way . " " large int'rest ? " say aunt , with eagerness ; " and what do you call large int'rest ? " " ten or twelve per cent , say , after expense be pay . " " then why be not I let to know of ' such thing before , ? " say , turn to she husband , with a deep grating tone of reproach . " have not you allays tell I as there be no get more nor five per cent ? " " Pooh , pooh , nonsense , my good woman , " say . " you could not go into trade , could you ? you can not get more than five per cent with security . " " but I can turn a bit of ' money for you , a ' welcome , mum , " say , " if you would like to risk it , -- not as there be any risk to speak on . but if you would a mind to lend a bit of ' money to , he would pay you six or seven per zent , a ' get a trifle for himself as well ; an' a good - natur would lady like you 'ud like the feel of ' the money better if you nephey take part on it . " " what do you say , . G.? " say . " I have a notion , when I have make a bit more inquiry , as I shall perhaps start here with a bit of a nest - egg , -- he will pay I int'rest , you know , -- a ' if you have get some little sum lyin ' idle twist up in a stockin ' toe , or that -- -- " " , it be beyond iverything ! you will go and give information to the tramp next , as they may come and rob I . " " well , well , as I be sayin ' , if you like to join I wi' twenty pound , you can -- I will make it fifty . that will be a pretty good nest - egg , eh , ? " " you be not count on I , , I hope , " say he wife . " you could do fine thing wi' my money , I do not doubt . " " very well , " say , rather snappishly , " then we will do without you . I shall go with you to see this Salt , " he add , turn to . " and now , I suppose , you will go all the other way , , " say , " and want to shut I out of ' my own nephey 's business . I never say I would not put money into it ,-- I do not say as it shall be twenty pound , though you be so ready to say it for I , -- but he will see some day as he aunt 's in the right not to risk the money she be save for he till it be prove as it will not be lose . " " ay , that be a pleasant sort o'risk , that be , " say , indiscreetly wink at , who could not avoid smiling . but stem the injured lady 's outburst . " ay , mum , " he say admiringly , " you know what be what -- you do . a ' it be nothing but fair . _You_ see how the first bit of a job answer , a ' then you will come down handsome . Lors , it be a fine thing to hev good kin . I get my bit of a nest - egg , as the master call it , all by my own sharpness , -- ten suvreign it be , -- wi' douse the fire at 's mill , a ' it be grow a ' grow by a bit a ' a bit , till I and get a matter of ' thirty pound to lay out , besides makin ' my mother comfor'ble . I should get more , of n'y I be such a soft wi' the woman , -- I can not help lettin' 'em hev such good bargain . there be this bundle , now , " thump it lustily , " any other chap 'uld make a pretty penny out on it . but I !--lor , I shall sell 'em for pretty near what I pay for th'ey . " " have you get a bit of good net , now ? " say , in a patronizing tone , move from the
the tea - table , and fold she napkin . " Eh , mum , not what you would think it worth you while to look at . I have scorn to show it you . it 'uld be a insult to you . " " but let I see , " say , still patronize . " if they be damage goods , they be like enough to be a bit the better quality . " " no , mum , I know my place , " say , lift up he pack and shouldere it . " I be not go t ' expose the lowness of ' my trade to a lady like you . pack be come down I ' the world ; it 'uld cut you to th' heart to see the difference . I be at you sarvice , sir , when you have a mind to go and see . " " all in good time , " say , really unwilling to cut short the dialogue . " be you want at the wharf , ? " " no , sir ; I leave in my place . " " come , put down you pack , and let I see , " say , draw a chair to the window and seat herself with much dignity . " do not you ask it , mum , " say , entreatingly . " make no more word , " say , severely , " but do as I tell you . " " Eh mum , I be loth , that I be , " say , slowly deposit he pack on the step , and begin to untie it with unwilling finger . " but what you order shall be done " ( much fumbling in pause between the sentences ) . " it be not as you will buy a single thing on I ,-- I would be sorry for you to do it , -- for think of ' they poor woman up I ' the villag there , as niver stir a hundred yard from home , -- it 'uld be a pity for anybody to buy up they bargain . Lors , it be as good as a junketing to 'em when they see I wi' my pack , an' I shall niver pick up such bargain for th'ey again . least way , I have no time now , for I be off to . see here now , " go on , become rapid again , and hold up a scarlet woollen Kerchief with a embroidered wreath in the corner ; " here be a thing to make a lass 's mouth water , a ' on 'y two shillin ' -- a ' why ? why , ' cause there be a bit of a moth - hole 'i this plain end . Lor , I think the moth a ' the mildew be send by Providence of ' purpose to cheapen the goods a bit for the good - lookin ' woman as ha not get much money . if it have not be for the moth , now , every hankicher on th'ey 'ud ha ' go to the rich , handsome lady , like you , mum , at five shillin ' apiece , -- not a farthin ' less ; but what do the moth do ? why , it nibble off three shillin ' of ' the price I ' no time ; a ' then a packman like I can carry 't to the poor lass as live under the dark thack , to make a bit of a blaze for th'ey . Lors , it be as good as a fire , to look at such a hankicher ! " hold it at a distance for admiration , but . say sharply : " yes , but nobody want 's a fire this time of ' year . put these colored thing by ; let I look at you net , if you have get th'ey . " " Eh , mum , I tell you how it 'uld be , " say , flinge aside the colored thing with a air of desperation . " I know it ud ' turn again ' you to look at such paltry article as I carry . here be a piece o's figure muslin now , what be the use of ' you lookin ' at it ? you might as well look at poor folk 's victual , mum ; it 'uld on 'y take away you appetite . there be a yard I ' the middle o not as the pattern 's all miss , -- lor , why , it be a muslin as the might ha ' wore ; but , " add , flinge it behind he on to the turf , as if to save 's eye , " it will be buy up by the huckster 's wife at 's , -- that be where _it'll_ go -- ten shillin ' for the whole lot -- ten yard , countin ' the damage un-- five - a '- twenty shilling 'uld ha ' be the price , not a penny less . but I will say no more , mum ; it be nothing to you , a piece of ' muslin like that ; you can afford to pay three time the money for a thing as be not half so good . it be nets _you_ talk on ; well , I have get a piece as ' ull serve you to make fun on ---- " " bring I that muslin , " say . " it be a buff ; I be partial to buff . " " Eh , but a _damaged_ thing , " say , in a tone of deprecating disgust . " you would do
do nothing with it , mum , you would give it to the cook , I know you would , a ' it 'uld be a pity , -- she would look too much like a lady in it ; it be unbecoming for servants . " " fetch it , and let I see you measure it , " say , authoritatively . obey with ostentatious reluctance . " see what there be over measure ! " he say , hold forth the extra half - yard , while Mrs . be busy examine the damaged yard , and throw she head back to see how far the fault would be lose on a distant view . " I will give you six shilling for it , " she say , throw it down with the air of a person who mention a ultimatum . " do not I tell you now , mum , as it 'uld hurt you feeling to look at my pack ? that damage bit 's turn you stomach now ; I see it have , " say , wrap the muslin up with the utmost quickness , and apparently about to fasten up he pack . " you be use to seein' a different sort of ' article carry by packman , when you live at the stone house . pack be come down I ' the world ; I tell you that ; _my goods be for common folk . ' ull give I ten shillin ' for that muslin , a ' be sorry as I do not ask she more . such article answer I ' the wearin ' , -- they keep they color till the thread melt away I ' the wash - tub , a ' that will not be while _I be a young un . " " well , seven shilling , " say . " put it out of ' you mind , mum , now do , " say . " here be a bit of ' net , then , for you to look at before I tie up my pack , just for you to see what my trade 's come to , -- spot and sprig , you see , beautiful but yallow ,-- be be lyin ' by a ' get the wrong color . I could niver ha ' buy such net , if it have not be yallow . Lors , it be take I a deal of ' study to know the vally of ' such article ; when I begin to carry a pack , I be as ignirant as a pig ; net or calico be all the same to I . I think they thing the most vally as be the thickest . I be take in dreadful , for I be a straightforrard chap , -- up to no trick , mum . I can only say my nose be my own , for if I go beyond , I should lose myself pretty quick . An' I hageve five - a '- eightpence for that piece of ' net ,-- if I be to tell y ' anything else I should be tellin ' you fib , -- a ' five - a '- eightpence I shall ask of it , not a penny more , for it be a woman 's article , an' I like to ' commodate the woman . five - a '- eightpence for six yard , -- as cheap as if it be only the dirt on it as be pay for . ' " " I do not mind have three yard of it , ' " say . " why , there be but six altogether , " say . " no , mum , it be not worth you while ; you can go to the shop to - morrow an' get the same pattern ready whiten . it be on 'y three time the money ; what be that to a lady like you ? " he give a emphatic tie to he bundle . " come , lay I out that muslin , " say . " here be eight shilling for it . " " you _will be jokin ' , " say , look up with a laugh face ; " I see would you be a pleasant lady when I fust come to the winder . " " well , put it I out , " say , peremptorily . " but if I let you have it for ten shillin ' , mum , you will be so good as not tell nobody . I should be a laughin ' - stock ; the trade 'uld hoet I , if they know it . I be oblige to make believe as I ask more nor I do for my goods , else they would find out I be a flat . I be glad you do not insist upo ' buyin ' the net , for then I should ha ' lose my two best bargain for of ' 's , a ' she be a rare customer . " " let I look at the net again , " say . , year after the cheap spot and sprig , now they be vanish . " well , I can not deny _yout , mum , " say hand it out . " Eh ! , see what a pattern now ! goods . now , this be the sort of ' article I be recommendin' to send out . Lors , it be a fine thing for anybody as have get a bit of ' money ; these Laceham good 'uld make it breed like maggit . if I be a lady wi' a bit of ' money !-- why , I know one as put thirty pound into they goods , -- a lady
lady wi' a cork leg , but as sharp , -- you would not catch _her_ runnin ' she head into a sack ; _she would see she way clear out of ' anything afore she would be in a hurry to start . well , she let out thirty pound to a young man in the drape line , and he lay it out I ' Laceham goods , a ' a shupercargo of ' my acquinetance ( not ) take th'ey out , a ' she get she eight per zent fust go off ; an' now you can not hold she but she must be sendin ' out carguy wi' every ship , till she be gettin ' as rich as a . buck she name be , she do not live I ' this town . now then , mum , if you will please to give I the net ---- " " here be fifteen shilling , then , for the two , " say . " but it be a shameful price . " " Nay , mum , you will niver say that when you be upo ' you knee I ' church I ' five year ' time . I be makin ' you a present of ' th ' article ; I be , indeed . that eightpence shave off my profit as clean as a razor . now then , sir , " continue , shouldere he pack , " if you please , I will be glad to go and see about makin' 's fortin . Eh , I wish I have get another twenty pound to lay out _my_sen ; I should not stay to say my Catechism afore I know what to do with i't . " " stop a bit , , " say the lady , as she husband take he hat , " you never _will give I the chance o's speak . you will go away now , and finish everything about this business , and come back and tell I it be too late for I to speak . as if I be not my nephey 's own aunt , and the head of ' the family on he mother 's side ! and laid by guinea , all full weight , for he , as he will know who to respect when I be laid in my coffin . " " well , , say what you mean , " say , hastily . " well , then , I desire as nothing may be do without my know . I do not say as I sha ' not venture twenty pound , if you make out as everything be right and safe . and if I do , , " conclude , turn impressively to she nephew , " I hope you will allays bear it in mind and be grateful for such a aunt . I mean you to pay I interest , you know ; I do not approve o ' give ; we niver look for that in _my family . " " thank you , aunt , " say , rather proudly . " I prefer have the money only lent to I . " " very well ; that be the sperrit , " say , rise to get she knitting with the sense that any further remark after this would be batho . -- that eminently " briny chap " -- have be discover in a cloud of tobacco - smoke at the , commence inquiry which turn out satisfactorily enough to warrant the advance of the " nest - egg , " to which aunt contribute twenty pound ; and in this modest begin you see the ground of a fact which might otherwise surprise you ; namely , 's accumulation of a fund , unknown to he father , that promise in no very long time to meet the more tardy process of save , and quite cover the deficit . when once he attention have be turn to this source of , determined to make the most of it , and lose on opportunity of obtaining information and extend he small enterprise . in not tell he father , he be influence by that strange mixture of opposite feeling which often give equal truth to those who blame a action and those who admire it , -- partly , it be that disinclination to confidence which be see between near kindred , that family repulsion which spoil the most sacred relation of we life ; partly , it be the desire to surprise he father with a great joy . he do not see that it would have be better to soothe the interval with a new hope , and prevent the delirium of a too sudden elation . at the time of 's first meeting with , have already nearly a hundred and fifty pound of he own capital ; and while they be walk by the evening light in the , he , by the same evening light , be ride into , proud of be on he first journey on behalf of & , and revolve in he mind all the chance that by the end of another year he should have double he gain , lifte off the obloquy of debt from he father 's name , and perhaps -- for he should be twenty - one -- have get a new start for himself , on a higher platform of employment . do he not desire it ? he be quite sure that he do . III the Balance I say that go home that even from the with a mental conflict already begin . you have see clearly enough , in she interview with , what that conflict be . here suddenly be a opening in the rocky wall which shut in the narrow valley of
of humiliation , where all she prospect be the remote , unfathomed sky ; and some of the memory - haunt earthly delight be no longer out of she reach . she might have book , converse , affection ; she might hear tiding of the world from which she mind have not yet lose its sense of exile ; and it would be a kindness to Philip too , who be pitiable , -- clearly not happy . and perhaps here be a opportunity indicate for make she mind more worthy of its highest service ; perhaps the noblest , completest devoutness could hardly exist without some width of knowledge ; _must she always live in this resign imprisonment ? it be so blameless , so good a thing that there should be friendship between she and ; the motive that forbade it be so unreasonable , so unchristian ! but the severe monotonous warning come again and again , -- that she be lose the simplicity and clearness of she life by admit a ground of concealment ; and that , by forsak the simple rule of renunciation , she be throw herself under the seductive guidance of illimitable want . she think she have win strength to obey the warning before she allow herself the next week to turn she step in the evening to the . but while she be resolve to say a affectionate farewell to , how she look forward to that evening walk in the still , flecker shade of the hollow , away from all that be harsh and unlovely ; to the affectionate , admir look that would meet she ; to the sense of comradeship that childish memory would give to wiser , older talk ; to the certainty that would care to hear everything she say , which no one else care for ! it be a half - hour that it would be very hard to turn she back upon , with the sense that there would be no other like it . yet she say what she mean to say ; she look firm as well as sad . " , I have make up my mind ; it be right that we should give each other up , in everything but memory . I could not see you without concealment -- stay , I know what you be go to say , -- it be other people 's wrong feeling that make concealment necessary ; but concealment be bad , however it may be cause . I feel that it would be bad for I , for we both . and then , if we secret be discover , there would be nothing but misery , -- dreadful anger ; and then we must part after all , and it would be harder , when we be use to see each other . " 's face have flush , and there be a momentary eagerness of expression , as if he have be about to resist this decision with all he might . but he controlle himself , and say , with assume calmness : " well , , if we must part , let we try and forget it for one half hour ; let we talk together a little while , for the last time . " he take she hand , and feel no reason to withdraw it ; he quietness make she all the more sure she have give he great pain , and she want to show he how unwillingly she have give it . they walk together hand in hand in silence . " let we sit down in the hollow , " say , " where we stand the last time . see how the dog - rose have strew the ground , and spread they opal petal over it . " they sit down at the root of the slanting ash . " I have begin my picture of you among the Scotch fir , , " say , " so you must let I study you face a little , while you stay ,-- since I be not to see it again . please turn you head this way . " this be say in a entreat voice , and it would have be very hard of to refuse . the full , lustrous face , with the bright black coronet , look down like that of a divinity well please to be worship , on the pale - hue , small - featured face that be turn up to it . " I shall be sit for my second portrait then , " she say , smile . " will it be larger than the other ? " " oh yes , much larger . it be a oil - painting . you will look like a tall , dark and strong and noble , just issue from one of the fir - tree , when the stem be cast they afternoon shadow on the grass . " " you seem to think more of pain than of anything now , ? " " perhaps I do , " say , rather sadly ; " but I think of too many thing , -- sow all sort of seed , and get no great harvest from any one of they . I be curse with susceptibility in every direction , and effective faculty in none . I care for painting and music ; I care for classic literature , and mediaeval literature , and modern literature ; I flutter all way , and fly in none . " " but surely that be a happiness to have so many taste , -- to enjoy so many beautiful thing , when they be within you reach , " say , musingly . " it always seem to I a sort of clever stupidity only to have one sort
sort of talent ,-- almost like a carrier - pigeon . " " it might be a happiness to have many taste if I be like other man , " say , bitterly . " I might get some power and distinction by mere mediocrity , as they do ; at least I should get those middling satisfaction which make man contente to do without great one . I might think society at . 's agreeable then . but nothing could make life worth the purchase - money of pain to I , but some faculty that would lift I above the dead level of provincial existence . yes , there be one thing ,-- a passion answer as well as a faculty . " do not hear the last word ; she be struggle against the consciousness that 's word have set she own discontent vibrat again as it use to do . " I understand what you mean , " she say , " though I know so much less than you do . I use to think I could never bear life if it keep on be the same every day , and I must always be do thing of no consequence , and never know anything greater . but , dear , I think we be only like child that some one who be wiser be take care of . be it not right to resign ourselves entirely , whatever may be deny we ? I have find great peace in that for the last two or three year , even joy in subdue my own will . " " yes , , " say , vehemently ; " and you be shutt yourself up in a narrow , self - delusive fanaticism , which be only a way of escape pain by starve into dulness all the highest power of you nature . and peace be not resignation ; resignation be the willing endurance of a pain that be not allay , that you do not expect to be allay . Stupefaction be not resignation ; and it be stupefaction to remain in ignorance , -- to shut up all the avenue by which the life of you fellow - man might become known to you . I be not resign ; I be not sure that life be long enough to learn that lesson . _you_ be not resign ; you be only try to stupefy yourself . " 's lip tremble ; she feel there be some truth in what say , and yet there be a deeper consciousness that , for any immediate application it have to she conduct , it be no better than falsity . she double impression correspond to the double impulse of the speaker . seriously believe what he say , but he say it with vehemence because it make a argument against the resolution that oppose he wish . but 's face , make more childlike by the gather tear , touch he with a tenderer , less egotistic feeling . he take she hand and say gently : do not let we think of such thing in this short half - hour , . let we only care about be together . we shall be friend in spite of separation . we shall always think of each other . I shall be glad to live as long as you be alive , because I shall think there may always come a time when I can -- when you will let I help you in some way . " " what a dear , good brother you would have be , , " say , smile through the haze of tear . " I think you would have make as much fuss about I , and be as pleased for I to love you , as would have satisfied even I . you would have love I well enough to bear with I , and forgive I everything . that be what I always long that should do . I be never satisfied with a _litle of anything . that be why it be better for I to do without earthly happiness altogether . I never feel that I have enough music ,-- I want more instrument play together ; I want voice to be fuller and deeper . do you ever se now , ? " she add abruptly , as if she have forget what go before . " yes , " he say , " every day , almost . but my voice be only middling , like everything else in I . " " oh , se I something , -- just one song . I _may listen to that before I go , -- something you use to s at on a afternoon , when we have the drawing - room all to ourselves , and I put my apron over my head to listen . " " _I_ know , " say ; and bury she face in she hand while he sang _sotto voce , " live in she eye sit play , " and then say , " that be it , be not it ? " " oh no , I will not stay , " say , start up . " it will only haunt I . let we walk , . I must go home . " she move away , so that he be oblige to rise and follow she . " , " he say , in a tone of remonstrance , " do not persist in this wilful , senseless privation . it make I wretch to see you benumb and cramp you nature in this way . you be so full of life when you be a child ; I think you would be a brilliant woman , -- all wit and bright imagination . and it flash out in you face still
still , until you draw that veil of dull quiescence over it . " " why do you speak so bitterly to I , ? " say . " because I foresee it will not end well ; you can never carry on this self - torture . " " I shall have strength give I , " say , tremulously . " no , you will not , Maggie ; no one have strength give to do what be unnatural . it be mere cowardice to seek safety in negation . no character become strong in that way . you will be throw into the world some day , and then every rational satisfaction of you nature that you deny now will assault you like a savage appetite . " start and pause , look at with alarm in she face . " , how dare you shake I in this way ? you be a tempter . " " no , I be not ; but love give insight , , and insight often give foreboding . _Listen_ to I , -- let _me_ supply you with book ; do let I see you sometimes , -- be you brother and teacher , as you say at . it be less wrong that you should see I than that you should be commit this long suicide . " feel unable to speak . she shook she head and walk on in silence , till they come to the end of the fir , and she put out she hand in sign of parting . " do you banish I from this place forever , then , ? surely I may come and walk in it sometimes ? if I meet you by chance , there be no concealment in that ? " it be the moment when we resolution seem about to become irrevocable -- when the fatal iron gate be about to close upon we -- that test we strength . then , after hour of clear reasoning and firm conviction , we snatch at any sophistry that will nullify we long struggle , and bring we the defeat that we love better than victory . feel she heart leap at this subterfuge of 's , and there pass over she face that almost imperceptible shock which accompany any relief . he see it , and they part in silence . 's sense of the situation be too complete for he not to be visit with glancing fear lest he have be intervene too presumptuously in the action of 's conscience , perhaps for a selfish end . but no !-- he persuade himself he end be not selfish . he have little hope that would ever return the strong feeling he have for she ; and it must be better for 's future life , when these petty family obstacle to she freedom have disappear , that the present should not be entirely sacrifice , and that she should have some opportunity of culture , -- some interchange with a mind above the vulgar level of those she be now condemn to live with . if we only look far enough off for the consequence of we action , we can always find some point in the combination of result by which those action can be justifi ; by adopt the point of view of a Providence who arrange result , or of a philosopher who trace they , we shall find it possible to obtain perfect complacency in choose to do what be most agreeable to we in the present moment . and it be in this way that justifi he subtle effort to overcome 's true prompting against a concealment that would introduce doubleness into she own mind , and might cause new misery to those who have the primary natural claim on she . but there be a surplus of passion in he that make he half independent of justifying motive . he longe to see , and make a element in she life , have in it some of that savage impulse to snatch a offer joy which spring from a life in which the mental and bodily constitution have make pain predominate . he have not he full share in the common good of man ; he could not even pass muster with the insignificant , but must be single out for pity , and except from what be a matter of course with other . even to he be a exception ; it be clear that the thought of he be she lover have never enter she mind . do not think too hardly of . ugly and deform people have great need of unusual virtue , because they be likely to be extremely uncomfortable without they ; but the theory that unusual virtue spring by a direct consequence out of personal disadvantage , as animal get thicker wool in severe climates , be perhaps a little overstrained . the temptation of beauty be much dwelt upon , but I fancy they only bear the same relation to those of ugliness , as the temptation to excess at a feast , where the delight be varied for eye and ear as well as palate , bear to the temptation that assail the desperation of hunger . do not the stand as the type of the utmost trial to what be human in we ? have never be soothe by that mother 's love which flow out to we in the greater abundance because we need be greater , which cling to we the more tenderly because we be the less likely to be winners in the game of life ; and the sense of he father 's affection and indulgence toward he be mar by the keener perception of he father 's fault . keep aloon from all practical life as have be , and by nature half feminine in sensitiveness
sensitiveness , he have some of the woman 's intolerant repulsion toward worldliness and the deliberate pursuit of sensual enjoyment ; and this one strong natural tie in he life , -- he relation as a son , -- be like a ach limb to he . perhaps there be inevitably something morbid in a human be who be in any way unfavorably except from ordinary condition , until the good force have have time to triumph ; and it have rarely have time for that at two - and - twenty . that force be present in in much strength , but the sun himself look feeble through the morning mist . chapter IV another love - scene Early in the follow , nearly a year after that dubious part you have just witness , you may , if you like , again see enter the through the group of Scotch fir . but it be early afternoon and not evening , and the edge of sharpness in the spring air make she draw she large shawl close about she and trip along rather quickly ; though she look round , as usual , that she may take in the sight of she beloved tree . there be a more eager , inquire look in she eye than there be last , and a smile be hover about she lip , as if some playful speech be await the right hearer . the hearer be not long in appear . " take back you , " say , draw a book from under she shawl . " you be right in tell I she would do I no good ; but you be wrong in think I should wish to be like she . " " would not you really like to be a tenth Muse , then , ? " say look up in she face as we look at a first parting in the cloud that promise we a bright heaven once more . " not at all , " say , laugh . " the be uncomfortable goddesse , I think ,-- oblige always to carry roll and musical instrument about with they . if I carry a harp in this climate , you know , I must have a green baize cover for it ; and I should be sure to leave it behind I by mistake . " " you agree with I in not like , then ? " " I do not finish the book , " say . " as soon as I come to the blond - haired young lady read in the park , I shut it up , and determined to read no further . I foresee that that light - complexioned girl would win away all the love from and make she miserable . I be determined to read no more book where the blond - haired woman carry away all the happiness . I should begin to have a prejudice against they . if you could give I some story , now , where the dark woman triumph , it would restore the balance . I want to avenge and and , and all the rest of the dark unhappy one . since you be my tutor , you ought to preserve my mind from prejudice ; you be always argue against prejudice . " " well , perhaps you will avenge the dark woman in you own person , and carry away all the love from you cousin . she be sure to have some handsome young man of Ogg's at she foot now ; and you have only to shine upon he -- you fair little cousin will be quite quench in you beams . " " , that be not pretty of you , to apply my nonsense to anything real , " say , look hurt . " as if I , with my old gown and want of all accomplishment , could be a rival of dear little Lucy , -- who know and do all sort of charming thing , and be ten time prettier than I be ,-- even if I be odious and base enough to wish to be she rival . besides , I never go to aunt 's when any one be there ; it be only because dear Lucy be good , and love I , that she come to see I , and will have I go to see she sometimes . " " , " say , with surprise , " it be not like you to take playfulness literally . you must have be in 's this morning , and bring away a slight infection of dulness . " " well , " say , smile , " if you mean that for a joke , it be a poor one ; but I think it be a very good reproof . I think you want to remind I that I be vain , and wish every one to admire I most . but it be not for that that I be jealous for the dark woman , -- not because I be dark myself ; it be because I always care the most about the unhappy people . if the blond girl be forsake , I should like _her_ best . I always take the side of the reject lover in the story . " " then you would never have the heart to reject one yourself , should you , ? " say , flush a little . " I do not know , " say , hesitatingly . then with a bright smile , " I think perhaps I could if he be very conceited ; and yet , if he get extremely humiliated afterward , I should relent . " " I have often wonder , , " say , with some effort , " whether you would not
not really be more likely to love a man that other woman be not likely to love . " " that would depend on what they do not like he for , " say , laugh . " he might be very disagreeable . he might look at I through a eye - glass stuck in he eye , make a hideous face , as young do . I should think other woman be not fond of that ; but I never feel any pity for young . I have never any pity for conceit people , because I think they carry they comfort about with they . " " but suppose , ,-- suppose it be a man who be not conceit , who feel he have nothing to be conceit about ; who have be mark from childhood for a peculiar kind of suffering , and to whom you be the day - star of he life ; who love you , worship you , so entirely that he feel it happiness enough for he if you would let he see you at rare moment ---- " pause with a pang of dread lest he confession should cut short this very happiness , -- a pang of the same dread that have keep he love mute through long month . a rush of self - consciousness tell he that he be besot to have say all this . 's manner this morning have be as unconstrained and indifferent as ever . but she be not look indifferent now . strike with the unusual emotion in 's tone , she have turn quickly to look at he ; and as he go on speak , a great change come over she face , -- a flush and slight spasm of the feature , such as we see in people who hear some news that will require they to readjust they conception of the past . she be quite silent , and walk on toward the trunk of a fall tree , she sit down , as if she have no strength to spare for she muscle . she be trembl . " , " say , get more and more alarmed in every fresh moment of silence , " I be a fool to say it ; forget that I have say it . I shall be contente if thing can be as they be . " the distress with which he speak urge to say something . " I be so surprised , ; I have not think of it . " and the effort to say this bring the tear down too . " have it make you hate I , ? " say , impetuously . " do you think I be a presumptuous fool ? " " oh , ! " say , " how can you think I have such feeling ? as if I be not grateful for _any love . but --but I have never think of you be my lover . it seem so far off -- like a dream -- only like one of the story one imagine -- that I should ever have a lover . " " then can you bear to think of I as you lover , ? " say , seat himself by she , and take she hand , in the elation of a sudden hope . " _Do_ you love I ? " turn rather pale ; this direct question seem not easy to answer . but she eye meet 's , which be in this moment liquid and beautiful with beseeching love . she speak with hesitation , yet with sweet , simple , girlish tenderness . " I think I could hardly love any one better ; there be nothing but what I love you for . " she pause a little while , and then add : " but it will be better for we not to say any more about it , will not it , dear ? you know we could not even be friend , if we friendship be discover . I have never feel that I be right in give way about see you , though it have be so precious to I in some way ; and now the fear come upon I strongly again , that it will lead to evil . " " but no evil have come , ; and if you have be guide by that fear before , you would only have live through another dreary , benumb year , instead of revive into you real self . " shook she head . " it have be very sweet , I know , -- all the talking together , and the book , and the feeling that I have the walk to look forward to , when I could tell you the thought that have come into my head while I be away from you . but it have make I restless ; it have make I think a great deal about the world ; and I have impatient thought again , -- I get weary of my home ; and then it cut I to the heart afterward , that I should ever have felt weary of my father and mother . I think what you call be benumb be better -- better for I -- for then my selfish desire be benumb . " have risen again , and be walk backward and forward impatiently . " no , , you have wrong idea of self - conquest , as I have often tell you . what you call self - conquest -- bind and deafen yourself to all but one train of impressions -- be only the culture of monomania in a nature like yours . " he have speak with some irritation , but now he sit down by she again and take she hand . "
" do not think of the past now , Maggie ; think only of we love . if you can really cling to I with all you heart , every obstacle will be overcome in time ; we need only wait . I can live on hope . look at I , Maggie ; tell I again it be possible for you to love I . do not look away from I to that cloven tree ; it be a bad oman . " she turn she large dark glance upon he with a sad smile . " come , , say one kind word , or else you be better to I at . you ask I if I should like you to kiss I , -- do not you remember ?-- and you promise to kiss I when you meet I again . you never keep the promise . " the recollection of that childish time come as a sweet relief to . it make the present moment less strange to she . she kiss he almost as simply and quietly as she have do when she be twelve year old . 's eye flash with delight , but he next word be word of discontent . " you do not seem happy enough , ; you be force yourself to say you love I , out of pity . " " no , , " say , shak she head , in she old childish way ; " I be tell you the truth . it be all new and strange to I ; but I do not think I could love any one better than I love you . I should like always to live with you -- to make you happy . I have always be happy when I have be with you . there be only one thing I will not do for you sake ; I will never do anything to wound my father . you must never ask that from I . " " no , , I will ask nothing ; I will bear everything ; I will wait another year only for a kiss , if you will only give I the first place in you heart . " " no , " say , smile , " I will not make you wait so long as that . " but then , look serious again , she add , as she rise from she seat ,-- " but what would you own father say , ? oh , it be quite impossible we can ever be more than friend , -- brother and sister in secret , as we have be . let we give up thinking of everything else . " " no , , I can not give you up ,-- unless you be deceive I ; unless you really only care for I as if I be you brother . tell I the truth . " " indeed I do , . what happiness have I ever have so great as be with you ,-- since I be a little girl , -- the day be good to I ? and you mind be a sort of world to I ; you can tell I all I want to know . I think I should never be tired of be with you . " they be walk hand in hand , look at each other ; Maggie , indeed , be hurrie along , for she feel it time to be gone . but the sense that they parting be near make she more anxious lest she should have unintentionally leave some painful impression on 's mind . it be one of those dangerous moment when speech be at once sincere and deceptive ; when feel , rise high above it be average depth , leave floodmark which be never reach again . they stop to part among the fir . " then my life will be fill with hope , , and I shall be happier than other man , in spite of all ? we _do_ belong to each other -- for always -- whether we be apart or together ? " " yes , ; I should like never to part ; I should like to make you life very happy . " " I be wait for something else . I wonder whether it will come . " smile , with glisten tear , and then stoop she tall head to kiss the pale face that be full of pleading , timid love , -- like a woman 's . she have a moment of real happiness then ,-- a moment of belief that , if there be sacrifice in this love , it be all the richer and more satisfying . she turn away and hurrie home , feel that in the hour since she have trode this road before , a new era have begin for she . the tissue of vague dream must now get narrower and narrower , and all the thread of thought and emotion be gradually absorb in the woof of she actual daily life . the be rarely betraye or discover accord to any programme we fear have sketch out . fear be almost always haunt by terrible dramatic scene , which recur in spite of the best - argue probability against they ; and during a year that have have the burthan of concealment on she mind , the possibility of discovery have continually present itself under the form of a sudden meeting with she father or when she be walk with in the . she be aware that this be not one of the most likely event ; but it be the scene that must completely symbolize she inward dread . those slight indirect suggestion which be dependent on apparently trivial coincidence and incalculable state of mind , be the favorite machinery of ,
, but be not the stuff in which imagination be apt to work . certainly one of the person about whom 's fear be furthest from troubling themselves be she aunt Pullet , on whom , see that she do not live in . 's , and be neither sharp - eyed nor sharp - tempere , it would surely have be quite whimsical of they to fix rather than on aunt Glegg . and yet the channel of fatality -- the pathway of the lightning -- be no other than aunt Pullet . she do not live at . 's , but the road from lay by the , at the end opposite that by which enter . the day after 's last meeting with , be a on which be bound to appear in funeral hatband and scarf at . 's church , Pullet make this the occasion of dining with sister , and take tea with poor sister . be the one day in the week on which be at home in the afternoon ; and today the brighter spirit he have be in of late have flow over in unusually cheerful open chat with he father , and in the invitation , " come , , you come too ! " when he stroll out with he mother in the garden to see the advancing cherry - blossom . he have be better pleased with since she have be less odd and ascetic ; he be even get rather proud of she ; several person have remark in he hearing that he sister be a very fine girl . to -day there be a peculiar brightness in she face , due in reality to a undercurrent of excitement , which have as much doubt and pain as pleasure in it ; but it might pass for a sign of happiness . " you look very well , my dear , " say aunt Pullet , shak she head sadly , as they sit round the tea - table . " I niver think you girl 'uld be so good - look , . but you must wear pink , my dear ; that blue thing as you aunt give you turn you into a crowflower . never _be tasty . why do not you wear that gow of ' mine ? " " it be so pretty and so smart , aunt . I think it be too showy for I , -- at least for my other clothes , that I must wear with it . " to be sure , it 'uld be unbecoming if it be not well know you have get they belong to you as can afford to give you such thing when they have do with them themselves . it stand to reason I must give my own niece clothes now and then , -- such thing as _I_ buy every year , and never wear anything out . and as for , there be no giving to she , for she be get everything of ' the choicest ; sister may well hold she head up ,-- though she look dreadful yallow , poor thing -- I doubt this liver complaint ' ull carry she off . that be what this new vicar , this , say in the funeral sermon to - day . " " ah , he be a wonderful preacher , by all account , -- be not he , ? " say . " why , have get a collar on this blessed day , " continue , with she eye fix in a ruminating manner , " as I do not say I have not get as good , but I must look out my best to match it . " " 's call the bell o' . 's , they say ; that be a cur 'ous word , " observe , on whom the mystery of etymology sometimes fall with a oppressive weight . " Pooh ! " say , jealous for , " she be a small thing , not much of a figure . but fine feather make fine bird . I see nothing to admire so much in those diminutive woman ; they look silly by the side of ' the man , -- out of ' proportion . when I choose my wife , I choose she the right size , -- neither too little nor too big . " the poor wife , with she wither beauty , smile complacently . " but the man be not _all_ big , " say uncle Pullet , not without some self - reference ; " a young fellow may be good - look and yet not be a six - foot , like master Tom here . " ah , it be poor talk about littleness and bigness , -- anybody may think it be a mercy they be straight , " say aunt Pullet . " there be that mismade son o' 's , I see he at church to - day . dear , dear ! to think of ' the property he be like to have ; and they say he be very queer and lonely , do not like much company . I should not wonder if he go out of he mind ; for we never come along the road but he be a - scrambl out of ' the tree and bramble at the . " this wide statement , by which represent the fact that she have twice see at the spot indicate , produce a effect on which be all the stronger because sate opposite she , and she be intensely anxious to look indifferent . at 's name she have blush , and the blush deepen every instant from consciousness , until the mention of the make she feel as if the whole secret be betrayed , and she da
da not even hold she tea - spoon lest she should show how she tremble . she sit with she hand clasp under the table , not da to look round . happily , she father be seat on the same side with herself , beyond she uncle Pullet , and could not see she face without stoop forward . she mother 's voice bring the first relief , turn the conversation ; for be always alarme when the name of be mention in she husband 's presence . recovere composure enough to look up ; she eye meet 's , but he turn away he head immediately ; and she go to be that night wonder if he have gather any suspicion from she confusion . perhaps not ; perhaps he would think it be only she alarm at she aunt 's mention of before she father ; that be the interpretation she mother have put in it . to she father , be like a disfiguring disease , of which he be oblige to endure the consciousness , but be exasperate to have the existence recognize by other ; and no amount of sensitiveness in she about she father could be surprising , thought . but be too keen - sigh to rest satisfied with such a interpretation ; he have see clearly enough that there be something distinct from anxiety about she father in 's excessive confusion . in try to recall all the detail that could give shape to he suspicion , he remember only lately hear he mother scold for walking in the when the ground be wet , and bring home sho clog with red soil ; still Tom , retain all he old repulsion for 's deformity , shrank from attributing to he sister the probability of feel more than a friendly interest in such a unfortunate exception to the common run of man . 's be a nature which have a sort of superstitious repugnance to everything exceptional . a love for a deformed man would be odious in any woman , in a sister intolerable . but if she have be carry on any kind of intercourse whatever with , a stop must be put to it at once ; she be disobey she father 's strongest feeling and she brother 's express command , besides compromise herself by secret meeting . he leave home the next morning in that watchful state of mind which turn the most ordinary course of thing into pregnant coincidence . that afternoon , about half - past three o'clock , be stand on the wharf , talk with about the probability of the good ship Adelaide come in , in a day or two , with result highly important to both of they . " Eh , " say , parenthetically , as he look over the field on the other side of the river , " there go that crook young . I know he or he shadder as far off as I can see th'ey ; I be allays light on he of ' that side the river . " a sudden thought seem to have dart through 's mind . " I must go , , " he say ; " I 've something to attend to , " hurrie off to the warehouse , where he leave notice for some one to take he place ; he be call away home on peremptory business . the swiftest pace and the shortest road take he to the gate , and he be pause to open it deliberately , that he might walk into the house with a appearance of perfect composure , when come out at the front door in bonnet and shawl . he conjecture be fulfil , and he wait for she at the gate . she start violently when she see he . " , how be it you be come home ? be there anything the matter ? " speak in a low , tremulous voice . " I be come to walk with you to the , and meet , " say , the central fold in he brow , which have become habitual with he , deepen as he speak . stand helpless , pale and cold . by some means , then , know everything . at last she say , " I be , not go , " and turn round . " yes , you be ; but I want to speak to you first . where be my father ? " " out on horseback . " " and my mother ? " " in the yard , I think , with the poultry . " " I can go in , then , without she see I ? " they walk in together , and , enter the parlor , say to , " come in here . " she obey , and he close the door behind she . " now , , tell I this instant everything that have pass between you and . " " do my father know anything ? " say , still trembl . " no , " say indignantly . " but he _shall_ know , if you attempt to use deceit toward I any further . " " I do not wish to use deceit , " say , flush into resentment at hear this word apply to she conduct . " tell I the whole truth , then . " " perhaps you know it . " " never mind whether I know it or not . tell I exactly what have happen , or my father shall know everything . " " I tell it for my father 's sake , then . " " yes , it become you to profess affection for you father , when you have despise he strongest feeling . " " you never do wrong ,
, , " say , tauntingly . " not if I know it , " answer , with proud sincerity . " but I have nothing to say to you beyond this : tell I what have pass between you and . when do you first meet he in the ? " " a year ago , " say , quietly . 's severity give she a certain fund of defiance , and keep she sense of error in abeyance . " you need ask I no more question . we have be friendly a year . we have meet and walk together often . he have lent I book . " " be that all ? " say , look straight at she with he frown . pause a moment ; then , determined to make a end of 's right to accuse she of deceit , she say haughtily : " no , not quite all . on he tell I that he love I . I do not think of it before then ; I have only think of he as a old friend . " " and you _encourage he ? " say , with a expression of disgust . " I tell he that I love he too . " be silent a few moment , look on the ground and frowning , with he hand in he pocket . at last he look up and say coldly ,-- " now , then , , there be but two course for you to take , -- either you vow solemnly to I , with you hand on my father 's , that you will never have another meeting or speak another word in private with , or you refuse , and I tell my father everything ; and this month , when by my exertion he might be make happy once more , you will cause he the blow of know that you be a disobedient , deceitful daughter , who throw away she own respectability by clandestine meeting with the son of a man that have help to ruin she father . choose ! " end with cold decision , go up to the large , draw it forward , and open it at the fly - leaf , where the writing be . it be a crush alternative to . " , " she say , urge out of pride into pleading , " do not ask I that . I will promise you to give up all intercourse with , if you will let I see he once , or even only write to he and explain everything , -- to give it up as long as it would ever cause any pain to my father . I feel something for too . _he_ be not happy . " " I do not wish to hear anything of you feeling ; I have say exactly what I mean . , and quickly , lest my mother should come in . " " if I give you my word , that will be as strong a bond to I as if I lay my hand on the . I do not require that to bind I . " " do what _i_ require , " say . " I can not trust you , . there be no consistency in you . put you hand on this , and say , 'I renounce all private speech and intercourse with from this time forth . ' you will bring shame on we all , and grief on my father ; and what be the use of my exert myself and give up everything else for the sake of pay my father 's debt , if you be to bring madness and vexation on he , just when he might be easy and hold up he head once more ? " " oh , , _will_ the debt be pay soon ? " say , clasp she hand , with a sudden flash of joy across she wretchedness . " if thing turn out as I expect , " say . " but , " he add , he voice trembl with indignation , " while I have be contrive and work that my father may have some peace of mind before he die ,-- work for the respectability of we family , -- you have do all you can to destroy both . " feel a deep movement of compunction ; for the moment , she mind cease to contend against what she feel to be cruel and unreasonable , and in she self - blame she justify she brother . " , " she say in a low voice , " it be wrong of I ; but I be so lonely , and I be sorry for . and I think enmity and hatred be wick . " " ! " say . " you duty be clear enough . say no more ; but promise , in the word I tell you . " " I _must speak to once more . " " you will go with I now and speak to he . " " I give you my word not to meet he or write to he again without you knowledge . that be the only thing I will say . I will put my hand on the Bible if you like . " " say it , then . " lay she hand on the page of manuscript and repeat the promise . close the book , and say , " now let we go . " not a word be speak as they walk along . be suffer in anticipation of what be about to suffer , and dread the galling word that would fall on he from 's lip ; but she feel it be in vain to attempt anything but submission . have he terrible
terrible clutch on she conscience and she deepest dread ; she writh under the demonstrable truth of the character he have give to she conduct , and yet she whole soul rebel against it as unfair from its incompleteness . he , meanwhile , feel the impetus of he indignation divert toward . he do not know how much of a old boyish repulsion and of mere personal pride and animosity be concerned in the bitter severity of the word by which he mean to do the duty of a son and a brother . be not give to inquire subtly into he own motive any more than into other matter of a intangible kind ; he be quite sure that he own motive as well as action be good , else he would have have nothing to do with they . 's only hope be that something might , for the first time , have prevent from come . then there would be delay , -- then she might get 's permission to write to he . she heart beat with double violence when they get under the fir . it be the last moment of suspense , she think ; always meet she soon after she get beyond they . but they pass across the more open green space , and enter the narrow bushy path by the mound . another turning , and they come so close upon he that both and stop suddenly within a yard of each other . there be a moment 's silence , in which dart a look of inquiry at 's face . he see a answer there , in the pale , part lip , and the terrified tension of the large eye . she imagination , always rush extravagantly beyond a immediate impression , see she tall , strong brother grasp the feeble bodily , crush he and trampl on he . " do you call this act the part of a man and a gentleman , sir ? " say , in a voice of harsh scorn , as soon as 's eye be turn on he again . " what do you mean ? " answer , haughtily . " ? farther from I , lest I should lay hand on you , and I will tell you what I mean . I mean , take advantage of a young girl 's foolishness and ignorance to get she to have secret meeting with you . I mean , da to trifle with the respectability of a family that have a good and honest name to support . " " I deny that , " interrupt , impetuously . " I could never trifle with anything that affect you sister 's happiness . she be dearer to I than she be to you ; I honor she more than you can ever honor she ; I would give up my life to she . " " do not talk high - fly nonsense to I , sir ! do you mean to pretend that you do not know it would be injuriious to she to meet you here week after week ? do you pretend you have any right to make profession of love to she , even if you have be a fit husband for she , when neither she father nor you father would ever consent to a marriage between you ? and _you_,--_you_ to try and worm yourself into the affections of a handsome girl who be not eighteen , and have be shut out from the world by she father 's misfortune ! that be you crooke notion of honor , be it ? I call it base treachery ; I call it take advantage of circumstance to win what be too good for you , -- what you would never get by fair means . " " it be manly of you to talk in this way to _me_, " say , bitterly , he whole frame shake by violent emotion . " have a immemorial right to stupidity and insolent abuse . you be incapable even of understanding what I feel for you sister . I feel so much for she that I could even desire to be at friendship with _you_. " " I should be very sorry to understand you feeling , " say , with scorch contempt . " what I wish be that you should understand _me _,-- that I shall take care of _my_ sister , and that if you dare to make the least attempt to come near she , or to write to she , or to keep the slightest hold on she mind , you puny , miserable body , that ought to have put some modesty into you mind , shall not protect you . I will thrash you ; I will hold you up to public scorn . who would not laugh at the idea of _your_ turn lover to a fine girl ? " and walk on in silence for some yard . he burst out , in a convulse voice . " stay , ! " say , make a strong effort to speak . then look at , " you have drag you sister here , I suppose , that she may stand by while you threat and insult I . these naturally seem to you the right means to influence I . but you be mistaken . let you sister speak . if she say she be bound to give I up , I shall abide by she wish to the slightest word . " " it be for my father 's sake , , " say , imploringly . " threaten to tell my father , and he could not bear it ; I have promise , I have vow solemnly , that we will not have any intercourse without my brother 's knowledge . " " it
it be enough , . _I_ shall not change ; but I wish you to hold yourself entirely free . but trust I ; remember that I can never seek for anything but good to what belong to you . " " yes , " say , exasperate by this attitude of 's , " you can talk of seek good for she and what belong to she now ; do you seek she good before ? " " I do , -- at some risk , perhaps . but I wish she to have a friend for life , -- who would cherish she , who would do she more justice than a coarse and narrow - minded brother , that she have always lavish she affections on . " " yes , my way of befriend she be different from yours ; and I will tell you what be my way . I will save she from disobeying and disgrac she father ; I will save she from throw herself away on you , -- from make herself a laugh - stock , -- from be floute by a man like _your father , because she be not good enough for he son . you know well enough what sort of justice and cherish you be prepare for she . I be not to be impos upon by fine word ; I can see what action mean . come away , . " he seize 's right wrist as he speak , and she put out she left hand . clasp it a instant , with one eager look , and then hurrie away . and walk on in silence for some yard . he be still hold she wrist tightly , as if he be compelle a culprit from the scene of action . at last , with a violent snatch , draw she hand away , and she pent - up , long - gather irritation burst into utterance . " do not suppose that I think you be right , , or that I bow to you will . I despise the feeling you have show in speak to ; I detest you insulting , unmanly allusion to he deformity . you have be reproach other people all you life ; you have be always sure you yourself be right . it be because you have not a mind large enough to see that there be anything better than you own conduct and you own petty aim . " " certainly , " say , coolly . " I do not see that you conduct be better , or you aim either . if you conduct , and 's conduct , have be right , why be you asham of its be know ? answer I then . I know what I have aim at in my conduct , and I have succeed ; pray , what good have you conduct bring to you or any one else ? " " I do not want to defend myself , " say , still with vehemence : " I know I have be wrong , -- often , continually . but yet , sometimes when I have do wrong , it have be because I have feeling that you would be the better for , if you have they . if _you_ be in fault ever , if you have do anything very wrong , I should be sorry for the pain it bring you ; I should not want punishment to be heape on you . but you have always enjoy punish I ; you have always be hard and cruel to I ; even when I be a little girl , and always love you better than any one else in the world , you would let I go cry to be without forgive I . you have no pity ; you have no sense of you own imperfection and you own sins . it be a sin to be hard ; it be not fitte for a mortal , for a . you be nothing but a Pharisee . you thank for nothing but you own virtue ; you think they be great enough to win you everything else . you have not even a vision of feeling by the side of which you shining virtue be mere darkness ! " " well , " say , with cold scorn , " if you feeling be so much better than mine , let I see you show they in some other way than by conduct that be likely to disgrase we all , -- than by ridiculous flight first into one extreme and then into another . pray , how have you show you love , that you talk of , either to I or my father ? by disobey and deceive we . I have a different way of show my affection . " " because you be a man , , and have power , and can do something in the world . " " then , if you can do nothing , submit to those that can . " " so I _will submit to what I acknowledge and feel to be right . I will submit even to what be unreasonable from my father , but I will not submit to it from you . you boast of you virtue as if they purchase you a right to be cruel and unmanly , as you have be to - day . do not suppose I would give up in obedience to you . the deformity you insult would make I cling to he and care for he the more . " " very well ; that be you view of thing . " say , more coldly than ever ; " you need say no more to show I what a wide distance there be between we . let we
we remember that in future , and be silent . " go back to . , to fulfill a appointment with he uncle , and receive direction about a journey on which he be to set out the next morning . go up to she own room to pour out all that indignant remonstrance , against which 's mind be close barred , in bitter tear . then , when the first burst of unsatisfied anger be go by , come the recollection of that quiet time before the pleasure which have end in to - day 's misery have pertur the clearness and simplicity of she life . she use to think in that time that she have make great conquest , and win a last stand on serene height above worldly temptation and conflict . and here she be down again in the thick of a hot strife with she own and other ' passion . life be not so short , then , and perfect rest be not so near as she have drea when she be two year younger . there be more struggle for she , and perhaps more fal . if she have feel that she be entirely wrong , and that have be entirely right , she could sooner have recover more inward harmony ; but now she penitence and submission be constantly obstruct by resentment that would present itself to she no otherwise than as a just indignation . she heart b for ; she go on recalle the insult that have be flng at he with so vivid a conception of what he have feel under they , that it be almost like a sharp bodily pain to she , make she beat the floor with she foot and tighten she finger on she palm . and yet , how be it that she be now and then conscious of a certain dim background of relief in the force separation from ? surely it be only because the sense of a deliverance from concealment be welcome at any cost . the - Three week later , when be at its prettiest moment in all the year , -- the great chestnut in blossom , and the grass all deep and daisied ,-- come home to it earlier than usual in the evening , and as he pass over the bridge , he look with the old deep - root affection at the respectable red brick house , which always seem cheerful and invite outside , let the room be as bare and the heart as sad as they might inside . there be a very pleasant light in 's blue - gray eye as he glance at the house - window ; that fold in he brow never disappear , but it be not unbecoming ; it seem to imply a strength of will that may possibly be without harshness , when the eye and mouth have they gentlest expression . he firm step become quicker , and the corner of he mouth rebel against the compression which be meant to forbid a smile . the eyes in the parlor be not turn toward the bridge just then , and the group there be sitting in unexpectant silence ,-- Tulliver in he arm -chair , tired with a long ride , and ruminat with a worn look , fix chiefly on , who be bend over she sew while she mother be make the tea . they all look up with surprise when they hear the well - know foot . " why , what be up now , ? " say he father . " you be a bit earlier than usual . " " oh , there be nothing more for I to do , so I come away . well , mother ! " go up to he mother and kiss she , a sign of unusual good - humor with he . hardly a word or look have pass between he and in all the three week ; but he usual incommunicativeness at home prevent this from be noticeable to they parent . " , " say , when they have finish tea , " do you know exactly how much money there be in the tin box ? " " only a hundred and ninety - three pound , " say . " you have bring less of ' late ; but young fellow like to have they own way with they money . though I do not do as I like before _i_ be of age . " he speak with rather timid discontent . " be you quite sure that be the sum , father ? " say . " I wish you would take the trouble to fetch the tin box down . I think you have perhaps make a mistake . " " how should I make a mistake ? " say he father , sharply . " I have count it often enough ; but I can fetch it , if you will not believe I . " it be always a incident like , in he gloomy life , to fetch the tin box and count the money . " do not go out of the room , mother , " say , as he see she move when he father be go upstairs . " and be not Maggie to go ? " say ; " because somebody must take away the thing . " " just as she like , " say indifferently . that be a cutting word to . she heart have leape with the sudden conviction that be go to tell they father the debt could be pay ; and would have let she be absent when that news be tell ! but she carry away the tray and come back immediately . the feeling of injury on she own behalf could not predominate at that
that moment . draw to the corner of the table near he father when the tin box be set down and open , and the red evening light fall on they make conspicuous the worn , sour gloom of the dark - eyed father and the suppress joy in the face of the fair - complexioned son . the mother and sit at the other end of the table , the one in blank patience , the other in palpitating expectation . count out the money , set it in order on the table , and then say , glance sharply at : " there now ! you see I be right enough . " he pause , look at the money with bitter despondency . " there be more nor three hundred want ; it will be a fine while before _i_ can save that . lose that forty - two pound wi' the corn be a sore job . this world have be too many for I . it be take four year to lay _this by ; it be much if I be above ground for another four year . I must trusten to you to pay th'ey , " he go on , with a trembling voice , " if you keep I ' the same mind now you be come o ' age . but you be like enough to bury I first . " he look up in 's face with a querulous desire for some assurance . " no , father , " say , speak with energetic decision , though there be tremor discernible in he voice too , " you will live to see the debt all pay . you shall pay they with you own hand . " he tone imply something more than mere hopefulness or resolution . a slight electric shock seem to pass through , and he keep he eye fix on Tom with a look of eager inquiry , while Maggie , unable to restrain herself , rush to she father 's side and knelt down by he . be silent a little while before he go on . " a good while ago , my uncle lent I a little money to trade with , and that have answer . I have three hundred and twenty pound in the bank . " he mother 's arm be round he neck as soon as the last word be uttere , and she say , half cry : " oh , my boy , I know you would make iverything right again , when you get a man . " but he father be silent ; the flood of emotion hem in all power of speech . both and be strike with fear lest the shock of joy might even be fatal . but the bless relief of tear come . the broad chest heav , the muscle of the face give way , and the gray - haired man burst into loud sob . the fit of weeping gradually subside , and he sit quiet , recover the regularity of he breathing . at last he look up at he wife and say , in a gentle tone : " Bessy , you must come and kiss I now -- the lad have make you amend . you will see a bit of ' comfort again , belike . " when she have kiss he , and he have hold she hand a minute , he thought go back to the money . " I wish you would bring I the money to look at , , " he say , finger the sovereign on the table ; " I should ha ' feel surer . " " you shall see it to - morrow , father , " say . " my uncle have appoint the creditor to meet to - morrow at the , and he have order a dinner for they at two o'clock . my uncle and he will both be there . it be advertise in the ' Messenger ' on . " " then know o not ! " say , he eye kindl with triumphant fire . " ah ! " he go on , with a long - draw guttural enunciation , take out he snuff - box , the only luxury he have leave himself , and tap it with something of he old air of defiance . " I will get from under _his_ thumb now , though I _must leave the old mill . I think I could ha ' hold out to die here -- but I can not ---- we have get a glass o' nothing in the house , have we , ? " " yes , " say , draw out she much - reduce bunch of key , " there be some brandy sister Deane bring I when I be ill . " " get it I , then ; get it I . I feel a bit weak . " " , my lad , " he say , in a stronger voice , when he have take some brandy - and - water , " you shall make a speech to th'ey . I will tell them it be you as get the best part of ' the money . they will see I be honest at last , and ha ' get a honest son . ah ! thWakey 'uld be fine and glad to have a son like mine , -- a fine straight fellow , -- i'stead of ' that poor crooke creatur ! you will prosper I ' the world , my lad ; you will maybe see the day when and he son 's ull be a round or two below you . you will like enough be to 'en into partnership , as you uncle be before you , -- you be in
in the right way of r't ; and then there be nothing to hinder you get rich . and if ever you be rich enough -- mind this -- try and get th ' old mill again . " throw himself back in he chair ; he mind , which have so long be the home of nothing but bitter discontent and foreboding , suddenly fill , by the magic of joy , with vision of good fortune . but some subtle influence prevent he from foresee the good fortune as happene to himself . " shake hand wi' I , my lad , " he say , suddenly put out he hand . " it be a great thing when a man can be proud as he be get a good son . I have have that luck . " never live to taste another moment so delicious as that ; and could not help forget she own grievance . _was_ good ; and in the sweet humility that spring in we all in moment of true admiration and gratitude , she feel that the fault he have to pardon in she have never be redeem , as he fault were . she feel no jealousy this even that , for the first time , she seem to be throw into the background in she father 's mind . there be much more talk before bedtime . naturally want to hear all the particular of 's trading adventur , and he listen with grow excitement and delight . he be curious to know what have be say on every occasion ; if possible , what have be think ; and 's part in the business throw he into peculiar outburst of sympathy with the triumphant knowingness of that remarkable packman . 's juvenile history , so far as it have come under 's knowledge , be recall with that sense of astonishing promise it display , which be observable in all reminiscence of the childhood of great man . it be well that there be this interest of narrative to keep under the vague but fierce sense of triumph over , which would otherwise have be the channel he joy would have rush into with dangerous force . even as it be , that feel from time to time give threat of its ultimate mastery , in sudden bursts of irrelevant exclamation . it be long before get to sleep that night ; and the sleep , when it come , be fill with vivid dream . at half - past five o'clock in the morning , when be already rise , he alarme she by start up with a sort of smothered shout , and look round in a bewildered way at the wall of the bedroom . " what be the matter , ? " say he wife . he look at she , still with a puzzled expression , and say at last : " ah !-- I be dream -- do I make a noise ?--I think I would get hold of he . " a day of Reckoning be a essentially sober man ,-- able to take he glass and not averse to it , but never exceed the bounds of moderation . he have naturally a active Hotspur temperament , which do not crave liquid fire to set it aglow ; he impetuosity be usually equal to a exciting occasion without any such reinforcement ; and he desire for the brandy - and - water imply that the too sudden joy have fall with a dangerous shock on a frame depresse by four year of gloom and unaccustom hard fare . but that first doubtful tottering moment pass , he seem to gather strength with he gathering excitement ; and the next day , when he be seat at table with he creditor , he eye kindling and he cheek flush with the consciousness that he be about to make a honorable figure once more , he look more like the proud , confident , warm - hear , and warm -tempered Tulliver of old time than might have seem possible to any one who have meet he a week before , ride along as have be he will not for the last four year since the sense of failure and debt have be upon he , -- with he head hang down , casting brief , unwilling look on those who force themselves on he notice . he make he speech , assert he honest principle with he old confident eagerness , allud to the rascal and the luck that have be against he , but that he have triumph over , to some extent , by hard effort and the aid of a good son ; and win up with the story of how have get the best part of the needful money . but the streak of irritation and hostile triumph seem to melt for a little while into purer fatherly pride and pleasure , when , 's health have be propose , and uncle Deane have take occasion to say a few word of eulogy on he general character and conduct , himself get up and make the single speech of he life . it could hardly have be briefer . he thank the gentlman for the honor they have do he . he be glad that he have be able to help he father in prove he integrity and regain he honest name ; and , for he own part , he hope he should never undue that work and disgrase that name . but the applause that follow be so great , and look so gentlemanly as well as tall and straight , that remark , in a explanatory manner , to he friend on he right and leave , that he have spend a deal of money on he son 's education . the party break up
up in very sober fashion at five o'clock . remain in to attend to some business , and mount he horse to go home , and describe the memorable thing that have be say and do , to " poor Bessy and the little wench . " the air of excitement that hang about he be but faintly due to good cheer or any stimulus but the potent wine of triumphant joy . he do not choose any back street to - day , but ride slowly , with uplifted head and free glance , along the principal street all the way to the bridge . why do he not happen to meet Wakem ? the want of that coincidence vex he , and set he mind at work in a irritating way . perhaps thWakey be go out of town to - day on purpose to avoid see or hear anything of a honorable action which might well cause he some unpleasant twinge . if be to meet he then , would look straight at he , and the rascal would perhaps be forsake a little by he cool , domineer impudence . he would know by and by that a honest man be not go to serve _him_ any longer , and lend he honesty to fill a pocket already over -full of dishonest gain . perhaps the luck be begin to turn ; perhaps the do not always hold the best card in this world . Simmer in this way , approach the yardgate of , near enough to see a well - know figure come out of they on a fine black horse . they meet about fifty yard from the gate , between the great chestnut and elm and the high bank . " , " say , abruptly , in a haughtier tone than usual , " what a fool 's trick you do ,-- spread those hard lump on that Far close ! I tell you how it would be ; but you man never learn to farm with any method . " " oh ! " say , suddenly boil up ; " get somebody else to farm for you , then , as will ask _you_ to teach he . " " you have be drink , I suppose , " say Wakem , really believe that this be the meaning of 's flushed face and sparkl eye . " no , I have not be drink , " say ; " I want no drinking to help I make up my mind as I will serve no longer under a scoundrel . " " very well ! you may leave my premise to - morrow , then ; hold you insolent tongue and let I pass . " ( be back he horse across the road to hem Wakem in . ) " no , I _sha' not let you pass , " say , get fiercer . " I shall tell you what I think of you first . you be too big a raskill to get hang -- you be ---- " " let I pass , you ignorant brute , or I will ride over you . " , spurr he horse and raise he whip , make a rush forward ; and 's horse , rear and stagger backward , throw he rider from the saddle and send he sideway on the ground . thWakey have have the presence of mind to loose the bridle at once , and as the horse only stagger a few pace and then stand still , he might have risen and remount without more inconvenience than a bruise and a shake . but before he could rise , be off he horse too . the sight of the long - hate predominant man down , and in he power , throw he into a frenzy of triumphant vengeance , which seem to give he preternatural agility and strength . he rush on , who be in the act of try to recover he foot , grasp he by the left arm so as to press 's whole weight on the right arm , which rest on the ground , and flog he fiercely across the back with he riding - whip . thWakey shoute for help , but no help come , until a woman 's scream be hear , and the cry of " father , father ! " suddenly , Wakem felt , something have arrest 's arm ; for the flogging cease , and the grasp on he own arm be relaxed . " get away with you -- go ! " say , angrily . but it be not to that he speak . slowly the lawyer rise , and , as he turn he head , see that 's arm be be hold by a girl , rather by the fear of hurt the girl that cling to he with all she young might . " oh , -- mother -- come and help ! " cry , as she hear the long - for footstep . " help I on to that low horse , " say to , " then I shall perhaps manage ; though -- confound it -- I think this arm be sprain . " with some difficulty , be heav on to 's horse . then he turn toward the miller and say , with white rage , " you will suffer for this , sir . you daughter be a witness that you have assaulte I . " " I do not care , " say , in a thick , fierce voice ; " go and show you back , and tell them I thrash you . tell them I have make thing a bit more even I ' the world . " " ride my horse home with I , " say to . " by the
the , not through the town . " " Father , come in ! " say , imploringly . then , see that have ride off , and that no further violence be possible , she slacken she hold and burst into hysteric sob , while poor stand by in silence , quiver with fear . but become conscious that as she be slacken she hold she father be begin to grasp she and lean on she . the surprise check she sob . " I feel ill -- faintish , " he say . " help I in , Bessy -- I be giddy -- I have a pain I ' the head . " he walk in slowly , prop by he wife and daughter and totter into he arm -chair . the almost purple flush have give way to paleness , and he hand be cold . " have not we better send for the doctor ? " say . he seem to be too faint and suffer to hear she ; but presently , when she say to , " and seek for somebody to fetch the doctor , " he look up at she with full comprehension , and say , " ? no -- no doctor . it be my head , that be all . help I to be . " end to the day that have risen on they all like a beginning of better time ! but mingle seed must bear a mingled crop . in half a hour after he father have lain down come home . be with he , come to congratulate " the old master , " not without some excusable pride that he have have he share in bring about 's good luck ; and have think he father would like nothing better , as a finish to the day , than a talk with . but now could only spend the evening in gloomy expectation of the unpleasant consequence that must follow on this mad outbreak of he father 's long -smothered hate . after the painful news have be tell , he sit in silence ; he have not spirit or inclination to tell he mother and sister anything about the dinner ; they hardly care to ask it . apparently the mingled thread in the web of they life be so curiously twiste together that there could be no joy without a sorrow come close upon it . be deject by the thought that he exemplary effort must always be baffle by the wrong - do of other ; be live through , over and over again , the agony of the moment in which she have rush to throw herself on she father 's arm , with a vague , shudder foreboding of wretched scene to come . not one of the three felt any particular alarm about 's health ; the symptom do not recall he former dangerous attack , and it seem only a necessary consequence that he violent passion and effort of strength , after many hour of unusual excitement , should have make he feel ill . would probably cure he . , tire out by he active day , fall asleep soon , and sleep soundly ; it seem to he as if he have only just come to be , when he wake to see he mother stand by he in the gray light of early morning . " my boy , you must get up this minute ; I have send for the doctor , and you father want you and to come to he . " " be he worse , mother ? " " he be be very ill all night with he head , but he do not say it be worse ; he only say suddenly , ' Bessy , fetch the boy and girl . tell th'ey to make haste . ' " and throw on they clothes hastily in the chill gray light , and reach they father 's room almost at the same moment . he be watch for they with a expression of pain on he brow , but with sharpened , anxious consciousness in he eye . stand at the foot of the bed , frightene and trembl , look worn and a from disturbed rest . be at the bedside first , but she father 's glance be toward , who come and stand next to she . " , my lad , it be come upon I as I sha ' not get up again . this world have be too many for I , my lad , but you have do what you could to make thing a bit even . shake hand wi' I again , my lad , before I go away from you . " the father and son clasp hand and look at each other a instant . then say , try to speak firmly ,-- " Have you any wish , father -- that I can fulfil , when - - -- " " ay , my lad -- you will try and get the old mill back . " " yes , father . " " and there be you mother -- you will try and make she amend , all you can , for my bad luck -- and there be the little wench -- -- " the father turn he eye on with a still more eager look , while she , with a bursting heart , sank on she knee , to be closer to the dear , time - worn face which have be present with she through long year , as the sign of she deepest love and hardest trial . " you must take care of she , -- do not you fret , my wench -- there will come somebody as will love you and take you part -- and you
you must be good to she , my lad . I be good to _my sister . kiss I , .-- come , Bessy .-- you will manage to pay for a brick grave , , so as you mother and I can lie together . " he look away from they all when he have say this , and lay silent for some minute , while they stand watch he , not da to move . the morning light be grow clearer for they , and they could see the heaviness gather in he face , and the dulness in he eye . but at last he look toward and say ,-- " I have my turn -- I beat he . that be nothing but fair . I never want anything but what be fair . " " but , father , dear father , " say , a unspeakable anxiety predominat over she grief , " you forgive he -- you forgive every one now ? " he do not move he eye to look at she , but he say ,-- " no , my wench . I do not forgive he . what be forgive to do ? I can not love a raskill -- -- " he voice have become thicker ; but he want to say more , and move he lip again and again , struggle in vain to speak . at length the word force they way . " do forgive raskill ?-- but if he do , he will not be hard wi' I . " he hand move uneasily , as if he want they to remove some obstruction that weigh upon he . two or three time there fall from he some break word ,-- " this world 's -- too many -- honest man -- puzzl ----" they merge into mere muttering ; the eye have cease to discern ; and then come the final silence . but not of death . for a hour or more the chest heav , the loud , hard breathing continue , get gradually slower , as the cold dew gather on the brow . at last there be total stillness , and poor 's dimly light soul have forever cease to be vex with the painful riddle of this world . help be come now ; and he wife were there , and have arrive , too late for everything but to say , " this be death . " and go downstairs together into the room where they father 's place be empty . they eye turn to the same spot , and speak ,-- " Tom , forgive I -- let we always love each other " ; and they cling and weep together . the great temptation_ I a in the well - furnish drawing - room , with the open grand piano , and the pleasant outlook down a slop garden to a boat - house by the side of the , be 's . the neat little lady in mourning , whose light - brown ringlet be fall over the colored embroidery with which she finger be busy , be of course ; and the fine young man who be lean down from he chair to snap the scissors in the extremely abbreviated face of the " King Charles " lie on the young lady 's foot be no other than , whose diamond ring , attar of ros , and air of _nonchalant_ leisure , at twelve o'clock in the day , be the graceful and odoriferous result of the largest oil - mill and the most extensive wharf in 's . there be a apparent triviality in the action with the scissors , but you discernment perceive at once that there be a design in it which make it eminently worthy of a large - head , long - limb young man ; for you see that want the scissors , and be compelle , reluctant as she may be , to shake she ringlet back , raise she soft hazel eye , smile playfully down on the face that be so very nearly on a level with she knee , and hold out she little shell - pink palm , to say ,-- " my scissors , please , if you can renounce the great pleasure of persecut my poor . " the foolish scissors have slip too far over the knuckle , it seem , and Hercules hold out he entrap finger hopelessly . " Confound the scissors ! the oval lie the wrong way . please draw they off for I . " " draw they off with you other hand , " say , roguishly . " oh , but that be my left hand ; I be not leave - hand . " Lucy laugh , and the scissors be draw off with gentle touch from tiny tip , which naturally dispose for a repetition _da capo _. accordingly , he watch for the release of the scissors , that he may get they into he possession again . " no , no , " say , stick they in she band , " you shall not have my scissors again , -- you have strain they already . now do not set grow again . sit up and behave properly , and then I will tell you some news . " " what be that ? " say Stephen , throw himself back and hang he right arm over the corner of he chair . he might have be sit for he portrait , which would have represent a rather strike young man of five - and - twenty , with a square forehead , short dark - brown hair , stand erect , with a slight wave at the end , like a thick crop of corn , and a half - ardent , half - sarcastic
sarcastic glance from under he well - mark horizontal eyebrow . " be it very important news ? " " yes , very . . " " you be go to change 's diet , and give he three ratafias soak in a dessert - spoonful of cream daily ? " " quite wrong . " " well , then , have be preach against buckram , and you lady have all be send he a roundrobin , say , ' this be a hard doctrine ; who can bear it ? ' " " for shame ! " say , adjust she little mouth gravely . " it be rather dull of you not to guess my news , because it be about something I mention to you not very long ago . " " but you have mention many thing to I not long ago . do you feminine tyranny require that when you say the thing you mean be one of several thing , I should know it immediately by that mark ? " " yes , I know you think I be silly . " " I think you be perfectly charme . " " and my silliness be part of my charm ? " " I do not say _that _. " " but I know you like woman to be rather insipid . betraye you ; he say so one day when you be not here . " " oh , I know be fierce on that point ; he make it quite a personal matter . I think he must be love - sick for some unknown lady , -- some exalt whom he meet abroad . " " by the by , " say , pause in she work , " it have just occur to I that I never find out whether my cousin will object to see , as she brother do . will not enter a room where be , if he know it ; perhaps may be the same , and then we sha ' not be able to s we glee , shall we ? " " what ! be you cousin come to stay with you ? " say , with a look of slight annoyance . " yes ; that be my news , which you have forget . she be go to leave she situation , where she have be nearly two year , poor thing ,-- ever since she father 's death ; and she will stay with I a month or two ,-- many month , I hope . " " and be I bound to be pleased at that news ? " " oh no , not at all , " say , with a little air of pique . " _i be pleased , but that , of course , be no reason why _you_ should be pleased . there be no girl in the world I love so well as my cousin . " " and you will be inseparable I suppose , when she come . there will be no possibility of a _tete - a -tete_ with you any more , unless you can find a admirer for she , who will pair off with she occasionally . what be the ground of dislike to ? he might have be a resource . " " it be a family quarrel with 's father . there be very painful circumstance , I believe . I never quite understand they , or know they all . my uncle be unfortunate and lose all he property , and I think he consider be somehow the cause of it . buy , my uncle 's old place , where he always liv . you must remember my uncle , do not you ? " " no , " say , with rather supercilious indifference . " I have always know the name , and I dare say I know the man by sight , apart from he name . I know half the name and face in the neighborhood in that detached , disjointed way . " " he be a very hot - temper man . I remember , when I be a little girl and use to go to see my cousin , he often frightene I by talk as if he be angry . tell I there be a dreadful quarrel , the very day before my uncle 's death , between he and , but it be hush up . that be when you be in . say my uncle be quite mistaken in many way ; he mind have become embittered . but and must naturally feel it very painful to be remind of these thing . they have have so much , so very much trouble . be at school with I six year ago , when she be fetch away because of she father 's misfortune , and she have hardly have any pleasure since , I think . she have be in a dreary situation in a school since uncle 's death , because she be determined to be independent , and not live with aunt Pullet ; and I could hardly wish she to come to I then , because dear mamma be ill , and everything be so sad . that be why I want she to come to I now , and have a long , long holiday . " " very sweet and angelic of you , " say Stephen , look at she with a admiring smile ; " and all the more so if she have the conversational quality of she mother . " " poor aunty ! you be cruel to ridicule she . she be very valuable to _me_, I know . she manage the house beautifully , -- much better than any stranger would , -- and she be a great comfort to I in
in mamma 's illness . " " yes , but in point of companionship one would prefer that she should be represent by she brandy - cherry and cream -cake . I think with a shudder that she daughter will always be present in person , and have no agreeable proxy of that kind , -- a fat , blond girl , with round blue eye , who will stare at we silently . " " oh yes ! " exclaim , laugh wickedly , and clapp she hand , " that be just my cousin . you must have see she ! " " no , indeed ; I be only guess what 's daughter must be ; and then if she be to banish , we only apology for a tenor , that will be a additional bore . " " but I hope that may not be . I think I will ask you to call on and tell he be come to - morrow . he be quite aware of 's feeling , and always keep out of he way ; so he will understand , if you tell he , that I ask you to warn he not to come until I write to ask he . " " I think you have better write a pretty note for I to take ; be so sensitive , you know , the least thing might frighten he off come at all , and we have hard work to get he . I can never induce he to come to the park ; he do not like my sister , I think . it be only you faery touch that can lay he ruffle feather . " master the little hand that be stray toward the table , and touch it lightly with he lip . feel very proud and happy . she and be in that stage of courtship which make the most exquisite moment of youth , the freshest blossom - time of passion , -- when each be sure of the other 's love , but no formal declaration have be make , and all be mutual divination , exalt the most trivial word , the lightest gesture , into thrill delicate and delicious as waft jasmine scent . the explicitness of a engagement wear off this finest edge of susceptibility ; it be jasmine gather and present in a large bouquet . " but it be really odd that you should have hit so exactly on 's appearance and manners , " say the cunning Lucy , move to reach she desk , " because she might have be like she brother , you know ; and have not round eye ; and he be as far as possible from staring at people . " " oh , I suppose he be like the father ; he seem to be as proud as . not a brilliant companion , though , I should think . " " I like . he give I my when I lose ; and papa be very fond of he : he say have excellent principle . it be through he that he father be able to pay all he debt before he die . " " oh , ah ; I have hear about that . I hear you father and mine talk about it a little while ago , after dinner , in one of they interminable discussion about business . they think of do something for young ; he save they from a considerable loss by ride home in some marvellous way , like , to bring they news about the stoppage of a bank , or something of that sort . but I be rather drowsy at the time . " rise from he seat , and saunter to the piano , hum in falsetto , " , " as he turn over the volume of " the , " which stand open on the desk . " come and s this , " he say , when he see rise . " what , ' ' ? I do not think it suit you voice . " " never mind ; it exactly suit my feeling , which , will have it , be the grand element of good singing . I notice man with indifferent voice be usually of that opinion . " " Philip burst into one of he invective against ' the ' the other day , " say , seat herself at the piano . " he say it have a sort of sugared complacency and flattering make - believe in it , as if it be write for the birthday _fete_ of a german - . " " oh , pooh ! he be the fallen Adam with a soured temper . we be and unfallen , in paradise . now , then , -- the recitative , for the sake of the moral . you will se the whole duty of woman ,--'And from obedience grow my pride and happiness . ' " " oh no , I shall not respect a who drag the _tempo_ , as you will , " say , begin to play the duet . surely the only courtship unshaken by doubt and fear must be that in which the lover can s together . the sense of mutual fitness that spring from the two deep note fulfil expectation just at the right moment between the note of the silvery soprano , from the perfect accord of descending thirds and fifth , from the preconcert loving chase of a fugue , be likely enough to supersede any immediate demand for less impassioned form of agreement . the contralto will not care to catechise the bass ; the tenor will foresee no embarrassing dearth of remark in evening spend with the lovely soprano . in the province , too , where music be so
so scarce in that remote time , how could the musical people avoid fall in love with each other ? even political principle must have be in danger of relaxation under such circumstance ; and the violin , faithful to rotten borough , must have be temp to fraternize in a demoralizing way with a reform violoncello . in that case , the linnet - throate soprano and the full - ton bass singe ,-- " with thee delight be ever new , with thee be life incessant bliss , " believe what they sang all the more _because_ they sang it . " now for 's great song , " say , when they have finish the duet . " you do the ' heavy beasts ' to perfection . " " that sound complimentary , " say Stephen , look at he watch . " by , it be nearly half - past one ! well , I can just se this . " deliver with admirable ease the deep note represent the tread of the heavy beasts ; but when a singer have a audience of two , there be room for divide sentiment . 's mistress be charme ; but , who have intrench himself , trembl , in he basket as soon as the music begin , find this thunder so little to he taste that he leape out and scamper under the remotest _chiffonnier , as the most eligible place in which a small dog could await the crack of doom . " , ' graceful consort , ' " say Stephen , button he coat across when he have do singe , and smile down from he tall height , with the air of rather a patronizing lover , at the little lady on the music - stool . " my bliss be not incessant , for I must gallop home . I promise to be there at lunch . " " you will not be able to call on , then ? it be of no consequence ; I have say everything in my note . " " you will be engage with you cousin to - morrow , I suppose ? " " yes , we be go to have a little family - party . my cousin will dine with we ; and poor aunty will have she two child together for the first time . it will be very pretty ; I think a great deal about it . " " but I may come the next day ? " " oh yes ! come and be introduce to my cousin ; though you can hardly be say not to have see she , you have describe she so well . " " good - bye , then . " and there be that slight pressure of the hand , and momentary meeting of the eyes , which will often leave a little lady with a slight flush and smile on she face that do not subside immediately when the door be close , and with a inclination to walk up and down the room rather than to seat herself quietly at she embroidery , or other rational and improve occupation . at least this be the effect on ; and you will not , I hope , consider it a indication of vanity predominat over more tender impulse , that she just glance in the chimney - glass as she walk bring she near it . the desire to know that one have not look a absolute fright during a few hour of conversation may be construe as lie within the bounds of a laudable benevolent consideration for other . and have so much of this benevolence in she nature that I be inclin to think she small egoism be impregnate with it , just as there be people not altogether unknown to you whose small benevolence have a predominant and somewhat rank odor of egoism . even now , that she be walk up and down with a little triumphant flutter of she girlish heart at the sense that she be love by the person of chief consequence in she small world , you may see in she hazel eye a ever - present sunny benignity , in which the momentary harmless flash of personal vanity be quite lost ; and if she be happy in think of she lover , it be because the thought of he mingles readily with all the gentle affections and good - natured office with which she fill she peaceful day . even now , she mind , with that instantaneous alternation which make two current of feeling or imagination seem simultaneous , be glance continually from to the preparation she have only half finish in 's room . should be treat as well as the grandest lady - visitor , -- nay , better , for she should have 's best print and drawing in she bedroom , and the very finest bouquet of spring flower on she table . would enjoy all that , she be so find of pretty thing ! and there be poor aunt Tulliver , that no one make any account of , she be to be surprised with the present of a cap of superlative quality , and to have she health drink in a gratify manner , for which be go to lay a plot with she father this evening . clearly , she have not time to indulge in long revery about she own happy love -affair . with this think she walk toward the door , but pause there . " what be the matter , then , ? " she say , stoop in answer to some whimpering of that small quadru , and lift he glossy head against she pink cheek . " do you think I be go without you ? come , then , let we go and
and see . " be 's chestnut horse , that she always feed with she own hand when he be turn out in the paddock . she be fond of feeding dependent creature , and know the private taste of all the animal about the house , delighte in the little rippling sound of she canary when they beak be busy with fresh seed , and in the small nibbling pleasur of certain animal which , lest she should appear too trivial , I will here call " the more familiar rodent . " be not right in he decide opinion that this slim maiden of eighteen be quite the sort of wife a man would not be likely to repent of marrying , -- a woman who be loving and thoughtful for other woman , not give they Judas - kiss with eye askance on they welcome defect , but with real care and vision for they half - hidden pain and mortification , with long ruminating enjoyment of little pleasure prepare for they ? perhaps the emphasis of he admiration do not fall precisely on this rarest quality in she ; perhaps he approve he own choice of she chiefly because she do not strike he as a remarkable rarity . a man like he wife to be pretty ; well , be pretty , but not to a madden extent . a man like he wife to be accomplish , gentle , affectionate , and not stupid ; and have all these qualifications . be not surprised to find himself in love with she , and be conscious of excellent judgment in prefer she to , the daughter of the county member , although be only the daughter of he father 's subordinate partner ; beside , he have have to defy and overcome a slight unwillingness and disappointment in he father and sister , -- a circumstance which give a young man a agreeable consciousness of he own dignity . be aware that he have sense and independence enough to choose the wife who be likely to make he happy , unbiass by any indirect consideration . he mean to choose ; she be a little darling , and exactly the sort of woman he have always admired . ii first Impression " he be very clever , , " say . she be knee on a footstool at 's foot , after place that dark lady in the large crimson - velvet chair . " I feel sure you will like he . I hope you will . " " I shall be very difficult to please , " say , smile , and hold up one of 's long curl , that the sunlight might shine through it . " a gentleman who think he be good enough for must expect to be sharply criticise . " " indeed , he be a great deal too good for I . and sometimes , when he be away , I almost think it can not really be that he love I . but I can never doubt it when he be with I , though I could not bear any one but you to know that I feel in that way , . " " oh , then , if I disapprove of he you can give he up , since you be not engage , " say , with playful gravity . " I would rather not be engage . when people be engage , they begin to think of be marry soon , " say , too thoroughly preoccupy to notice 's joke ; " and I should like everything to go on for a long while just as it be . sometimes I be quite frightene lest should say that he have speak to papa ; and from something that fall from papa the other day , I feel sure he and be expect that . and 's sister be very civil to I now . at first , I think they do not like he pay I attention ; and that be natural . it _do seem out of keep that I should ever live in a great place like the , such a little insignificant thing as I be . " " but people be not expect to be large in proportion to the house they live in , like snail , " say , laugh . " pray , be 's sister giantess ? " " oh no ; and not handsome , -- that be , not very , " say , half - penitent at this uncharitable remark . " but _he_ be -- at least he be generally consider very handsome . " " though you be unable to share that opinion ? " " oh , I do not know , " say , blush pink over brow and neck . " it be a bad plan to raise expectation ; you will perhaps be disappoint . but I have prepare a charming surprise for _him ;_ I shall have a glorious laugh against he . I shall not tell you what it be , though . " rise from she knee and go to a little distance , hold she pretty head on one side , as if she have be arrange for a portrait , and wish to judge of the general effect . " stand up a moment , . " " what be you pleasure now ? " say , smile languidly as she rise from she chair and look down on she slight , aerial cousin , whose figure be quite subordinate to she faultless drapery of silk and crape . keep she contemplative attitude a moment or two in silence , and then say ,-- " I can not think what witchery it be in you , , that make you look best in shabby clothes ; though you really
really must have a new dress now . but do you know , last night I be try to fancy you in a handsome , fashionable dress , and do what I would , that old limp merino would come back as the only right thing for you . I wonder if look all the grander when she gown be darn at the elbow . now , if _i_ be to put anything shabby on , I should be quite unnoticeable . I should be a mere rag . " " oh , quite , " say , with mock gravity . " you would be liable to be sweep out of the room with the cobweb and carpet - dust , and to find yourself under the grate , like . may not I sit down now ? " " yes , now you may , " say , laugh . then , with a air of serious reflection , unfasten she large jet brooch , " but you must change brooch , ; that little butterfly look silly on you . " " but will not that mar the charming effect of my consistent shabbiness ? " say , seat herself submissively , while again and unfasten the contemptible butterfly . " I wish my mother be of you opinion , for she be frett last night because this be my best frock . I have be save my money to pay for some lesson ; I shall never get a better situation without more accomplishment . " give a little sigh . " now , do not put on that sad look again , " say , pin the large brooch below 's fine throat . " you be forget that you have leave that dreary schoolroom behind you , and have no little girl ' clothes to mmend . " " yes , " say . " it be with I as I use to think it would be with the poor uneasy white bear I see at the show . I think he must have get so stupid with the habit of turn backward and forward in that narrow space that he would keep do it if they set he free . one get 's a bad habit of be unhappy . " " but I shall put you under a discipline of pleasure that will make you lose that bad habit , " say , stick the black butterfly absently in she own collar , while she eye meet 's affectionately . " you dear , tiny thing , " say , in one of she burst of loving admiration , " you enjoy other people 's happiness so much , I believe you would do without any of you own . I wish I be like you . " " I have never be try in that way , " say . " I have always be so happy . I do not know whether I could bear much trouble ; I never have any but poor mamma 's death . you _have be try , ; and I be sure you feel for other people quite as much as I do . " " no , , " say , shak she head slowly , " I do not enjoy they happiness as you do , else I should be more contented . I do feel for they when they be in trouble ; I do not think I could ever bear to make any one _un_happy ; and yet I often hate myself , because I get angry sometimes at the sight of happy people . I think I get worse as I get older , more selfish . that seem very dreadful . " " now , ! " say , in a tone of remonstrance , " I do not believe a word of that . it be all a gloomy fancy , just because you be depresse by a dull , wearisome life . " " well , perhaps it be , " say , resolutely clear away the clouds from she face with a bright smile , and throw herself backward in she chair . " perhaps it come from the school diet , -- watery rice - pudding spice with Pinnock . let we hope it will give way before my mother 's custard and this charme . " take up the " , " which lay by she on the table . " do I look fit to be see with this little brooch ? " say , go to survey the effect in the chimney - glass . " oh no , will be oblige to go out of the room again if he see you in it . pray make haste and put another on . " hurry out of the room , but do not take the opportunity of open she book ; she let it fall on she knee , while she eye wander to the window , where she could see the sunshine fal on the rich clumps of spring flower and on the long hedge of laurel , and beyond , the silvery breadth of the dear old Floss , that at this distance seem to be sleep in a morning holiday . the sweet fresh garden - scent come through the open window , and the bird be busy flitting and alighting , gurgling and singing . yet 's eye begin to fill with tear . the sight of the old scene have make the rush of memory so painful that even yesterday she have only be able to rejoice in she mother 's restore comfort and 's brotherly friendliness as we rejoice in good news of friend at a distance , rather than in the presence of a happiness which we share . memory and imagination urge upon she a sense of privation too keen to let she
she taste what be offer in the transient present . she future , she think , be likely to be worse than she past , for after she year of contente renunciation , she have slipp back into desire and long ; she find joyless day of distasteful occupation harder and harder ; she find the image of the intense and varied life she year for , and despair of , become more and more importunate . the sound of the opening door rouse she , and hastily wipe away she tear , she begin to turn over the leaf of she book . " there be one pleasure , I know , , that you deepest dismalness will never resist , " say , begin to speak as soon as she enter the room . " that be music , and I mean you to have quite a riotous feast of it . I mean you to get up you playing again , which use to be so much better than mine , when we be at . " " you would have laugh to see I play the little girl ' tune over and over to they , when I take they to practise , " say , " just for the sake of finger the dear key again . but I do not know whether I could play anything more difficult now than ' Begone , dull care ! ' " " I know what a wild state of joy you use to be in when the glee - man come round , " say , take up she embroidery ; " and we might have all those old glee that you use to love so , if I be certain that you do not feel exactly as do about some thing . " " I should have think there be nothing you might be more certain of , " say , smile . " I ought rather to have say , one particular thing . because if you feel just as he do about that , we shall want we third voice . 's be so miserably provide with musical gentleman . there be really only and who have any knowledge of music , so as to be able to s a part . " have look up from she work as she utter the last sentence , and see that there be a change in 's face . " do it hurt you to hear the name mention , ? if it do , I will not speak of he again . I know will not see he if he can avoid it . " " I do not feel at all as do on that subject , " say , rise and go to the window as if she want to see more of the landscape . " I have always like ever since I be a little girl , and see he at . he be so good when hurt he foot . " " oh , I be so glad ! " say . " then you will not mind he come sometimes , and we can have much more music than we could without he . I be very fond of poor , only I wish he be not so morbid about he deformity . I suppose it _is_ he deformity that make he so sad , and sometimes bitter . it be certainly very piteous to see he poor little crooke body and pale face among great , strong people . " " but , ---- " say , try to arrest the prattling stream . " ah , there be the door - bell . that must be , " go on , not notice 's faint effort to speak . " one of the thing I must admire in be that he make a greater friend of than any one . " it be too late for to speak now ; the drawingroom door be open , and be already grow in a small way at the entrance of a tall gentleman , who go up to and take she hand with a half - polite , half - tender glance and tone of inquiry , which seem to indicate that he be unconscious of any other presence . " let I introduce you to my cousin , , " say , turn with wicked enjoyment toward , who now approach from the farther window . " this be . " for one instant could not conceal he astonishment at the sight of this tall , dark - eyed nymph with she jet - black coronet of hair ; the next , feel herself , for the first time in she life , receive the tribute of a very deep blush and a very deep bow from a person toward whom she herself be conscious of timidity . this new experience be very agreeable to she , so agreeable that it almost efface she previous emotion about . there be a new brightness in she eye , and a very become flush on she cheek , as she seat herself . " I hope you perceive what a striking likeness you draw the day before yesterday , " say , with a pretty laugh of triumph . she enjoy she lover 's confusion ; the advantage be usually on he side . " this designe cousin of yours quite deceive I , , " say Stephen , seat himself by , and stoop to play with , only look at furtively . " she say you have light hair and blue eye . " " Nay , it be you who say so , " remonstrate . " I only refrain from destroy you confidence in you own second - sight . " " I wish I could always err in the same way , " say , "
" and find reality so much more beautiful than my preconception . " " now you have prove yourself equal to the occasion , " say , " and say what it be incumbent on you to say under the circumstance . " she flash a slightly defiant look at he ; it be clear to she that he have be draw a satirical portrait of she beforehand . have say he be inclin to be satirical , and have mentally supply the addition , " and rather conceit . " " a alarming amount of there , " be 's first thought . the second , when she have bend over she work , be , " I wish she would look at I again . " the next be to answer ,-- " I suppose all phrase of mere compliment have they turn to be true . a man be occasionally grateful when he say ' thank you . ' it be rather hard upon he that he must use the same word with which all the world decline a disagreeable invitation , do not you think so , ? " " no , " say , look at he with she direct glance ; " if we use common word on a great occasion , they be the more striking , because they be feel at once to have a particular meaning , like old banners , or every - day clothes , hang up in a sacred place . " " then my compliment ought to be eloquent , " say , really not quite know what he say while look at he , " see that the word be so far beneath the occasion . " " no compliment can be eloquent , except as a expression of indifference , " say , flush a little . be rather alarm ; she think and be not go to like each other . she have always fear lest Maggie should appear too old and clever to please that critical gentleman . " why , dear , " she interpose , " you have always pretend that you be too fond of be admire ; and now , I think , you be angry because some one venture to admire you . " " not at all , " say ; " I like too well to feel that I be admire , but compliment never make I feel that . " " I will never pay you a compliment again , , " say Stephen . " thank you ; that will be a proof of respect . " poor Maggie ! she be so unused to society that she could take nothing as a matter of course , and have never in she life speak from the lip merely , so that she must necessarily appear absurd to more experienced lady , from the excessive feeling she be apt to throw into very trivial incidents . but she be even conscious herself of a little absurdity in this instance . it be true she have a theoretic objection to compliment , and have once say impatiently to Philip that she do not see why woman be to be tell with a simper that they be beautiful , any more than old man be to be tell that they be venerable ; still , to be so irritate by a common practice in the case of a stranger like , and to care about he have speak slightingly of she before he have see she , be certainly unreasonable , and as soon as she be silent she begin to be asham of herself . it do not occur to she that she irritation be due to the pleasanter emotion which proceed it , just as when we be satisfied with a sense of glow warmth a innocent drop of cold water may fall upon we as a sudden smart . be too well breed not to seem unaware that the previous conversation could have be feel embarrassing , and at once begin to talk of impersonal matter , ask if she know when the bazaar be at length to take place , so that there might be some hope of see she rain the influence of she eye on object more grateful than those worsted flower that be grow under she finger . " some day next month , I believe , " say . " but you sister be do more for it than I be ; they be to have the largest stall . " " ah yes ; but they carry on they manufacture in they own sitting - room , where I do not intrude on they . I see you be not addicte to the fashionable vice of fancy - work , , " say Stephen , look at 's plain hemm . " no , " say , " I can do nothing more difficult or more elegant than shirt - making . " " and you plain sew be so beautiful , , " say , " that I think I shall beg a few specimen of you to show as fancy - work . you exquisite sewing be quite a mystery to I , you use to dislike that sort of work so much in old day . " " it be a mystery easily explain , dear , " say , look up quietly . " plain sewing be the only thing I could get money by , so I be obliged to try and do it well . " Lucy , good and simple as she be , could not help blush a little . she do not quite like that should know that ; need not have mention it . perhaps there be some pride in the confession , -- the pride of poverty that will not be asham of itself . but if have
have be the queen of coquette she could hardly have invent a means of give greater piquancy to she beauty in 's eye ; I be not sure that the quiet admission of plain sewing and poverty would have do alone , but assist by the beauty , they make more unlike other woman even than she have see at first . " but I can knit , , " go on , " if that will be of any use for you bazaar . " " oh yes , of infinite use . I shall set you to work with scarlet wool to - morrow . but you sister be the most enviable person , " continue , turn to , " to have the talent of modelling . she be do a wonderful bust of entirely from memory . " " why , if she can remember to put the eye very near together , and the corner of the mouth very far apart , the likeness can hardly fail to be strike in 's . " " now that be very wicked of you , " say , look rather hurt . " I do not think you would speak disrespectfully of . " " I say anything disrespectful of ? heaven forbid ! but I be not bound to respect a libellous bust of he . I think one of the finest fellow in the world . I do not care much about the tall candlestick he have put on the communion - table , and I should not like to spoil my temper by get up to early prayer every morning . but he be the only man I ever know personally who seem to I to have anything of the real apostle in he , -- a man who have eight hundred a - year and be contented with deal furniture and boiled beef because he give away two - third of he income . that be a very fine thing of he , -- take into he house that poor lad , who shoot he mother by accident . he sacrifice more time than a less busy man could spare , to save the poor fellow from get into a morbid state of mind about it . he take the lad out with he constantly , I see . " " that be beautiful , " say , who have let she work fall , and be listen with keen interest . " I never know any one who do such thing . " " and one admire that sort of action in all the more , " say , " because he manners in general be rather cold and severe . there be nothing sugary and maudlin about he . " " oh , I think he be a perfect character ! " say , with pretty enthusiasm . " no ; there I can not agree with you , " say Stephen , shak he head with sarcastic gravity . " now , what fault can you point out in he ? " " he be a Anglican . " " well , those be the right views , I think , " say , gravely . " that settle the question in the abstract , " say , " but not from a parliamentary point of view . he have set the Dissenter and the church people by the ear ; and a rise senator like myself , of whose service the country be very much in need , will find it inconveniend when he put up for the honor of represent 's in . " " do you really think of that ? " say , she eye brighten with a proud pleasure that make she neglect the argumentative interest of . " Decidedly , whenever old 's public spirit and gout induce he to give way . my father 's heart be set on it ; and gift like mine , you know " -- here draw himself up , and rub he large white hand over he hair with playful self - admiration --" gift like mine involve great responsibility . do not you think so , ? " " yes , " say , smile , but not look up ; " so much fluency and self - possession should not be waste entirely on private occasion . " " ah , I see how much penetration you have , " say Stephen . " you have discover already that I be talkative and impudent . now superficial people never discern that , owe to my manner , I suppose . " " she do not look at I when I talk of myself , " he think , while he listener be laugh . " I must try other subject . " do intend to be present at the meeting of the next week ? be the next question . then follow the recommendation to choose 's " life of , " unless she be inclin to be philosophical , and startle the lady of 's by voting for one of the . of course wish to know what these alarmingly learn book were ; and as it be always pleasant to improve the mind of lady by talk to they at ease on subject of which they know nothing , become quite brilliant in a account of 's , which he have just be reade . he be reward by see let she work fall , and gradually get so absorbed in he wonderful geological story that she sit look at he , lean forward with cross arm , and with a entire absence of self - consciousness , as if he have be the snuffiest of old professor , and she a downy - lip alumna . he be so fascinate by the clear , large gaze that at last he forget to look
look away from it occasionally toward ; but she , sweet child , be only rejoice that be prove to Maggie how clever he be , and that they would certainly be good friend after all . " I will bring you the book , shall I , ? " say Stephen , when he find the stream of he recollection run rather shallow . " there be many illustration in it that you will like to see . " " oh , thank you , " say , blush with return self - consciousness at this direct address , and take up she work again . " no , no , " interpose . " I must forbid you plunge in book . I shall never get she away from they ; and I want she to have delicious do - nothing day , fill with boating and chat and ride and drive ; that be the holiday she need . " " ! " say Stephen , look at he watch . " shall we go out for a row on the river now ? the tide will suit for we to the way , and we can walk back . " that be a delightful proposition to , for it be year since she have be on the river . when she be go to put on she bonnet , linger to give a order to the servant , and take the opportunity of tell Stephen that have no objection to see , so that it be a pity she have send that note the day before yesterday . but she would write another to - morrow and invite he . " I will call and beat he up to - morrow , " say , " and bring he with I in the evening , shall I ? my sister will want to call on you when I tell they you cousin be with you . I must leave the field clear for they in the morning . " " oh yes , pray bring he , " say . " and you _will_ like , sha ' not you ? " she add , in a beseeching tone . " be not she a dear , noble - look creature ? " " too tall , " say Stephen , smile down upon she , " and a little too fiery . she be not my type of woman , you know . " gentlemen , you be aware , be apt to impart these imprudent confidence to lady concern they unfavorable opinion of sister fair one . that be why so many woman have the advantage of know that they be secretly repulsive to man who have self - denyingly make ardent love to they . and hardly anything could be more distinctively characteristic of than that she both implicitly believe what say , and be determine that should not know it . but you , who have a higher logic than the verbal to guide you , have already foresee , as the direct sequence to that unfavorable opinion of 's , that he walk down to the boathouse calculate , by the aid of a vivid imagination , that must give he she hand at least twice in consequence of this pleasant boating plan , and that a gentleman who wish lady to look at he be advantageously situate when he be row they in a boat . what then ? have he fall in love with this surprising daughter of at first sight ? certainly not . such passion be never hear of in real life . besides , he be in love already , and half - engage to the dearest little creature in the world ; and he be not a man to make a fool of himself in any way . but when one be five - and - twenty , one have not chalk - stone at one 's finger - end that the touch of a handsome girl should be entirely indifferent . it be perfectly natural and safe to admire beauty and enjoy look at it , -- at least under such circumstance as the present . and there be really something very interesting about this girl , with she poverty and trouble ; it be gratify to see the friendship between the two cousin . generally , admit , he be not fond of woman who have any peculiarity of character , but here the peculiarity seem really of a superior kind , and provide one be not oblige to marry such woman , why , they certainly make a variety in social intercourse . do not fulfil 's hope by look at he during the first quarter of a hour ; she eye be too full of the old banks that she know so well . she feel lonely , cut off from , -- the only person who have ever seem to love she devotedly , as she have always long to be love . but presently the rhythmic movement of the oar attract she , and she think she should like to learn how to row . this rouse she from she reverie , and she ask if she might take a oar . it appear that she require much teaching , and she become ambitious . the exercise bring the warm blood into she cheek , and make she inclin to take she lesson merrily . " I shall not be satisfied until I can manage both oar , and row you and , " she say , look very bright as she step out of the boat . , we know , be apt to forget the thing she be do , and she have choose a inopportune moment for she remark ; she foot slip , but happily hold she hand , and keep she up with a firm
firm grasp . " you have not hurt yourself at all , I hope ? " he say , bend to look in she face with anxiety . it be very charming to be take care of in that kind , graceful manner by some one taller and stronger than one 's self . have never feel just in the same way before . when they reach home again , they find uncle and aunt Pullet seate with in the drawing - room , and hurrie away , ask leave to come again in the evening . " and pray bring with you the volume of Purcell that you take away , " say . " I want to hear you best song . " aunt Pullet , under the certainty that would be invite to go out with , probably to , be much shocked at the shabbiness of she clothes , which when witness by the higher society of . 's , would be a discredit to the family , that demand a strong and prompt remedy ; and the consultation as to what would be most suitable to this end from among the superfluity of 's wardrobe be one that Lucy as well as enter into with some zeal . must really have a evening dress as soon as possible , and she be about the same height as aunt Pullet . " but she be so much broader across the shoulder than I be , it be very ill - convenient , " say , " else she might wear that beautiful black brocade of ' mine without any alteration ; and she arm be beyond everything , " add , sorrowfully , as she lift 's large round arm , " she would never get my sleeve on . " " oh , never mind that , aunt ; send we the dress , " say . " I do not mean to have long sleeve , and I have abundance of black lace for trimming . she arm will look beautiful . " " 's arm _are a pretty shape , " say . " they be like mine use to be , only mine be never bry ; I wish she would have _our_ family skin . " " Nonsense , aunty ! " say , pat she aunt 's shoulder , " you do not understand those thing . a painter would think 's complexion beautiful . " " maybe , my dear , " say Tulliver , submissively . " you know better than I do . only when I be yong a brown skin be not think well on among respectable folk . " " no , " say uncle Pullet , who take intense interest in the ladie 's conversation as he suck he lozenge . " though there be a song about the ' Nut - bry Maid ' too ; I think she be crazy ,-- crazy Kate , -- but I can not justly remember . " " oh dear , dear ! " say , laugh , but impatient ; " I think that will be the end of _my brown skin , if it be always to be talk about so much . " iii confidential moments when go up to she bedroom that night , it appear that she be not at all inclin to undress . she set down she candle on the first table that present itself , and begin to walk up and down she room , which be a large one , with a firm , regular , and rather rapid step , which show that the exercise be the instinctive vent of strong excitement . she eye and cheek have a almost feverish brilliancy ; she head be thrown backward , and she hand be clasp with the palm outward , and with that tension of the arm which be apt to accompany mental absorption . have anything remarkable happen ? Nothe that you be not likely to consider in the highest degree unimportant . she have be hear some fine music sung by a fine bass voice , -- but then it be sung in a provincial , amateur fashion , such as would have leave a critical ear much to desire . and she be conscious of have be look at a great deal , in rather a furtive manner , from beneath a pair of well - mark horizontal eyebrow , with a glance that see somehow to have catch the vibratory influence of the voice . such thing could have have no perceptible effect on a thoroughly well - educated young lady , with a perfectly balanced mind , who have have all the advantages of fortune , training , and refin society . but if have be that young lady , you would probably have know nothing about she : she life would have have so few vicissitude that it could hardly have be write ; for the happiest woman , like the happiest nation , have no history . in poor 's highly - strung , hungry nature , -- just come away from a third - rate schoolroom , with all its jarring sound and petty round of task , -- these apparently trivial cause have the effect of rousing and exalt she imagination in a way that be mysterious to herself . it be not that she think distinctly of , or dwelt on the indication that he look at she with admiration ; it be rather that she feel the half - remote presence of a world of love and beauty and delight , make up of vague , mingl image from all the poetry and romance she have ever read , or have ever woven in she dreamy revery . she mind glance back once or twice to the time when she have court privation , when she have
have think all long , all impatience be subdue ; but that condition see irrecoverably gone , and she recoil from the remembrance of it . no prayer , no striving now , would bring back that negative peace ; the battle of she life , it seem , be not to be decide in that short and easy way , -- by perfect renunciation at the very threshold of she youth . the music be vibrat in she still , -- 's music , with its wild passion and fancy , -- and she could not stay in the recollection of that bare , lonely past . she be in she brighter aerial world again , when a little tap come at the door ; of course it be she cousin , who enter in ample white dressing - gown . " why , , you naughty child , have not you begin to undress ? " say , in astonishment . " I promise not to come and talk to you , because I think you must be tired . but here you be , look as if you be ready to dress for a ball . come , come , get on you dressing - gown and unplait you hair . " " well , _you_ be not very forward , " retort , hastily reach she own pink cotton gown , and look at 's light - brown hair brush back in curly disorder . " oh , I have not much to do . I shall sit down and talk to you till I see you be really on the way to bed . " while stand and unplait she long black hair over she pink drapery , sit down near the toilette - table , watch she with affectionate eye , and head a little aside , like a pretty spaniel . if it appear to you at all incredible that young lady should be lead on to talk confidentially in a situation of this kind , I will beg you to remember that human life furnish many exceptional case . " you really _have_ enjoy the music to - night , have not you ? " " oh yes , that be what prevent I from feeling sleepy . I think I should have no other mortal want , if I could always have plenty of music . it seem to infuse strength into my limb , and idea into my brain . life seem to go on without effort , when I be fill with music . at other time one be conscious of carry a weight . " " and have a splendid voice , have not he ? " " well , perhaps we be neither of we judge of that , " say , laugh , as she seat herself and toss she long hair back . " you be not impartial , and _I_ think any barrel - organ splendid . " " but tell I what you think of he , now . tell I exactly ; good and bad too . " " oh , I think you should humiliate he a little . a lover should not be so much at ease , and so self - confident . he ought to tremble more . " " Nonsense , ! as if any one could tremble at I ! you think he be conceit , I see that . but you do not dislike he , do you ? " " dislike he ! no . be I in the habit of see such charme people , that I should be very difficult to please ? besides , how could I dislike any one that promise to make you happy , my dear thing ! " pinch 's dimple ching . " we shall have more music to - morrow evening , " say , look happy already , " for Stephen will bring with he . " " oh , , I can not see he , " say , turn pale . " at least , I could not see he without 's leave . " " be such a tyrant as that ? " say , surprised . " I will take the responsibility , then ,-- tell he it be my fault . " " but , dear , " say , falteringly , " I promise very solemnly , before my father 's death , -- I promise he I would not speak to without he knowledge and consent . and I have a great dread of open the subject with , -- of get into a quarrel with he again . " " but I never hear of anything so strange and unreasonable . what harm can poor have do ? may I speak to about it ? " " oh no , pray do not , dear , " say . " I will go to he myself to - morrow , and tell he that you wish to come . I have think before of ask he to absolve I from my promise , but I have not have the courage to determine on it . " they be both silent for some moment , and then say ,-- " , you have secret from I , and I have none from you . " look meditatively away from . then she turn to she and say , " I _should like to tell you about . but , , you must not betray that you know it to any one -- least of all to himself , or to . " the narrative last long , for have never before know the relief of such a outpouring ; she have never before tell anything of she inmost life ; and the sweet face bend toward she with sympathetic interest , and the little hand pressing hers ,
, encourage she to speak on . on two point only she be not expansive . she do not betray fully what still rank in she mind as 's great offence , -- the insult he have heape on . angry as the remembrance still make she , she could not bear that any one else should know it at all , both for 's sake and 's . and she could not bear to tell Lucy of the last scene between she father and Wakem , though it be this scene which she have ever since feel to be a new barrier between herself and . she merely say , she see now that be , no the whole , right in regard any prospect of love and marriage between she and as put out of the question by the relation of the two family . of course 's father would never consent . " there , , you have have my story , " say , smile , with the tear in she eye . " you see I be like . _i_ be adore once . " " ah , now I see how it be you know and everything , and have learn so much since you leave school ; which always see to I witchcraft before , -- part of you general uncanniness , " say . she muse a little with she eye downward , and then add , look at , " it be very beautiful that you should love ; I never think such a happiness would befall he . and in my opinion , you ought not to give he up . there be obstacle now ; but they may be do away with in time . " shook she head . " yes , yes , " persist ; " I can not help be hopeful about it . there be something romantic in it , -- out of the common way , -- just what everything that happen to you ought to be . and will adore you like a husband in a fairy tale . oh , I shall puzzle my small brain to contrive some plot that will bring everybody into the right mind , so that you may marry when I marry -- somebody else . would not that be a pretty end to all my poor , poor 's trouble ? " try to smile , but shiver , as if she feel a sudden chill . " ah , dear , you be cold , " say . " you must go to bed ; and so must I . I dare not think what time it be . " they kiss each other , and go away , possess of a confidence which have a strong influence over she subsequent impression . have be thoroughly sincere ; she nature have never find it easy to be otherwise . but confidences be sometimes blinding , even when they be sincere . and be oblige to go to 's lodging in the middle of the day , when he would be come in to dinner , else she would not have find he at home . he be not lod with entire stranger . we friend have , with 's tacit consent , take not only a wife about eight month ago , but also one of those queer old house , pierce with surprising passage , by the water - side , where , as he observe , he wife and mother could keep themselves out of mischief by let out two " pleasure - boat , " in which he have invest some of he savings , and by take in a lodger for the parlor and spare bedroom . under these circumstance , what could be better for the interests of all party , sanitary consideration apart , than that the lodger should be ? it be 's wife who open the door to . she be a tiny woman , with the general physiognomy of a doll , look , in comparison with 's mother , who fill up the passage in the rear , very much like one of those human figure which the artist find conveniently stand near a colossal statue to show the proportion . the tiny woman curtsy and look up at with some awe as soon as she have open the door ; but the word , " be my brother at home ? " which utter smilingly , make she turn round with sudden excitement , and say ,-- " Eh , mother , mother -- tell !-- it be ! come in , , for goodness do , " she go on , open a side door , and endeavor to flatten she person against the wall to make the utmost space for the visitor . sad recollection crowd on as she enter the small parlor , which be now all that poor have to call by the name of " home , " -- that name which have once , so many year ago , mean for both of they the same sum of dear familiar object . but everything be not strange to she in this new room ; the first thing she eye dwelt on be the large old , and the sight be not likely to disperse the old memory . she stand without speak . " if you please to take the privilege of ' sit down , , " say , rub she apron over a perfectly clean chair , and then lift up the corner of that garment and hold it to she face with a air of embarrassment , as she look wonderingly at . " be at home , then ? " say , recover herself , and smile at the bashful Dutch doll . " yes , ; but I think he must be wash
wash and dress himself ; I will go and see , " say , disappear . but she presently come back walking with new courage a little way behind she husband , who show the brilliancy of he blue eye and regular white tooth in the doorway , bow respectfully . " how do you do , ? " say , come forward and put out she hand to he ; " I always mean to pay you wife a visit , and I shall come another day on purpose for that , if she will let I . but I be oblige to come to - day to speak to my brother . " " he will be in before long , . he be doin ' finely , be ; he will be one of ' the first man hereabout , -- you will see that . " " well , , I be sure he will be indebt to you , whatever he become ; he say so himself only the other night , when he be talk of you . " " Eh , , that be he way of ' takin ' it . but I think the more o not when he say a thing , because he tongue do not overshoot he as mine do . Lor ! I be no better nor a tilte bottle , I be ' not ,-- I can not stop mysen when once I begin . but you look rarely , ; it do I good to see you . what do you say now , Prissy ? " --here turn to he wife , -- " be not it all come true as I say ? though there be not many sort of ' good as I can not over -praise when I set my tongue t o't . " . 's small nose seem to be follow the example of she eye in turn up reverentially toward , but she be able now to smile and curtsey , and say , " I would look forrard like aenything to seein ' you , , for my husband 's tongue be be runnin ' on you , like as if he be light - head , iver since first he come a - courtin ' on I . " " well , well , " say , look rather silly . " go a ' see after the tater , else 's ull have to wait for th'ey . " " I hope be friendly with , , " say , smile . " I remember you use to say he would not like you marrying . " " Eh , , " say , " he make up he mind t o't when he see would what a little un she be . he pretend not to see she mostly , or else to think as she be not full - grow . but about , , " say , speak lower and look serious , " he be as close as a iron biler , he be ; but I be a ' cutish chap , a ' when I have leave off carry my pack , a ' be at a loose end , I have get more brain nor I know what to do wig , an' I be force to busy myself wi' other folk 's inside . a ' it worret I as will sit by himself so glumpish , a - knittin ' he brow , a ' a - lookin ' at the fire of a night . he should be a bit livelier now , a fine young fellow like he . my wife say , when she go in sometimes , an' he take no notice of she , he sit lookin ' into the fire , and frownin ' as if he be watchin ' folk at work in it . " " he think so much about business , " say . " ay , " say , speak lower ; " but do you think it be nothin ' else , ? he be close , be ; but I be a ' cute chap , I be , an' I think tow 'rt last as I would find out a soft place in he . it be about a little black spaniel -- a rare bit of ' breed -- as he make a fuss to get . but since the summat 's come over he , as he be set he tooth again ' thing more nor iver , for all he be have such good luck . An' I want to tell _yout , , ' cause I think you might work it out of he a bit , now you be come . he be a deal too lonely , and do not go into company enough . " " I be afraid I have very little power over he , , " say , a good deal move by 's suggestion . it be a totally new idea to she mind that could have he love trouble . poor fellow !-- and in love with too ! but it be perhaps a mere fancy of 's too officious brain . the present of the dog mean nothing more than cousinship and gratitude . but have already say , " be , " and the outer door be open . " there be no time to spare , , " say , as soon as leave the room . " I must tell you at once what I come about , else I shall be hinder you from take you dinner . " stand with he back against the chimney - piece , and be seat opposite the light . he notice that she be tremulous , and he have a presentiment of the subject she be go to speak
speak about . the presentiment make he voice colder and harder as he say , " what be it ? " this tone rouse a spirit of resistance in , and she put she request in quite a different form from the one she have predetermine on . she rise from she seat , and look straight at , say ,-- " I want you to absolve I from my promise about . or rather , I promise you not to see he without tell you . I be come to tell you that I wish to see he . " " very well , " say , still more coldly . but have hardly finish speak in that chill , defiant manner , before she repent , and feel the dread of alienation from she brother . " not for myself , dear . do not be angry . I should not have ask it , only that , you know , be a friend of Lucy's and she wish he to come , have invite he to come this evening ; and I tell she I could not see he without tell you . I shall only see he in the presence of other people . there will never be anything secret between we again . " look away from , knitt he brow more strongly for a little while . then he turn to she and say , slowly and emphatically ,-- " you know what be my feeling on that subject , . there be no need for my repeat anything I say a year ago . while my father be live , I feel bound to use the utmost power over you , to prevent you from disgrac he as well as yourself , and all of we . but now I must leave you to you own choice . you wish to be independent ; you tell I so after my father 's death . my opinion be not change . if you think of as a lover again , you must give up I . " " I do not wish it , dear Tom , at least as thing be ; I see that it would lead to misery . but I shall soon go away to another situation , and I should like to be friend with he again while I be here . wish it . " the severity of 's face relax a little . " I should not mind you see he occasionally at my uncle 's -- I do not want you to make a fuss on the subject . but I have no confidence in you , . you would be lead away to do anything . " that be a cruel word . 's lip begin to tremble . " why will you say that , ? it be very hard of you . have I not do and borne everything as well as I could ? and I keep my word to you -- when -- when ---- my life have not be a happy one , any more than yours . " she be oblige to be childish ; the tear would come . when be not angry , she be as dependent on kind or cold word as a daisy on the sunshine or the cloud ; the need of be love would always subdue she , as , in old day , it subdue she in the worm-eaten attic . the brother 's goodness come uppermost at this appeal , but it could only show itself in 's fashion . he put he hand gently on she arm , and say , in the tone of a kind pedagogue ,-- " now listen to I , . I will tell you what I mean . you be always in extreme ; you have no judgment and self - command ; and yet you think you know best , and will not submit to be guid . you know I do not wish you to take a situation . my aunt Pullet be willing to give you a good home , and you might have live respectably amongst you relation , until I could have provide a home for you with my mother . and that be what I should like to do . I wish my sister to be a lady , and I always have take care of you , as my father desire , until you be well marry . but you idea and mine never accord , and you will not give way . yet you might have sense enough to see that a brother , who go out into the world and mix with man , necessarily know better what be right and respectable for he sister than she can know herself . you think I be not kind ; but my kindness can only be direct by what I believe to be good for you . " " yes , I know , dear , " say , still half - sobb , but try to control she tear . " I know you would do a great deal for I ; I know how you work , and do not spare yourself . I be grateful to you . but , indeed , you can not quite judge for I ; we nature be very different . you do not know how differently thing affect I from what they do you . " " yes , I _do_ know ; I know it too well . I know how differently you must feel about all that affect we family , and you own dignity as a young woman , before you could think of receive secret address from . if it be not disgust to I in every other way , I should object to my sister 's name be associate for a moment with that
that of a young man whose father must hate the very thought of we all , and would spurn you . with any one but you , I should think it quite certain that what you witness just before my father 's death would secure you from ever think again of as a lover . but I do not feel certain of it with you ; I never feel certain about anything with _you _. at one time you take pleasure in a sort of perverse self - denial , and at another you have not resolution to resist a thing that you know to be wrong . " there be a terrible cutting truth in 's word , -- that hard rind of truth which be discern by unimaginative , unsympathetic mind . always writh under this judgment of 's ; she rebel and be humiliate in the same moment ; it seem as if he hold a glass before she to show she she own folly and weakness , as if he be a prophetic voice predict she future fallings ; and yet , all the while , she judge he in return ; she say inwardly that he be narrow and unjust , that he be below feel those mental need which be often the source of the wrong - do or absurdity that make she life a planless riddle to he . she do not answer directly ; she heart be too full , and she sit down , lean she arm on the table . it be no use try to make feel that she be near to he . he always repell she . she feel under he word be complicate by the allusion to the last scene between she father and Wakem ; and at length that painful , solemn memory surmount the immediate grievance . no ! she do not think of such thing with frivolous indifference , and must not accuse she of that . she look up at he with a grave , earnest gaze and say ,-- " I can not make you think better of I , , by anything I can say . but I be not so shut out from all you feeling as you believe I to be . I see as well as you do that from we position with regard to 's father -- not on other grounds -- it would be unreasonable , it would be wrong , for we to entertain the idea of marriage ; and I have give up thinking of he as a lover . I be tell you the truth , and you have no right to disbelieve I ; I have keep my word to you , and you have never detect I in a falsehood . I should not only not encourage , I should carefully avoid , any intercourse with on any other footing than of quiet friendship . you may think that I be unable to keep my resolution ; but at least you ought not to treat I with hard contempt on the ground of fault that I have not commit yet . " " well , , " say , soften under this appeal , " I do not want to overstrain matter . I think , all thing consider , it will be best for you to see , if wish he to come to the house . I believe what you say , -- at least you believe it yourself , I know ; I can only warn you . I wish to be as good a brother to you as you will let I . " there be a little tremor in 's voice as he utter the last word , and 's ready affection come back with as sudden a glow as when they be child , and bit they cake together as a sacrament of conciliation . she rise and lay she hand on 's shoulder . " dear Tom , I know you mean to be good . I know you have have a great deal to bear , and have do a great deal . I should like to be a comfort to you , not to vex you . you do not think I be altogether naughty , now , do you ? " smile at the eager face ; he smile be very pleasant to see when they do come , for the gray eye could be tender underneath the frown . " no , . " " I may turn out better than you expect . " " I hope you will . " " and may I come some day and make tea for you , and see this extremely small wife of 's again ? " " yes ; but trot away now , for I have no more time to spare , " say , look at he watch . " not to give I a kiss ? " bend to kiss she cheek , and then say ,-- " there ! be a good girl . I have get a great deal to think of to - day . I be go to have a long consultation with my uncle this afternoon . " " you will come to aunt 's to - morrow ? we be go all to dine early , that we may go there to tea . you _must come ; tell I to say so . " " oh , pooh ! I have plenty else to do , " say , pull he bell violently , and bring down the small bell - rope . " I be frightened ; I shall run away , " say , make a laugh retreat ; while , with masculine philosophy , fling the bell - rope to the farther end of the room ; not very far either ,-- a touch of human experience
experience which I flatter myself will come home to the bosom of not a few substantial or distinguished man who be once at a early stage of they rise in the world , and be cherish very large hope in very small lodging . that have open the Oyster " and now we have settle this Newcastle business , , " say , that same afternoon , as they be seat in the private room at the together , " there be another matter I want to talk to you about . since you be likely to have rather a smoky , unpleasant time of it at for the next few week , you will want a good prospect of some sort to keep up you spirit . " wait less nervously than he have do on a former occasion in this apartment , while he uncle take out he snuff - box and gratify each nostril with deliberate impartiality . " you see , , " say at last , throw himself backward , " the world go on at a smarter pace now than it do when I be a young fellow . why , sir , forty year ago , when I be much such a strapp youngster as you , a man expect to pull between the shaft the best part of he life , before he get the whip in he hand . the loom go slowish , and fashions do not alter quite so fast ; I ' a best suit that last I six year . everything be on a lower scale , sir , -- in point of expenditure , I mean . it be this steam , you see , that have make the difference ; it drive on every wheel double pace , and the wheel of fortune along with 'em , as we say at the anniversary dinner ( he hit these thing off wonderfully , consider he be see nothing of business ) . I do not find fault with the change , as some people do . trade , sir , open a man 's eye ; and if the population be to get thicker upon the ground , as it be do , the world must use its wit at invention of one sort or other . I know I have do my share as a ordinary man of business . somebody have say it be a fine thing to make two ear of corn grow where only one grew before ; but , sir , it be a fine thing , too , to further the exchange of commodity , and bring the grains of corn to the mouth that be hungry . and that be we line of business ; and I consider it as honorable a position as a man can hold , to be connect with it . " know that the affair he uncle have to speak of be not urgent ; be too shrewd and practical a man to allow either he reminiscence or he snuff to impede the progress of trade . indeed , for the last month or two , there have be hint throw out to which enable he to guess that he be go to hear some proposition for he own benefit . with the beginning of the last speech he have stretch out he leg , thrust he hand in he pocket , and prepare himself for some introductory diffuseness , tend to show that have succeed by he own merit , and that what he have to say to young man in general be , that if they do not succeed too it be because of they own demerit . he be rather surprised , then , when he uncle put a direct question to he . " let I see , -- it be go on for seven year now since you apply to I for a situation , eh , ? " " yes , sir ; I be three - and - twenty now , " say . " ah , it be as well not to say that , though ; for you would pass for a good deal older , and age tell well in business . I remember you come very well ; I remember I see there be some pluck in you , and that be what make I give you encouragement . and I be happy to say I be right ; I be not often deceive . I be naturally a little shy at push my nephew , but I be happy to say you have do I credit , sir ; and if I would have a son of ' my own , I should not have be sorry to see he like you . " tap he box and open it again , repeat in a tone of some feel , " no , I should not have be sorry to see he like you . " " I be very glad I have give you satisfaction , sir ; I have do my best , " say , in he proud , independent way . " yes , , you have give I satisfaction . I do not speak of you conduct as a son ; though that weigh with I in my opinion of you . but what I have to do with , as a partner in we firm , be the quality you have show as a man of ' business . ours be a fine business , -- a splendid concern , sir , -- and there be no reason why it should not go on grow ; there be a grow capital , and grow outlet for it ; but there be another thing that be want for the prosperity of every concern , large or small , and that be man to conduct it , -- man
man of the right habit ; none of ' you flashy fellow , but such as be to be depend on . now this be what and I see clear enough . three year ago we take into the concern ; we give he a share in the oil - mill . and why ? why , because be a fellow whose service be worth a premium . so it will always be , sir . so it be with I . and though be pretty near ten year older than you , there be other point in you favor . " be get a little nervous as go on speaking ; he be conscious of something he have in he mind to say , which might not be agreeable to he uncle , simply because it be a new suggestion rather than a acceptance of the proposition he foresee . " it stand to reason , " go on , when he have finish he new pinch , " that you be my nephew weigh in you favor ; but I do not deny that if you would be no relation of mine at all , you conduct in that affair of 's bank would have lead and myself to make some acknowledgment of the service you have be to we ; and , back by you general conduct and business ability , it have make we determine on give you a share in the business , -- a share which we shall be glad to increase as the year go on . we think that will be better , on all grounds , than raise you salary . it will give you more importance , and prepare you better for take some of the anxiety off my shoulders by and by . I be equal to a good deal of ' work at present , thank ; but I be get older ,-- there be no denying that . I tell I would open the subject to you ; and when you come back from this northern business , we can go into particular . this be a great stride for a young fellow of three - and - twenty , but I be bound to say you have deserve it . " " I be very grateful to and you , sir ; of course I feel the most indebted to you_, who first take I into the business , and have take a good deal of pain with I since . " speak with a slight tremor , and pause after he have say this . " yes , yes , " say . " I do not spare pain when I see they will be of any use . I give myself some trouble with , else he would not have be what he be . " " but there be one thing I should like to mention to you uncle . I have never speak to you of it before . if you remember , at the time my father 's property be sold , there be some thought of you firm buy the ; I know you think it would be a very good investment , especially if steam be apply . " " to be sure , to be sure . but thWakey outbid we ; he would make up he mind to that . he be rather fond of carry everything over other people 's head . " " perhaps it be of no use my mention it at present , " go on , " but I wish you to know what I have in my mind about the . I have a strong feeling about it . it be my father 's die wish that I should try and get it back again whenever I could ; it be in he family for five generation . I promise my father ; and besides that , I be attach to the place . I shall never like any other so well . and if it should ever suit you view to buy it for the firm , I should have a better chance of fulfil my father 's wish . I should not have like to mention the thing to you , only you have be kind enough to say my service have be of some value . and I would give up a much greater chance in life for the sake of have the again , -- I mean have it in my own hand , and gradually work off the price . " have listen attentively , and now look thoughtful . " I see , I see , " he say , after a while ; " the thing would be possible if there be any chance of 's part with the property . but that I _do not see . he be put that young in the place ; and he have he reason when he buy it , I will be bound . " " he be a loose fish , that young , " say . " he be take to drink , and they say he be let the business go down . tell I about it , -- we old miller . he say he sha ' not stay unless there be a alteration . I be think , if thing go on that way , thWakey might be more willing to part with the mill . say he be get very sour about the way thing be go on . " " well , I will turn it over , . I must inquire into the matter , and go into it with . but , you see , it be rather strike out a new branch , and put you to that , instead of keep you where you be , which be what we would want . " " I
I should be able to manage more than the when thing be once set properly go , sir . I want to have plenty of work . there be nothing else I care about much . " there be something rather sad in that speech from a young man of three - and - twenty , even in uncle 's business - loving ears . " Pooh , pooh ! you will be have a wife to care about one of these day , if you get on at this pace in the world . but as to this , we must not reckon on we chicken too early . however , I promise you to bear it in mind , and when you come back we will talk of it again . I be go to dinner now . come and breakfast with we to - morrow morning , and say good - bye to you mother and sister before you start . " Illustrat the law of attraction it be evident to you now that have arrive at a moment in she life which must be consider by all prudent person as a great opportunity for a young woman . launch into the higher society of 's , with a striking person , which have the advantage of be quite unfamiliar to the majority of beholder , and with such moderate assistance of costume as you have see foreshadow in 's anxious colloquy with aunt Pullet , be certainly at a new starting - point in life . at 's first evening party , young fatigue he facial muscle more than usual in order that " the dark - eyed girl there in the corner " might see he in all the additional style confer by he eyeglass ; and several young lady go home intend to have short sleeve with black lace , and to plait they hair in a broad coronet at the back of they head , -- " that cousin of 's look so very well . " in fact , poor Maggie , with all she inward consciousness of a painful past and she presentiment of a troublous future , be on the way to become a object of some envy , -- a topic of discussion in the newly establish billiard - room , and between fair friend who have no secret from each other on the subject of trimming . the , who associate chiefly on term of condescension with the family of 's , and be the glass of fashion there , take some exception to 's manners . she have a way of not assent at once to the observation current in good society , and of say that she do not know whether those observation be true or not , which give she a air of _gaucherie , and imped the even flow of conversation ; but it be a fact capable of a amiable interpretation that lady be not the worst dispose toward a new acquaintance of they own sex because she have point of inferiority . and be so entirely without those pretty air of coquetry which have the traditional reputation of driving gentleman to despair that she win some feminine pity for be so ineffective in spite of she beauty . she have not have many advantage , poor thing ! and it must be admit there be no pretension about she ; she abruptness and unevenness of manner be plainly the result of she seclude and lowly circumstance . it be only a wonder that there be no tinge of vulgarity about she , consider what the rest of poor 's relation be -- a allusion which always make the shudder a little . it be not agreeable to think of any connection by marriage with such people as the and the Pullet ; but it be of no use to contradict Stephen when once he have set he mind on anything , and certainly there be no possible objection to Lucy in herself , -- no one could help like she . she would naturally desire that the should behave kindly to this cousin of whom she be so fond , and would make a great fuss if they be deficient in civility . under these circumstance the invitation to be not want ; and elsewhere , also , be too popular and too distinguished a member of society in . 's for any attention toward she to be neglect . thus be introduce for the first time to the young lady 's life , and know what it be to get up in the morning without any imperative reason for do one thing more than another . this new sense of leisure and unchecked enjoyment amidst the soft - breathing air and garden - scent of advancing spring -- amidst the new abundance of music , and linger stroll in the sunshine , and the delicious dreaminess of gliding on the river -- could hardly be without some intoxicat effect on she , after she year of privation ; and even in the first week begin to be less haunted by she sad memory and anticipation . life be certainly very pleasant just now ; it be become very pleasant to dress in the evening , and to feel that she be one of the beautiful thing of this spring - time . and there be admiring eye always await she now ; she be no longer a unheeded person , liable to be chid , from whom attention be continually claim , and on whom no one feel bound to confer any . it be pleasant , too , when and be go out riding , to sit down at the piano alone , and find that the old fitness between she finger and the key remain , and revive , like a sympathetic kinship not to be wear out by separation
separation ; to get the tune she have hear the evening before , and repeat they again and again until she have find out a way of produce they so as to make they a more pregnant , passionate language to she . the mere concord of octave be a delight to , and she would often take up a book of study rather than any melody , that she might taste more keenly by abstraction the more primitive sensation of interval . not that she enjoyment of music be of the kind that indicate a great specific talent ; it be rather that she sensibility to the supreme excitement of music be only one form of that passionate sensibility which belong to she whole nature , and make she fault and virtue all merge in each other ; make she affections sometimes a impatient demand , but also prevent she vanity from take the form of mere feminine coquetry and device , and give it the poetry of ambition . but you have know a long while , and need to be tell , not she characteristic , but she history , which be a thing hardly to be predict even from the completest knowledge of characteristic . for the tragedy of we life be not create entirely from withing . " character , " say , in one of he questionable aphorism , -- " character be destiny . " but not the whole of we destiny . , of , be speculative and irresolute , and we have a great tragedy in consequence . but if he father have live to a good old age , and he uncle have die a early death , we can conceive 's have marry , and get through life with a reputation of sanity , notwithstand many soliloquy , and some moody sarcasm toward the fair daughter of , to say nothing of the frankest incivility to he father - in - law . 's destiny , then , be at present hidden , and we must wait for it to reveal itself like the course of a unmapped river ; we only know that the river be full and rapid , and that for all rivers there be the same final home . under the charm of she new pleasur , herself be cease to think , with she eager prefiguring imagination , of she future lot ; and she anxiety about she first interview with be lose its predominance ; perhaps , unconsciously to herself , she be not sorry that the interview have be defer . for have not come the evening he be expect , and bring word that he be go to the coast , -- probably , he think , on a sketch expedition ; but it be not certain when he would return . it be just like , to go off in that way without tell any one . it be not until the twelfth day that he return , to find both Lucy 's note await he ; he have leave before he know of 's arrival . perhaps one have need be nineteen again to be quite convinced of the feeling that be crowd for into those twelve day ; of the length to which they be stretch for she by the novelty of she experience in they , and the varie attitude of she mind . the early day of a acquaintance almost always have this importance for we , and fill up a larger space in we memory than longer subsequent period , which have be less fill with discovery and new impressions . there be not many hour in those ten day in which be not seate by 's side , or stand near she at the piano , or accompany she on some outdoor excursion ; he attention be clearly become more assiduous , and that be what every one have expect . be very happy , all the happier because 's society seem to have become much more interesting and amuse since have be there . Playful discussion -- sometimes serious one -- be go forward , in which both and reveal themselves , to the admiration of the gentle , unobtrusive Lucy ; and it more than once cross she mind what a charme quartet they should have through life when marry . be it a inexplicable thing that a girl should enjoy she lover 's society the more for the presence of a third person , and be without the slightest spasm of jealousy that the third person have the conversation habitually direct to she ? not when that girl be as tranquil - heart as , thoroughly possess with a belief that she know the state of she companion ' affection , and not pro to the feeling which shake such a belief in the absence of positive evidence against it . besides , it be by whom sit , to whom he give he arm , to whom he appeal as the person sure to agree with he ; and every day there be the same tender politeness toward she , the same consciousness of she want and care to supply they . be there really the same ? it seem to Lucy that there be more ; and it be no wonder that the real significance of the change escape she . it be a subtle act of conscience in that even he himself be not aware of . he personal attention to be comparatively slight , and there have even spring up a apparent distance between they , that prevent the renewal of that faint resemblance to gallantry into which he have fall the first day in the boat . if come in when be out of the room , if leave they together , they never speak to each other ; , perhaps , seem to be examine book
book or music , and bend she head assiduously over she work . each be oppressively conscious of the other 's presence , even to the finger - end . yet each look and long for the same thing to happen the next day . neither of they have begin to reflect on the matter , or silently to ask , " to what do all this tend ? " only feel that life be reveal something quite new to she ; and she be absorb in the direct , immediate experience , without any energy leave for take account of it and reaso about it . Stephen wilfully abstain from self - question , and would not admit to himself that he feel a influence which be to have any determine effect on he conduct . and when come into the room again , they be once more unconstrained ; could contradict , and laugh at he , and he could recommend to she consideration the example of that most charme heroine , , who have a great " respect for the understanding of man . " could look at , which , for some reason or other she always avoid when they be alone ; and he could even ask she to play he accompaniment for he , since 's finger be so busy with that bazaar - work , and lecture she on hurrie the tempo , which be certainly 's weak point . one day -- it be the day of 's return -- have form a sudden engagement to spend the evening with , whose delicate state of health , threaten to become confirm illness through a attack of bronchitis , oblige she to resign she function at the come bazaar into the hand of other lady , of whom she wish to be one . the engagement have be form in 's presence , and he have hear Lucy promise to dine early and call at six o'clock for , who bring 's request . " here be another of the moral result of this idiotic bazaar , " Stephen burst forth , as soon as have leave the room , -- " take young lady from the duty of the domestic hearth into scene of dissipation among urn-rug and embroider reticule ! I should like to know what be the proper function of woman , if it be not to make reasons for husband to stay at home , and still stronger reasons for bachelor to go out . if this go on much longer , the bond of society will be dissolve . " " well , it will not go on much longer , " say , laugh , " for the bazaar be to take place on week . " " thank ! " say Stephen . " himself say the other day that he do not like this plan of make vanity do the work of charity ; but just as the british public be not reasonable enough to bear direct taxation , so . 's have not get force of motive enough to build and endow school without call in the force of folly . " " do he say so ? " say little , she hazel eye open wide with anxiety . " I never hear he say anything of that kind ; I think he approve of what we be do . " " I be sure he approve _you _, " say Stephen , smile at she affectionately ; " you conduct in go out to - night look vicious , I own , but I know there be benevolence at the bottom of it . " " oh , you think too well of I , " say , shak she head , with a pretty blush , and there the subject end . but it be tacitly understand that would not come in the evening ; and on the strength of that tacit understanding he make he morning visit the longer , not say good - bye until after four . be seat in the drawing - room , alone , shortly after dinner , with on she lap , have leave she uncle to he wine and he nap , and she mother to the compromise between knitting and nodding , which , when there be no company , she always carry on in the dining - room till tea - time . be stoop to caress the tiny silken pet , and comforte he for he mistress 's absence , when the sound of a footstep on the gravel make she look up , and she see walk up the garden , as if he have come straight from the river . it be very unusual to see he so soon after dinner ! he often complain that they dinner - hour be late at . nevertheless , there he be , in he black dress ; he have evidently be home , and must have come again by the river . feel she cheek glow and she heart beat ; it be natural she should be nervous , for she be not accustom to receive visitor alone . he have see she look up through the open window , and raise he hat as he walk toward it , to enter that way instead of by the door . he blush too , and certainly look as foolish as a young man of some wit and self - possession can be expect to look , as he walk in with a roll of music in he hand , and say , with a air of hesitat improvisation ,-- " you be surprised to see I again , ; I ought to apologize for come upon you by surprise , but I want to come into the town , and I get we man to row I ; so I think
think I would bring these thing from the ' of ' for you cousin ; I forget they this morning . will you give they to she ? " " yes , " say , who have risen confusedly with in she arm , and now , not quite know what else to do , sit down again . lay down he hat , with the music , which roll on the floor , and sit down in the chair close by she . he have never do so before , and both he and be quite aware that it be a entirely new position . " well , you pamper minion ! " say Stephen , lean to pull the long curly ear that droop over 's arm . it be not a suggestive remark , and as the speaker do not follow it up by further development , it naturally leave the conversation at a standstill . it seem to Stephen like some action in a dream that he be obliged to do , and wonder at himself all the while , -- to go on strok 's head . yet it be very pleasant ; he only wish he da look at , and that she would look at he , -- let he have one long look into those deep , strange eye of hers , and then he would be satisfied and quite reasonable after that . he think it be become a sort of monomania with he , to want that long look from ; and he be rack he invention continually to find out some means by which he could have it without its appear singular and entail subsequent embarrassment . as for , she have no distinct thought , only the sense of a presence like that of a closely hovering broad - win bird in the darkness , for she be unable to look up , and see nothing but 's black wavy coat . but this must end some time , perhaps it end very soon , and only _seemed_ long , as a minute 's dream do . Stephen at last sat upright sideway in he chair , lean one hand and arm over the back and look at . what should he say ? " we shall have a splendid sunset , I think ; sha ' not you go out and see it ? " " I do not know , " say . then courageously raise she eye and look out of the window , " if I be not play cribbage with my uncle . " a pause ; during which be strok again , but have sufficient insight not to be grateful for it , to growl rather . " do you like sit alone ? " a rather arch look come over 's face , and , just glance at , she say , " would it be quite civil to say 've 's ' ? " " it _was_ rather a dangerous question for a intruder to ask , " say Stephen , delighte with that glance , and get determined to stay for another . " but you will have more than half a hour to yourself after I be gone , " he add , take out he watch . " I know never come in till half - past seven . " another pause , during which look steadily out of the window , till by a great effort she move she head to look down at 's back again , and say ,-- " I wish have not be oblige to go out . we lose we music . " " we shall have a new voice to - morrow night , " say Stephen . " will you tell you cousin that we friend be come back ? I see he as I go home . " give a little start , -- it see hardly more than a vibration that pass from head to foot in a instant . but the new image summon by 's name disperse half the oppressive spell she have be under . she rise from she chair with a sudden resolution , and lay on he cushion , go to reach 's large work - basket from its corner . be vex and disappoint ; he think perhaps do not like the name of to be mention to she in that abrupt way , for he now recal what have tell he of the family quarrel . it be of no use to stay any longer . be seat herself at the table with she work , and look chill and proud ; and he -- he look like a simpleton for have come . a gratuitous , entirely superfluous visit of that sort be sure to make a man disagreeable and ridiculous . of course it be palpable to 's think that he have dine hastily in he own room for the sake of set off again and find she alone . a boyish state of mind for a accomplished young gentleman of five - and - twenty , not without legal knowledge ! but a reference to history , perhaps , may make it not incredible . at this moment 's ball of knitting - wool roll along the ground , and she start up to reach it . rise too , and pick up the ball , meet she with a vex , complain look that give he eye quite a new expression to , whose own eye meet they as he present the ball to she . " good - bye , " say , in a tone that have the same beseeching discontent as he eye . he da not put out he hand ; he thrust both hand into he tail - pocket as he speak . think she have perhaps be rude . " will
will not you stay ? " she say timidly , not look away , for that would have seem rude again . " no , thank you , " say Stephen , look still into the half - unwilling , half - fascinate eye , as a thirsty man look toward the track of the distant brook . " the boat be wait for I . you will tell you cousin ? " " yes . " " that I bring the music , I mean ? " " yes . " " and that be come back ? " " yes . " ( do not notice 's name this time . ) " will not you come out a little way into the garden ? " say , in a still gentler tone ; but the next moment he be vex that she do not say " no , " for she move away now toward the open window , and he be obliged to take he hat and walk by she side . but he think of something to make he amend . " do take my arm , " he say , in a low tone , as if it be a secret . there be something strangely win to most woman in that offer of the firm arm ; the help be not want physically at that moment , but the sense of help , the presence of strength that be outside they and yet theirs , meet a continual want of the imagination . either on that ground or some other , take the arm . and they walk together round the grassplot and under the droop green of the laburnum , in the same dim , dreamy state as they have be in a quarter of a hour before ; only that have have the look he longe for , without yet perceive in himself the symptom of return reasonableness , and have dart thought across the dimness , -- how come he to be there ? why have she come out ? not a word be speak . if it have be , each would have be less intensely conscious of the other . " take care of this step , " say Stephen at last . " oh , I will go in now , " say , feel that the step have come like a rescue . " good -evening . " in a instant she have withdraw she arm , and be run back to the house . she do not reflect that this sudden action would only add to the embarrassing recollection of the last half - hour . she have no thought left for that . she only throw herself into the low arm - chair , and burst into tear . " oh , , , I wish we be together again -- so quietly -- in the . " look after she a moment , then go on to the boat , and be soon land at the wharf . he spend the evening in the billiard - room , smoke one cigar after another , and lose " life " at pool . but he would not leave off . he be determined not to think , -- not to admit any more distinct remembrance than be urge upon he by the perpetual presence of . he be look at she , and she be on he arm . but there come the necessity of walking home in the cool starlight , and with it the necessity of curse he own folly , and bitterly determine that he would never trust himself alone with again . it be all madness ; he be in love , thoroughly attach to , and engage ,-- engage as strongly as a honorable man need be . he wish he have never see this , to be throw into a fever by she in this way ; she would make a sweet , strange , troublesome , adorable wife to some man or other , but he would never have choose she himself . do she feel as he do ? he hope she do -- not . he ought not to have go . he would master himself in future . he would make himself disagreeable to she , quarrel with she perhaps . Quarrel with she ? be it possible to quarrel with a creature who have such eye , -- defy and deprecat , contradict and cling , imperious and beseech , -- full of delicious opposite ? to see such a creature subdue by love for one would be a lot worth have -- to another man . there be a muttered exclamation which end this inward soliloquy , as throw away the end of he last cigar , and thrust he hand into he pocket , stalk along at a quieter pace through the shrubbery . it be not of a benedictory kind . the next morning be very wet , -- the sort of morning on which male neighbor who have no imperative occupation at home be likely to pay they fair friend a illimitable visit . the rain , which have be endurable enough for the walk or ride one way , be sure to become so heavy , and at the same time so certain to clear up by and by , that nothing but a open quarrel can abbreviate the visit ; latent detestation will not do at all . and if people happen to be lover , what can be so delightful , in , as a rainy morning ? English sunshine be dubious ; bonnet be never quite secure ; and if you sit down on the grass , it may lead to catarrh . but the rain be to be depend on . you gallop through it in a mackintosh , and presently find yourself in the
the seat you like best , -- a little above or a little below the one on which you goddess sit ( it be the same thing to the metaphysical mind , and that be the reason why woman be at once worship and look down upon ) , with a satisfactory confidence that there will be no lady - caller . " will come earlier this morning , I know , " say ; " he always do when it be rainy . " make no answer . she be angry with ; she begin to think she should dislike he ; and if it have not be for the rain , she would have go to she aunt 's this morning , and so have avoid he altogether . as it be , she must find some reason for remain out of the room with she mother . but do not come earlier , and there be another visitor -- a nearer neighbor -- who proceed he . when enter the room , he be go merely to bow to , feel that they acquaintance be a secret which he be bound not to betray ; but when she advanc toward he and put out she hand , he guess at once that have be take into she confidence . it be a moment of some agitation to both , though have spend many hour in prepare for it ; but like all persons who have pass through life with little expectation of sympathy , he seldom lose he self - control , and shrank with the most sensitive pride from any noticeable betrayal of emotion . a little extra paleness , a little tension of the nostril when he speak , and the voice pitch in rather a higher key , that to stranger would seem expressive of cold indifference , were all the sign usually give of a inward drama that be not without its fierceness . but , who have little more power of conceal the impression make upon she than if she have be construct of musical string , feel she eye get larger with tear as they take each other 's hand in silence . they be not painful tear ; they have rather something of the same origin as the tear woman and child she when they have find some protection to cling to and look back on the threaten danger . for , who a little while ago be associate continually in 's mind with the sense that might reproach she with some justice , have now , in this short space , become a sort of outward conscience to she , that she might fly to for rescue and strength . she tranquil , tender affection for , with it be root deep down in she childhood , and its memory of long quiet talk confirm by distinct successive impressiond the first instinctive bia , -- the fact that in he the appeal be more strongly to she pity and womanly devotedness than to she vanity or other egoistic excitability of she nature , -- see now to make a sort of sacred place , a sanctuary where she could find refuge from a alluring influence which the best part of herself must resist ; which must bring horrible tumult within , wretchedness without . this new sense of she relation to nullify the anxious scruple she would otherwise have felt , lest she should overstep the limit of intercourse with he that would sanction ; and she put out she hand to he , and feel the tear in she eye without any consciousness of a inward check . the scene be just what Lucy expect , and she kind heart delight in bring and together again ; though , even with all _her_ regard for , she could not resist the impression that she cousin have some excuse for feeling shocked at the physical incongruity between the two , -- a prosaic person like cousin , who do not like poetry and fairy tale . but she begin to speak as soon as possible , to set they at ease . " this be very good and virtuous of you , " she say , in she pretty treble , like the low conversational note of little bird , " to come so soon after you arrival . and as it be , I think I will pardon you for run away in a inopportune manner , and give you friend no notice . come and sit down here , " she go on , place the chair that would suit he best , " and you shall find yourself treat mercifully . " " you will never govern well , , " say , as he seat himself , " because no one will ever believe in you severity . people will always encourage themselves in misdemeanor by the certainty that you will be indulgent . " give some playful contradiction , but do not hear what it be , for he have naturally turn toward , and she be look at he with that open , affectionate scrutiny which we give to a friend from whom we have be long separate . what a moment they parting have be ! and feel as if he be only in the morrow of it . he feel this so keenly , -- with such intense , detailed remembrance , with such passionate revival of all that have be say and look in they last conversation , -- that with that jealousy and distrust which in diffident nature be almost inevitably link with a strong feeling , he think he read in 's glance and manner the evidence of a change . the very fact that he fear and half expect it would be sure to make this thought rush in , in the absence of positive proof to the
the contrary . " I be have a great holiday , be I not ? " say . " Lucy be like a fairy godmother ; she have turn I from a drudge into a princess in no time . I do nothe but indulge myself all day long , and she always find out what I want before I know it myself . " " I be sure she be the happier for have you , then , " say . " you must be better than a whole menagerie of pet to she . and you look well . you be benefit by the change . " Artificial conversation of this sort go on a little while , till , determine to put a end to it , exclaim , with a good imitation of annoyance , that she have forget something , and be quickly out of the room . in a moment and lean forward , and the hand be clasp again , with a look of sad contentment , like that of friend who meet in the memory of recent sorrow . " I tell my brother I wish to see you , ; I ask he to release I from my promise , and he consent . " , in she impulsiveness , want to know at once the position they must hold toward each other ; but she check herself . the thing that have happen since he have speak of he love for she be so painful that she shrank from be the first to alude to they . it seem almost like a injury toward even to mention she brother , -- she brother , who have insult he . but he be think too entirely of she to be sensitive on any other point at that moment . " then we can at least be friend , ? there be nothing to hinder that now ? " " will not you father object ? " say , withdraw she hand . " I should not give you up on any ground but you own wish , , " say , coloring . " there be point on which i should always resist my father , as I use to tell you . that be one . " " then there be nothing to hinder we be friend , , -- see each other and talk to each other while I be here ; I shall soon go away again . I mean to go very soon , to a new situation . " " be that inevitable , ? " " yes ; I must not stay here long . it would unfit I for the life I must begin again at last . I can not live in dependence , -- I can not live with my brother , though he be very good to I . he would like to provide for I ; but that would be intolerable to I . " be silent a few moment , and then say , in that high , feeble voice which with he indicate the resolute suppression of emotion ,-- " be there no other alternative , ? be that life , away from those who love you , the only one you will allow yourself to look forward to ? " " yes , , " she say , look at he pleadingly , as if she entreate he to believe that she be compelle to this course . " at least , as thing be ; I do not know what may be in year to come . but I begin to think there can never come much happiness to I from loving ; I have always have so much pain mingl with it . I wish I could make myself a world outside it , as man do . " " now you be return to you old think in a new form , , -- the thought I use to combat , " say , with a slight tinge of bitterness . " you want to find out a mode of renunciation that will be a escape from pain . I tell you again , there be no such escape possible except by perverting or mutilate one 's nature . what would become of I , if I try to escape from pain ? and cynicism would be my only opium ; unless I could fall into some kind of conceited madness , and fancy myself a favorite of because I be not a favorite with man . " the bitterness have take on some impetuosity as go on speak ; the word be evidently a outlet for some immediate feeling of he own , as well as a answer to . there be a pain presse on he at that moment . he shrank with proud delicacy from the faintest allusion to the word of love , of plight love that have pass between they . it would have seem to he like reminde of a promise ; it would have have for he something of the baseness of compulsion . he could not dwell on the fact that he himself have not change ; for that too would have have the air of a appeal . he love for be stampe , even more than the rest of he experience , with the exaggerated sense that he be a exception , -- that she , that every one , see he in the light of a exception . but be conscience - stricken . " yes , , " she say , with she childish contrition when he use to chide she , " you be right , I know . I do always think too much of my own feeling , and not enough of other ' , -- not enough of yours . I have need have you always to find fault
fault with I and teach I ; so many thing have come true that you use to tell I . " be rest she elbow on the table , lean she head on she hand and look at with half - penitent dependent affection , as she say this ; while he be return she gaze with a expression that , to she consciousness , gradually become less vague , -- become charge with a specific recollection . have he mind fly back to something that _she_ now remember , -- something about a lover of Lucy's ? it be a thought that make she shudder ; it give new definiteness to she present position , and to the tendency of what have happen the evening before . she move she arm from the table , urge to change she position by that positive physical oppression at the heart that sometimes accompany a sudden mental pang . " what be the matter , ? have something happen ? " say , in inexpressible anxiety , he imagination be only too ready to weave everything that be fatal to they both . " no , nothing , " say , rouse she latent will . must not have that odious thought in he mind ; she would banish it from she own . " nothing , " she repeat , " except in my own mind . you use to say I should feel the effect of my starved life , as you call it ; and I do . I be too eager in my enjoyment of music and all luxury , now they be come to I . " she take up she work and occupy herself resolutely , while watch she , really in doubt whether she have anything more than this general allusion in she mind . it be quite in 's character to be agitate by vague self - reproach . but soon there come a violent well - know ring at the door - bell resoun through the house . " oh , what a start announcement ! " say , quite mistress of herself , though not without some inward flutter . " I wonder where be . " Lucy have not be deaf to the signal , and after a interval long enough for a few solicitous but not hurrie inquiry , she herself usher in . " well , old fellow , " he say , go straight up to and shake he heartily by the hand , bow to in passing , " it be glorious to have you back again ; only I wish you would conduct yourself a little less like a sparrow with a residence on the house - top , and not go in and out constantly without let the servants know . this be about the twentieth time I have have to scamper up those countless stair to that painting - room of yours , all to no purpose , because you people think you be at home . such incidents embitter friendship . " " I have so few visitor , it seem hardly worth while to leave notice of my exit and entrances , " say , feel rather oppress just then by 's bright strong presence and strong voice . " be you quite well this morning , ? " say Stephen , turn to Maggie with stiff politeness , and put out he hand with the air of fulfil a social duty . give the tip of she finger , and say , " quite well , thank you , " in a tone of proud indifference . 's eye be watch they keenly ; but be use to see variation in they manner to each other , and only think with regret that there be some natural antipathy which every now and then surmount they mutual good - will . " be not the sort of woman admire , and she be irritate by something in he which she interpret as conceit , " be the silent observation that account for everything to guileless . and have no sooner complete this study greeting than each felt hurt by the other 's coldness . and , while ratt on in question to about he recent sketching expedition , be think all the more about because he be not draw she into the conversation as he have invariably do before . " and be not look happy , " think ; " this first interview have be sadden to they . " " I think we people who have not be gallop , " she say to , " be all a little damp by the rain . let we have some music . we ought to take advantage of have and you together . give we the duet in ' ' ; have not hear that , and I know it will suit she . " " come , then , " say Stephen , go toward the piano , and give a foretaste of the tune in he deep " brum -brum , " very pleasant to hear . " you , please , , -- you play the accompaniment , " say , " and then I can go on with my work . you _will_ like to play , sha ' not you ? " she add , with a pretty , inquire look , anxious , as usual , lest she should have propose what be not pleasant to another ; but with yearning toward she unfinished embroidery . have brighten at the proposition , for there be no feeling , perhaps , except the extreme of fear and grief , that do not find relief in music , -- that do not make a man se or play the better ; and have a abundance of pent - up feeling at this moment , as complex as any
any trio or quartet that be ever mean to express love and jealousy and resignation and fierce suspicion , all at the same time . " oh , yes , " he say , seat himself at the piano , " it be a way of ek out one 's imperfect life and be three people at once , -- to s and make the piano se , and hear they both all the while , -- or else to s and paint . " " ah , there you be a enviable fellow . I can do nothing with my hand , " say Stephen . " that have generally be observe in man of great administrative capacity , I believe , -- a tendency to predominance of the reflective power in I ! have not you observ that , ? " Stephen have fall by mistake into he habit of playful appeal to , and she could not repress the answer flush and epigram . " I _have observe a tendency to predominance , " she say , smile ; and at that moment devoutly hope that she find the tendency disagreeable . " come , come , " say ; " music , music ! we will discuss each other 's quality another time . " always try in vain to go on with she work when music begin . she try harder than ever to - day ; for the thought that know how much she care for he singing be one that no longer rouse a merely playful resistance ; and she know , too , that it be he habit always to stand so that he could look at she . but it be of no use ; she soon throw she work down , and all she intention be lose in the vague state of emotion produce by the inspiring duet , -- emotion that seem to make she at once strong and weak ; strong for all enjoyment , weak for all resistance . when the strain pass into the minor , she half start from she seat with the sudden thrill of that change . poor Maggie ! she look very beautiful when she soul be be play on in this way by the inexorable power of sound . you might have see the slightest perceptible quiver through she whole frame as she lean a little forward , clasp she hand as if to steady herself ; while she eye dilate and brighten into that wide - open , childish expression of wonder delight which always come back in she happiest moment . , who at other time have always be at the piano when be look in this way , could not resist the impulse to steal up to she and kiss she . , too , catch a glimpse of she now and then round the open book on the desk , and feel that he have never before see she under so strong a influence . " more , more ! " say , when the duet have be encor . " something spirite again . always say she like a great rush of sound . " " it must be ' let we take the road , ' then , " say , -- " so suitable for a wet morning . but be you prepare to abandon the most sacred duty of life , and come and s with we ? " " oh , yes , " say , laugh . " if you will look out the ' 's ' from the large canterbury . it have a dingy cover . " " that be a great clue , consider there be about a score cover here of rival dinginess , " say Stephen , draw out the canterbury . " oh , play something the while , , " say , notice that he finger be wander over the key . " what be that you be fall into ?-- something delicious that I do not know . " " do not you know that ? " say , bring out the tune more definitely . " it be from the ' Sonnambula'--'Ah ! perche non posso odiarti . ' I do not know the opera , but it appear the tenor be tell the heroine that he shall always love she though she may forsake he . you have hear I s it to the english word , 'i love thee still . ' " it be not quite unintentionally that have wander into this song , which might be a indirect expression to Maggie of what he could not prevail on himself to say to she directly . she ears have be open to what he be say , and when he begin to s , she understand the plaintive passion of the music . that pleading tenor have no very fine quality as a voice , but it be not quite new to she ; it have sung to she by snatch , in a subdued way , among the grassy walk and hollow , and underneath the lean ash - tree in the . there seem to be some reproach in the word ; do mean that ? she wish she have assure he more distinctly in they conversation that she desire not to renew the hope of love between they , _only because it clash with she inevitable circumstance . she be touch , not thrill by the song ; it suggest distinct memory and thought , and bring quiet regret in the place of excitement . " that be the way with you tenor , " say , who be wait with music in he hand while finish the song . " you demoralize the fair sex by warbl you sentimental love and constancy under all sort of vile treatment . nothing short of have you head serve
serve up in a dish like that mediaeval tenor or troubadour , would prevent you from express you entire resignation . I must administer a antidote , while prepare to tear herself away from she bobbin . " Stephen roll out , with saucy energy ,-- " shall I , waste in despair , because a woman 's fair ? " and seem to make all the air in the room alive with a new influence . , always proud of what do , go toward the piano with laughing , admir look at he ; and , in spite of she resistance to the spirit of the song and to the singer , be take hold of and shake by the invisible influence , -- be borne along by a wave too strong for she . but , angrily resolve not to betray herself , she seize she work , and go on make false stitch and prick she finger with much perseverance , not look up or take notice of what be go forward , until all the three voice united in " let we take the road . " I be afraid there would have be a subtle , steal gratification in she mind if she have know how entirely this saucy , be occupy with she ; how he be pass rapidly from a determination to treat she with ostentatious indifference to a irritating desire for some sign of inclination from she , -- some interchange of subdued word or look with she . it be not long before he find a opportunity , when they have pass to the music of " the . " , feel the need of a footstool , be walk across the room to get one , when Stephen , who be not singe just then , and be conscious of all she movement , guess she want , and fly to anticipate she , lift the footstool with a entreating look at she , which make it impossible not to return a glance of gratitude . and then , to have the footstool place carefully by a too self - confident personage , -- not _any self - confident personage , but one in particular , who suddenly look humble and anxious , and linger , bend still , to ask if there be not some dratch in that position between the window and the fireplace , and if he may not be allow to move the work - table for she ,-- these thing will summon a little of the too ready , traitorous tenderness into a woman 's eye , compelle as she be in she girlish time to learn she life - lesson in very trivial language . and to Maggie such thing have not be every - day incident , but be a new element in she life , and find she keen appetite for homage quite fresh . that tone of gentle solicitude oblige she to look at the face that be bend toward she , and to say , " no , thank you " ; and nothing could prevent that mutual glance from be delicious to both , as it have be the evening before . it be but a ordinary act of politeness in ; it have hardly take two minute ; and , who be singe , scarcely notice it . but to 's mind , fill already with a vague anxiety that be likely to find a definite ground for itself in any trivial incident , this sudden eagerness in , and the change in 's face , which be plainly reflect a beam from he , see so strong a contrast with the previous overwrotch sign of indifference , as to be charge with painful meaning . 's voice , pour in again , jar upon he nervous susceptibility as if it have be the clang of sheet - iron , and he feel inclined to make the piano shriek in utter discord . he have really see no communicable ground for suspect any ususual feeling between and ; he own reason tell he so , and he want to go home at once that he might reflect coolly on these false image , till he have convince himself of they nullity . but then , again , he want to stay as long as Stephen stay , -- always to be present when be present with . it seem to poor so natural , nay , inevitable , that any man who be near Maggie should fall in love with she ! there be no promise of happiness for she if she be beguil into loving ; and this think embolden to view he own love for she in the light of a less unequal offering . he be begin to play very falsely under this deafen inward tumult , and be look at he in astonishment , when 's entrance to summon they to lunch come as a excuse for abruptly break off the music . " ah , ! " say , when they enter the dining - room , " I have not see you for a long while . you father be not at home , I think , be he ? I go after he to the office the other day , and they say he be out of town . " " he be be to on business for several day , " say ; " but he be come back now . " " as fond of he far hobby as ever , eh ? " " I believe so , " say , rather wonder at this sudden interest in he father 's pursuit . " ah ! " say , " he be get some land in he own hand on this side the river as well as the other , I think ? " " yes , he
he have . " " ah ! " continue , as he dispense the pigeonpie , " he must find far a heavy item , -- a expensive hobby . I never have a hobby myself , never would give in to that . and the worst of all hobby be those that people think they can get money at . they shoot they money down like corn out of a sack then . " feel a little nervous under she father 's apparently gratuitous criticism of 's expenditure . but it cease there , and become unusually silent and meditative during he luncheon . , accustom to watch all indication in she father , and have reason , which have recently become strong , for a extra interest in what refer to the , feel a unsual curiosity to know what have prompt she father 's question . he subsequent silence make she suspect there have be some special reason for they in he mind . with this idea in she head , she resort to she usual plan when she want to tell or ask she father anything particular : she find a reason for she aunt to leave the dining - room after dinner , and seate herself on a small stool at she father 's knee . , under those circumstance , consider that he taste some of the most agreeable moment he merit have purchase he in life , notwithstand that , dislik to have she hair powder with snuff , usually begin by master he snuff - box on such occasion . " you do not want to go to sleep yet , papa , _do_ you ? " she say , as she bring up she stool and open the large finger that clutch the snuff - box . " not yet , " say , glance at the reward of merit in the decanter . " but what do _you_ want ? " he add , pinch the dimple ching fondly , --" to coax some more sovereign out of my pocket for you bazaar ? Eh ? " " no , I have no base motive at all to - day . I only want to talk , not to beg . I want to know what make you ask about he father 's farme to - day , papa ? it seem rather odd , because you never hardly say anything to he about he father ; and why should you care about 's lose money by he hobby ? " " something to do with business , " say , wave he hand , as if to repel intrusion into that mystery . " but , papa , you always say have bring up like a girl ; how come you to think you should get any business knowledge out of he ? those abrupt question sound rather oddly . think they queer . " " Nonsense , child ! " say , willing to justify he social demeanor , with which he have take some pain in he upward progress . " there be a report that 's mill and farm on the other side of the river -- Dorlcote , you uncle 's , you know -- be not answer so well as it do . I want to see if you friend would let anything out about he father 's be tired of farme . " " why ? would you buy the mill , papa , if he would part with it ? " say , eagerly . " oh , tell I everything ; here , you shall have you snuff - box if you will tell I . because say all they heart be set on 's get back the mill some time . it be one of the last thing she father say to , that he must get back the mill . " " Hush , you little puss , " say , avail himself of the restore snuff - box . " you must not say a word about this thing ; do you hear ? there be very little chance of they get the mill or of anybody be get it out of 's hand . and if he know that we want it with a view to the 's get it again , he would be the less likely to part with it . it be natural , after what happen . he behave well enough to before ; but a horsewhipping be not likely to be pay for with sugar- plum . " " now , papa , " say , with a little air of solemnity , " will you trust I ? you must not ask I all my reason for what I be go to say , but I have very strong reason . and I be very cautious ; I be , indeed . " " well , let we hear . " " why , I believe , if you will let I take into we confidence , -- let I tell he all about you wish to buy , and what it be for ; that my cousin wish to have it , and why they wish to have it , -- I believe would help to bring it about . I know he would desire to do it . " " I do not see how that can be , child , " say , look puzzl . " why should _he_ care ? " -- then , with a sudden penetrating look at he daughter , " you do not think the poor lad 's fond of you , and so you can make he do what you like ? " ( feel quite safe about he daughter 's affection . ) " no , papa ; he care very little about I , -- not so much as I
I care about he . but I have a reason for be quite sure of what I say . do not you ask I . and if you ever guess , do not tell I . only give I leave to do as I think fit about it . " rise from she stool to seat herself on she father 's knee , and kiss he with that last request . " be you sure you will not do mischief , now ? " he say , look at she with delight . " yes , papa , quite sure . I be very wise ; I have get all you business talents . do not you admire my accompt - book , now , when I show it you ? " " well , well , if this youngster will keep he counsel , there will not be much harm done . and to tell the truth , I think there be not much chance for we any other way . now , let I go off to sleep . " in a Before three day have pass after the conversation you have just overheard between and she father she have contrive to have a private interview with during a visit of 's to she aunt . for a day and a night turn over in he mind with restless agitation all that have tell he in that interview , till he have thoroughly resolve on a course of action . he think he see before he now a possibility of alte he position with respect to , and remove at least one obstacle between they . he lay he plan and calculate all he move with the fervid deliberation of a chess - player in the day of he first ardor , and be amaze himself at he sudden genius as a tactician . he plan be as bold as it be thoroughly calculate . have watch for a moment when he father have nothing more urgent on he hand than the newspaper , he go behind he , lay a hand on he shoulder , and say ,-- " , will you come up into my sanctum , and look at my new sketch ? I have arrange they now . " " I be get terrible stiff in the joint , , for climb those stair of yours , " say Wakem , look kindly at he son as he lay down he paper . " but come along , then . " " this be a nice place for you , be not it , ?-- a capital light that from the roof , eh ? " be , as usual , the first thing he say on enter the painting - room . he like to remind himself and he son to that he fatherly indulgence have provide the accommodation . he have be a good father . Emily would have nothing to reproach he with there , if she come back again from she grave . " come , come , " he say , put he double eye - glass over he nose , and seate himself to take a general view while he rest , " you have get a famous show here . upon my word , I do not see that you thing be not as good as that artist 's -- what be he name -- that give so much money for . " shook he head and smile . he have seat himself on he painting - stool , and have take a lead pencil in he hand , with which he be make strong mark to counteract the sense of tremulousness . he watch he father get up , and walk slowly round , good - naturedly dwell on the picture much longer than he amount of genuine taste for landscape would have prompt , till he stop before a stand on which two picture be place , -- one much larger than the other , the smaller one in a leather case . " bless I ! what have you here ? " say , start by a sudden transition from landscape to portrait . " I think you would leave off figure . who be these ? " " they be the same person , " say , with calm promptness , " at different age . " " and what person ? " say Wakem , sharply fix he eye with a grow look of suspicion on the larger picture . " . the small one be something like what she be when I be at school with she brother at 's ; the larger one be not quite so good a likeness of what she be when I come from abroad . " thWakey turn round fiercely , with a flushed face , let he eye - glass fall , and look at he son with a savage expression for a moment , as if he be ready to strike that da feebleness from the stool . but he throw himself into the armchair again , and thrust he hand into he trouser - pocket , still look angrily at he son , however . do not return the look , but sit quietly watch the point of he pencil . " and do you mean to say , then , that you have have any acquaintance with she since you come from abroad ? " say , at last , with that vain effort which rage always make to throw as much punishment as it desire to inflict into word and tone , since blow be forbidden . " yes ; I see a great deal of she for a whole year before she father 's death . we meet often in that thicket -- the -- near . I love she dearly ; I shall never love any other woman .
. I have think of she ever since she be a little girl . " " go on , sir ! and you have correspond with she all this while ? " " no . I never tell she I love she till just before we part , and she promise she brother not to see I again or to correspond with I . I be not sure that she love I or would consent to marry I . but if she would consent , -- if she _do love I well enough , -- I should marry she . " " and this be the return you make I for all the indulgence I have heape on you ? " say Wakem , get white , and begin to tremble under a enraged sense of impotence before 's calm defiance and concentration of purpose . " no , father , " say , look up at he for the first time ; " I do not regard it as a return . you have be a indulgent father to I ; but I have always feel that it be because you have a affectionate wish to give I as much happiness as my unfortunate lot would admit , not that it be a debt you expect I to pay by sacrifice all my chance of happiness to satisfy feeling of your which I can never share . " " I think most son would share they father 's feeling in this case , " say Wakem , bitterly . " the girl 's father be a ignorant mad brute , who be within a inch of murder I . the whole town know it . and the brother be just as insolent , only in a cooler way . he forbade she see you , you say ; he will break every bone in you body , for you greater happiness , if you do not take care . but you seem to have make up you mind ; you have count the consequence , I suppose . of course you be independent of I ; you can marry this girl to - morrow , if you like ; you be a man of five - and - twenty , -- you can go you way , and I can go mine . we need have no more to do with each other . " thWakey rise and walk toward the door , but something hold he back , and instead of leave the room , he walk up and down it . be slow to reply , and when he speak , he tone have a more incisive quietness and clearness than ever . " no ; I can not marry , even if she would have I , if I have only my own resource to maintain she with . I have be bring up to no profession . I can not offer she poverty as well as deformity . " " ah , _there_ be a reason for you clinging to I , doubtless , " say Wakem , still bitterly , though 's last word have give he a pang ; they have stir a feeling which have be a habit for a quarter of a century . he throw himself into the chair again . " I expect all this , " say . " I know these scene be often happen between father and son . if I be like other man of my age , I might answer you angry word by still angrier ; we might part ; I should marry the woman I love , and have a chance of be as happy as the rest . but if it will be a satisfaction to you to annihilate the very object of everything you have do for I , you have a advantage over most father ; you can completely deprive I of the only thing that would make my life worth haive . " pause , but he father be silent . " you know best what satisfaction you would have , beyond that of gratify a ridiculous rancor worthy only of wander savage . " " ridiculous rancor ! " thWakey burst out . " what do you mean ? damn it ! be a man to be horsewhip by a boor and love he for it ? besides , there be that cold , proud devil of a son , who say a word to I I shall not forget when we have the settling . he would be as pleasant a mark for a bullet as I know , if he be worth the expense . " " I do not mean you resentment toward they , " say , who have he reason for some sympathy with this view of , " though a feeling of revenge be not worth much , that you should care to keep it . I mean you extend the enmity to a helpless girl , who have too much sense and goodness to share they narrow prejudice . _She_ have never enter into the family quarrel . " " what do that signify ? we do not ask what a woman do ; we ask whom she belong to . it be altogether a degrading thing to you , to think of marry old 's daughter . " for the first time in the dialogue , lose some of he self - control , and color with anger . " , " he say , with bitter incisiveness , " have the only grounds of rank that anything but vulgar folly can suppose to belong to the middle class ; she be thoroughly refin , and she friend , whatever else they may be , be respect for irreproachable honor and integrity . all . 's , I fancy , would pronounce she to be more than my equal .
. " thWakey dart a glance of fierce question at he son ; but be not look at he , and with a certain penitent consciousness go on , in a few moment , as if in amplification of he last word ,-- " find a single person in . 's who will not tell you that a beautiful creature like she would be throw herself away on a pitiable object like I . " " not she ! " say Wakem , rise again , and forget everything else in a burst of resentful pride , half fatherly , half personal . " it would be a deuced fine match for she . it be all stuff about a accidental deformity , when a girl 's really attach to a man . " " but girl be not apt to get attach under those circumstance , " say . " well , then , " say Wakem , rather brutally , try to recover he previous position , " if she do not care for you , you might have spare yourself the trouble of talk to I about she , and you might have spare I the trouble of refuse my consent to what be never likely to happen . " thWakey strode to the door , and without look round again , bang it after he . be not without confidence that he father would be ultimately wrotch upon as he have expect , by what have pass ; but the scene have jar upon he nerve , which be as sensitive as a woman 's . he determine not to go down to dinner ; he could not meet he father again that day . it be 's habit , when he have no company at home , to go out in the evening , often as early as half - past seven ; and as it be far on in the afternoon now , lock up he room and go out for a long ramble , think he would not return until he father be out of the house again . he get into a boat , and go down the river to a favorite village , where he dine , and linger till it be late enough for he to return . he have never have any sort of quarrel with he father before , and have a sickening fear that this contest , just begin , might go on for week ; and what might not happen in that time ? he would not allow himself to define what that involuntary question mean . but if he could once be in the position of 's accept , acknowledge lover , there would be less room for vague dread . he go up to he painting - room again , and throw himself with a sense of fatigue into the armchair , look round absently at the view of water and rock that be range around , till he fall into a doze , in which he fancie be slipp down a glistening , green , slimy channel of a waterfall , and he be look on helpless , till he be awaken by what see a sudden , awful crash . it be the opening of the door , and he could hardly have dozen more than a few moment , for there be no perceptible change in the evening light . it be he father who enter ; and when move to vacate the chair for he , he say ,-- " sit still . I would rather walk about . " he stalk up and down the room once or twice , and then , stand opposite with he hand thrust in he side pocket , he say , as if continue a conversation that have not be break off ,-- " but this girl seem to have be fond of you , , else she would not have meet you in that way . " 's heart be beate rapidly , and a transient flush pass over he face like a gleam . it be not quite easy to speak at once . " she like I at 's , when she be a little girl , because I use to sit with she brother a great deal when he have hurt he foot . she have keep that in she memory , and think of I as a friend of a long while ago . she do not think of I as a lover when she meet I . " " well , but you make love to she at last . what do she say then ? " say Wakem , walk about again . " she say she _do love I then . " " Confound it , then ; what else do you want ? be she a jilt ? " " she be very young then , " say , hesitatingly . " I be afraid she hardly know what she feel . I be afraid we long separation , and the idea that event must always divide we , may have make a difference . " " but she be in the town . I have see she at church . have not you speak to she since you come back ? " " yes , at 's . but I could not renew my proposal to she on several grounds . one obstacle would be remove if you would give you consent , -- if you would be willing to think of she as a daughter - in - law . " be silent a little while , pause before 's picture . " she be not the sort of woman you mother be , though , , " he say , at last . " I see she at church , -- she be handsomer than this , -- deuce fine eye and
and fine figure , I see ; but rather dangerous and unmanageable , eh ? " " she be very tender and affectionate , and so simple , -- without the air and petty contrivance other woman have . " " ah ? " say Wakem . then look round at he son , " but you mother look gentler ; she have that brown wavy hair and gray eye , like yours . you can not remember she very well . it be a thousand pity I have no likeness of she . " " then , should not you be glad for I to have the same sort of happiness , father , to sweeten my life for I ? there can never be another tie so strong to you as that which begin eight - and - twenty year ago , when you marry my mother , and you have be tighten it ever since . " " ah , , you be the only fellow that know the best of I , " say Wakem , give he hand to he son . " we must keep together if we can . and now , what be I to do ? you must come downstairs and tell I . be I to go and call on this dark - eyed damsel ? " the barrier once throw down in this way , could talk freely to he father of they entire relation with the Tulliver , -- of the desire to get the mill and land back into the family , and of its transfer to & as a intermediate step . he could venture now to be persuasive and urgent , and he father yield with more readiness than he have calculate on . " _I_ do not care about the mill , " he say at last , with a sort of angry compliance . " I have have a infernal deal of bother lately about the mill . let they pay I for my improvement , that be all . but there be one thing you need not ask I . I shall have no direct transaction with young . if you like to swallow he for he sister 's sake , you may ; but I 've no sauce that will make he go down . " I leave you to imagine the agreeable feeling with which go to the next day , to say that be ready to open the negotiation , and be pretty triumph as she appeal to she father whether she have not prove she great business abilitie . be rather puzzl , and suspect that there have be something " go on " among the young people to which he want a clew . but to man of 's stamp , what go on among the young people be as extraneous to the real business of life as what go on among the bird and butterfly , until it can be show to have a malign bear on monetary affair . and in this case the bearing appear to be entirely propitious . in - the culmination of 's career as a admired member of society in 's be certainly the day of the bazaar , when she simple noble beauty , clad in a white muslin of some soft -floating kind , which I suspect must have come from the store of aunt Pullet 's wardrobe , appear with mark distinction among the more adorned and conventional woman around she . we perhaps never detect how much of we social demeanor be make up of artificial air until we see a person who be at once beautiful and simple ; without the beauty , we be apt to call simplicity awkwardness . the be much too well - breed to have any of the grimace and affect tone that belong to pretentious vulgarity ; but they stall be next to the one where sit , it seem newly obvious to - day that hold she chin too high , and that speak and move continually with a view to effect . all well - dress . and its neighborhood be there ; and it would have be worth while to come even from a distance , to see the fine old hall , with its open roof and carve oaken rafter , and great oaken folding - door , and light shed down from a height on the many - colored show beneath ; a very quaint place , with broad faded stripe pain on the wall , and here and there a show of heraldic animal of a bristly , long - snoute character , the cherish emblem of a noble family once the seignior of this now civic hall . a grand arch , cut in the upper wall at one end , surmount a oaken orchestra , with a open room behind it , where hothouse plant and stall for refreshment be dispose ; a agreeable resort for gentleman dispose to loiter , and yet to exchange the occasional crush down below for a more commodious point of view . in fact , the perfect fitness of this ancient building for a admirable modern purpose , that make charity truly elegant , and lead through vanity up to the supply of a deficit , be so striking that hardly a person enter the room without exchange the remark more than once . near the great arch over the orchestra be the stone oriel with painted glass , which be one of the venerable inconsistency of the old hall ; and it be close by this that have she stall , for the convenience of certain large plain article which she have take charge of for . have beg to sit at the open end of the stall , and to have the sale of these article rather than of bead - mat and other
other elaborate product of which she have but a dim understanding . but it soon appear that the gentleman 's dressing - gowns , which be among she commodity , be object of such general attention and inquiry , and excited so troublesome a curiosity as to they lining and comparative merit , together with a determination to test they by try on , as to make she post a very conspicuous one . the lady who have commodity of they own to sell , and do not want dressing - gowns , see at once the frivolity and bad taste of this masculine preference for goods which any tailor could furnish ; and it be possible that the emphatic notice of various kind which be draw toward on this public occasion , throw a very strong and unmistakable light on she subsequent conduct in many mind then present . not that anger , on account of spurned beauty can dwell in the celestial breast of charitable lady , but rather that the error of person who have once be much admire necessarily take a deeper tinge from the mere force of contrast ; and also , that to - day Maggie 's conspicuous position , for the first time , make evident certain characteristic which be subsequently feel to have a explanatory bearing . there be something rather bold in 's direct gaze , and something undefinably coarse in the style of she beauty , which place she , in the opinion of all feminine judge , far below she cousin ; for the ladie of . 's have now completely ceded to Lucy they hypothetic claim on the admiration of . as for dear little Lucy herself , she late benevolent triumph about the , and all the affectionate project she be cherish for and , help to give she the highest spirit to - day , and she feel nothing but pleasure in the evidence of 's attractiveness . it be true , she be look very charme herself , and be pay she the utmost attention on this public occasion ; jealously buy up the article he have see under she finger in the process of make , and gayly help she to cajeal the male customer into the purchase of the most effeminate futility . he choose to lay aside he hat and wear a scarlet fez of she embroidering ; but by superficial observer this be necessarily liable to be interpret less as a compliment to than as a mark of coxcombry . " be a great coxcomb , " yoing observe ; " but then he be a privileged person in 's -- he carry all before he ; if another fellow do such thing , everybody would say he make a fool of himself . " and purchase absolutely nothing from , until say , in rather a vex undertone ,-- " see , now ; all the thing of 's knitting will be go , and you will not have buy one . there be those deliciously soave warm thing for the wrist , -- do buy they . " " oh no , " say , " they must be intend for imaginative person , who can chill themselves on this warm day by think of the frosty Caucasus . Stern reason be my forte , you know . you must get to buy those . by the way , why do not he come ? " " he never like go where there be many people , though I enjoin he to come . he say he would buy up any of my goods that the rest of the world reject . but now , do go and buy something of . " " no , no ; see , she have get a customer ; there be old Wakem himself just come up . " 's eye turn with anxious interest toward to see how she go through this first interview , since a sadly memorable time , with a man toward whom she must have so strange a mixture of feeling ; but she be pleased to notice that have tact enough to enter at once into talk about the bazaar ware , and appear interested in purchase , smile now and then kindly at , and not call on she to speak much , as if he observe that she be rather pale and tremulous . " why , be make himself particularly amiable to you cousin , " say , in a undertone to ; " be it pure magnanimity ? you talk of a family quarrel . " " oh , that will soon be quite heale , I hope , " say , become a little indiscreet in she satisfaction , and speak with a air of significance . but do not appear to notice this , and as some lady - purchaser come up , he lounge on toward 's end , handle trifle and stand aloon until , who have take out he purse , have finish he t transaction . " my son come with I , " he overhear say , " but he have vanish into some other part of the building , and have leave all these charitable gallantry to I . I hope you will reproach he for he shabby conduct . " she return he smile and bow without speak , and he turn away , only then observe Stephen and nodd to he . , conscious that be still there , busy herself with counting money , and avoid look up . she have be well please that he have devote himself to Lucy to - day , and have not come near she . they have begin the morning with a indifferent salutation , and both have rejoice in be aloon from each other , like a patient who have actually do without he
he opium , in spite of former failure in resolution . and during the last few day they have even be make up they minds to failure , look to the outward event that must soon come to separate they , as a reason for dispense with self - conquest in detail . move step by step as if he be be unwillingly drag , until he have get round the open end of the stall , and be half hide by a screen of drapery . go on count she money till she suddenly hear a deep gentle voice say , " be not you very try ? do let I bring you something , -- some fruit or jelly , may not I ? " the unexpected tone shook she like a sudden accidental vibration of a harp close by she . " oh no , thank you , " she say faintly , and only half look up for a instant . " you look so pale , " Stephen insist , in a more entreating tone . " I be sure you be exhaust . I must disobey you , and bring something . " " no , indeed , I could not take it . " " be you angry with I ? what have I do ? Do_ look at I . " " pray , go away , " say , look at he helplessly , she eye glance immediately from he to the opposite corner of the orchestra , which be half hide by the fold of the old fad green curtain . have no sooner utter this entreaty than she be wretch at the admission it imply ; but turn away at once , and follow she upward glance , he see seal in the half - hide corner , so that he could command little more than that angle of the hall in which sit . a entirely new though occur to , and link itself with what he have observe of 's manner , and with 's reply to he observation , it convince he that there have be some former relation between and beyond that childish one of which he have hear . more than one impulse make he immediately leave the hall and go upstairs to the refreshment - room , where , walk up to , he sit down behind he , and put he hand on he shoulder . " be you study for a portrait , , " he say , " or for a sketch of that oriel window ? by , it make a capital bit from this dark corner , with the curtain just mark it off . " " I have be study expression , " say , curtly . " what ! 's ? it be rather of the savage - moody order to - day , I think ,-- something of the fallen princess serve behind a counter . she cousin send I to she with a civil offer to get she some refreshment , but I have be snub , as usual . there be natural antipathy between we , I suppose ; I have seldom the honor to please she . " " what a hypocrite you be ! " say , flush angrily . " what ! because experience must have tell I that I be universally please ? I admit the law , but there be some disturbing force here . " " I be go , " say , rise abruptly . " so be I -- to get a breath of fresh air ; this place get oppressive . I think I have do suit and service long enough . " the two friend walk downstairs together without speak . turn through the outer door into the court -yard ; but , say , " oh , by the by , I must call in here , " go on along the passage to one of the room at the other end of the building , which be appropriate to the town library . he have the room all to himself , and a man require nothing less than this when he want to dash he cap on the table , throw himself astride a chair , and stare at a high brick wall with a frown which would not have be beneath the occasion if he have be slay " the giant python . " the conduct that issue from a moral conflict have often so close a resemblance to vice that the distinction escape all outward judgment founde on a mere comparison of action . it be clear to you , I hope , that be not a hypocrite , -- capable of deliberate doubleness for a selfish end ; and yet he fluctuation between the indulgence of a feeling and the systematic concealment of it might have make a good case in support of 's accusation . meanwhile , sit at she stall cold and trembl , with that painful sensation in the eyes which come from resolutely repress tear . be she life to be always like this , -- always bring some new source of inward strife ? she hear confusedly the busy , indifferent voice around she , and wish she mind could flow into that easy babbling current . it be at this moment that , who have quite lately come into the hall , and be now walk down the middle with he hand behind he , take a general view , fix he eye on for the first time , and be struck with the expression of pain on she beautiful face . she be sit quite still , for the stream of customer have lessen at this late hour in the afternoon ; the gentleman have chiefly choose the middle of the day , and 's stall be look rather bare . this
this , with she absent , pain expression , finish the contrast between she and she companion , who be all bright , eager , and busy . he be strongly arrest . she face have naturally draw he attention as a new and strike one at church , and he have be introduce to she during a short call on business at 's , but he have never speak more than three word to she . he walk toward she now , and , perceive some one approaching , rouse herself to look up and be prepare to speak . she feel a childlike , instinctive relief from the sense of uneasiness in this exertion , when she see it be 's face that be look at she ; that plain , middle - aged face , with a grave , penetrat kindness in it , seem to tell of a human being who have reach a firm , safe strand , but be look with helpful pity toward the struggler still toss by the wave , have a effect on at this moment which be afterward remember by she as if it have be a promise . the middle - aged , who have live through they strongest emotion , but be yet in the time when memory be still half passionate and not merely contemplative , should surely be a sort of natural priesthood , whom life have disciplin and consecrate to be the refuge and rescue of early stumbler and victim of self - despair . most of we , at some moment in we young life , would have welcome a priest of that natural order in any sort of canonical or uncanonical , but have to scramble upward into all the difficulty of nineteen entirely without such aid , as do . " you find you office rather a fatiguing one , I fear , , " say . " it be , rather , " say , simply , not be accustom to simpler amiable denial of obvious fact . " but I can tell . Kenn that you have dispose of she goods very quickly , " he add ; " she will be very much oblige to you . " " oh , I have do nothing ; the gentleman come very fast to buy the dressing - gowns and embroider waistcoat , but I think any of the other lady would have sell more ; I do not know what to say about they . " smile . " I hope I be go to have you as a permanent parishioner now , ; be I ? you have be at a distance from we hitherto . " " I have be a teacher in a school , and I be go into another situation of the same kind very soon . " " ah ? I be hope you would remain among you friend , who be all in this neighborhood , I believe . " " oh , _I must go_ , " say , earnestly , look at with a expression of reliance , as if she have tell he she history in those three word . it be one of those moment of implicit revelation which will sometimes happen even between people who meet quite transiently , -- on a mile 's journey , perhaps , or when rest by the wayside . there be always this possibility of a word or look from a stranger to keep alive the sense of human brotherhood . 's ear and eye take in all the sign that this brief confidence of 's be charge with meaning . " I understand , " he say ; " you feel it right to go . but that will not prevent we meeting again , I hope ; it will not prevent my know you better , if I can be of any service to you . " he put out he hand and press hers kindly before he turn away . " she have some trouble or other at heart , " he think . " poor child ! she look as if she might turn out to be one of ' the soul by nature pitch too high , by suffering plunge too low . ' " there be something wonderfully honest in those beautiful eye . " it may be surprising that , among whose many imperfectiond a excessive delight in admiration and acknowledge supremacy be not absent now , any more than when she be instruct the gypsy with a view toward achieve a royal position among they , be not more elate on a day when she have have the tribute of so many look and smile , together with that satisfactory consciousness which have necessarily come from be take before 's chevalglass , and make to look at the full length of she tall beauty , crown by the night of she massy hair . have smile at herself then , and for the moment have forget everything in the sense of she own beauty . if that state of mind could have last , she choice would have be to have at she foot , offer she a life fill with all luxuries , with daily incense of adoration near and distant , and with all possibility of culture at she command . but there be thing in she stronger than vanity , -- passion and affection , and long , deep memory of early discipline and effort , of early claim on she love and pity ; and the stream of vanity be soon sweep along and mingl imperceptibly with that wider current which be at it be highest force today , under the double urgency of the event and inward impulse bring by the last week . have not speak to she himself about the removal of obstacle between they on he father
father 's side , -- he shrank from that ; but he have tell everything to , with the hope that , be inform through she , might give he some encourage sign that they be bring thus much nearer to each other be a happiness to she . the rush of conflicting feeling be too great for to say much when Lucy , with a face breathing playful joy , like one of 's cherub , pour forth she triumphant revelation ; and could hardly be surprised that she could do little more than cry with gladness at the thought of she father 's wish be fulfil , and of 's get the again in reward for all he hard striving . the detail of preparation for the bazaar have then come to usurp 's attention for the next few day , and nothing have be say by the cousin on subject that be likely to rouse deeper feeling . have be to the house more than once , but have have no private conversation with he , and thus she have be leave to fight she inward battle without interference . but when the bazaar be fairly end , and the cousin be alone again , rest together at home , say ,-- " you must give up go to stay with you aunt Moss the day after to - morrow , Maggie ; write a note to she , and tell she you have put it off at my request , and I will send the man with it . she will not be displease ; you will have plenty of time to go by - and - by ; and I do not want you to go out of the way just now . " " yes , indeed I must go , dear ; I can not put it off . I would not leave aunt out for the world . and I shall have very little time , for I be go away to a new situation on the 25th of . " " ! " say , almost white with astonishment . " I do not tell you , dear , " say , make a great effort to command herself , " because you have be so busy . but some time ago I write to we old governess , , to ask she to let I know if she meet with any situation that I could fill , and the other day I have a letter from she tell I that I could take three orphan pupil of hers to the coast during the holiday , and then make trial of a situation with she as teacher . I write yesterday to accept the offer . " feel so hurt that for some moment she be unable to speak . " , " she say at last , " how could you be so unkind to I -- not to tell I -- to take _such a step -- and now ! " she hesitate a little , and then add , " and ? I think everything be go to be so happy . oh , , what be the reason ? give it up ; let I write . there be nothing now to keep you and apart . " " yes , " say , faintly . " there be 's feel . he say I must give he up if I marry . and I know he will not change -- at least not for a long while -- unless something happen to soften he . " " but I will talk to he ; he be come back this week . and this good news about the will soften he . and I will talk to he about . 's always very compliant to I ; I do not think he be so obstinate . " " but I must go , " say , in a distressed voice . " I must leave some time to pack . do not press I to stay , dear . " be silent for two or three minute , look away and ruminat . at length she knelt down by she cousin , and look up in she face with anxious seriousness , say ,-- " , be it that you do not love well enough to marry he ? tell I -- trust I . " hold 's hand tightly in silence a little while . she own hand be quite cold . but when she speak , she voice be quite clear and distinct . " yes , , I would choose to marry he . I think it would be the best and highest lot for I , -- to make he life happy . he love I first . no one else could be quite what he be to I . but I can not divide myself from my brother for life . I must go away , and wait . pray do not speak to I again about it . " obey in pain and wonder . the next word she say be ,-- " well , dear , at least you will go to the dance at to - morrow , and have some music and brightness , before you go to pay these dull dutiful visit . ah ! here come aunty and the tea . " the the suite of room open into each other at look duly brilliant with light and flower and the personal splendor of sixteen couple , with attendant parent and guardian . the focus of brilliancy be the long drawing - room , where the dancing go forward , under the inspiration of the grand piano ; the library , into which it open at one end , have the more sober illumination of maturity , with cap and card ; and at the other end
end the pretty sitting - room , with a conservatory attach , be leave as a occasional cool retreat . , who have laid aside she black for the first time , and have she pretty slimness set off by a abundant dress of white crape , be the acknowledged queen of the occasion ; for this be one of the ' thoroughly condescende party , include no member of any aristocracy higher than that of 's , and stretch to the extreme limit of commercial and professional gentility . Maggie at first refuse to dance , say that she have forget all the figure -- it be so many year since she have dance at school ; and she be glad to have that excuse , for it be ill dancing with a heavy heart . but at length the music wrotch in she young limb , and the longing come ; even though it be the horrible young , who walk up a second time to try and persuade she . she warn he that she could not dance anything but a country - dance ; but he , of course , be willing to wait for that high felicity , mean only to be complimentary when he assure she at several interval that it be a " great bore " that she could not waltz , he would have like so much to waltz with she . but at last it be the turn of the good old - fashioned dance which have the least of vanity and the most of merriment in it , and quite forget she troublous life in a childlike enjoyment of that half - rustic rhythm which seem to banish pretentious etiquette . she feel quite charitably toward young , as he hand bear she along and hold she up in the dance ; she eye and cheek have that fire of young joy in they which will flame out if it can find the least breath to fan it ; and she simple black dress , with its bit of black lace , see like the dim setting of a jewel . Stephen have not yet ask she to dance ; have not yet pay she more than a passing civility . since yesterday , that inward vision of she which perpetually make part of he consciousness , have be half screen by the image of , which come across it like a blot ; there be some attachment between she and ; at least there be a attachment on he side , which make she feel in some bondage . here , then , tell himself , be another claim of honor which call on he to resist the attraction that be continually threaten to overpower he . he tell himself so ; and yet he have once or twice feel a certain savage resistance , and at another moment a shuddering repugnance , to this intrusion of 's image , which almost make it a new incitement to rush toward and claim she for himself . nevertheless , he have do what he mean to do this evening , -- he have keep aloon from she ; he have hardly look at she ; and he have be gayly assiduous to . but now he eye be devour ; he feel inclin to kick young out of the dance , and take he place . then he want the dance to end that he might get rid of he partner . the possibility that he too should dance with , and have she hand in he so long , be begin to possess he like a thirst . but even now they hand be meet in the dance , -- be meet still to the very end of it , though they be far off each other . hardly know what happen , or in what automatic way he get through the duty of politeness in the interval , until he be free and see seat alone again , at the farther end of the room . he make he way toward she round the couple that be form for the waltz ; and when become conscious that she be the person he seek , she feel , in spite of all the thought that have go before , a glow gladness at heart . she eye and cheek be still brighten with she childlike enthusiasm in the dance ; she whole frame be set to joy and tenderness ; even the coming pain could not seem bitter , -- she be ready to welcome it as a part of life , for life at this moment seem a keen , vibrat consciousness poise above pleasure or pain . this one , this last night , she might expand unrestrainedly in the warmth of the present , without those chill , eat thoughts of the past and the future . " they be go to waltz again , " say Stephen , bend to speak to she , with that glance and tone of subdue tenderness which young dream create to themselve in the summer wood when low , cooe voice fill the air . such glance and tone bring the breath of poetry with they into a room that be half stifle with glaring gas and hard flirtation . " they be go to waltz again . it be rather dizzy work to look on , and the room be very warm ; shall we walk about a little ? " he take she hand and place it within he arm , and they walk on into the sitting - room , where the table be strew with engraving for the accommodation of visitor who would not want to look at they . but no visitor be here at this moment . they pass on into the conservatory . " how strange and unreal the tree and flower look
look with the light among they ! " say , in a low voice . " they look as if they belong to a enchant land , and would never fake away ; I could fancy they be all make of jewel . " she be look at the tier of geranium as she speak , and make no answer ; but he be look at she ; and do not a supreme poet blend light and sound into one , call darkness mute , and light eloquent ? something strangely powerful there be in the light of 's long gaze , for it make 's face turn toward it and look upward at it , slowly , like a flower at the ascending brightness . and they walk unsteadily on , without feel that they be walk ; without feel anything but that long , grave , mutual gaze which have the solemnity belong to all deep human passion . the hovering think that they must and would renounce each other make this moment of mute confession more intense in its rapture . but they have reach the end of the conservatory , and be oblige to pause and turn . the change of movement bring a new consciousness to ; she blush deeply , turn away she head , and draw she arm from 's , go up to some flower to smell they . stood motionless , and still pale . " oh , may I get this rose ? " say , make a great effort to say something , and dissipate the burn sense of irretrievable confession . " I think I be quite wick with rose ; I like to gather they and smell they till they have no scent left . " be mute ; he be incapable of put a sentence together , and bend she arm a little upward toward the large half - open rose that have attract she . who have not feel the beauty of a woman 's arm ? the unspeakable suggestion of tenderness that lie in the dimpled elbow , and all the varied gently lessen curve , down to the delicate wrist , with its tiniest , almost imperceptible nick in the firm softness . a woman 's arm touch the soul of a great sculptor two thousand year ago , so that he wrotch a image of it for the which move we still as it clasp lovingly the timeworn marble of a headless trunk . 's be such a arm as that , and it have the warm tints of life . a mad impulse seize on ; he dart toward the arm , and shower kiss on it , clasp the wrist . but the next moment snatch it from he , and glar at he like a wounded war - goddess , quiver with rage and humiliation . " how dare you ? " she speak in a deeply shaken , half - smother voice . " what right have I give you to insult I ? " she dart from he into the adjoining room , and throw herself on the sofa , pante and trembl . a horrible punishment be come upon she for the sin of allow a moment 's happiness that be treachery to , to , to she own better soul . that momentary happiness have be smite with a blight , a leprosy ; think more lightly of _her_ than he do of . as for , he lean back against the framework of the conservatory , dizzy with the conflict of passion , -- love , rage , and confuse despair ; despair at he want of self - mastery , and despair that he have offend Maggie . the last feeling surmount every other ; to be by she side again and entreat forgiveness be the only thing that have the force of a motive for he , and she have not be seat more than a few minute when he come and stand humbly before she . but 's bitter rage be unspent . " leave I to myself , if you please , " she say , with impetuous haughtiness , " and for the future avoid I . " turn away , and walk backward and forward at the other end of the room . there be the dire necessity of go back into the dancing - room again , and he be begin to be conscious of that . they have be absent so short a time , that when he go in again the waltz be not end . , too , be not long before she re-enter . all the pride of she nature be sting into activity ; the hateful weakness which have drag she within reach of this wound to she self - respect have at least wrotch its own cure . the thought and temptation of the last month should all be fling away into a unvisited chamber of memory . there be nothing to allure she now ; duty would be easy , and all the old calm purpose would reign peacefully once more . she re-enter the drawing - room still with some excited brightness in she face , but with a sense of proud self - command that defy anything to agitate she . she refuse to dance again , but she talk quite readily and calmly with every one who address she . and when they get home that night , she kiss with a free heart , almost exult in this scorching moment , which have deliver she from the possibility of another word or look that would have the stamp of treachery toward that gentle , unsuspicious sister . the next morning do not set off to Basset quite so soon as she have expect . she mother be to accompany she in the carriage , and household business
business could not be dispatch hastily by . so , who have be in a hurry to prepare herself , have to sit waiting , equip for the drive , in the garden . be busy in the house wrap up some bazaar present for the younger one at , and when there be a loud ring at the door - bell , feel some alarm lest Lucy should bring out Stephen to she ; it be sure to be . but presently the visitor come out into the garden alone , and seate himself by she on the garden - chair . it be not Stephen . " we can just catch the tip of the fir , , from this seat , " say . they have take each other 's hand in silence , but have look at he with a more complete revival of the old childlike affectionate smile than he have see before , and he feel encouraged . " yes , " she say , " I often look at they , and wish I could see the low sunlight on the stem again . but I have never be that way but once , -- to the churchyard with my mother . " " I have be there , I go there , continually , " say . " I have nothing but the past to live upon . " a keen remembrance and keen pity impell to put she hand in 's . they have so often walk hand in hand ! " I remember all the spot , " she say , -- " just where you tell I of particular thing , beautiful story that I have never hear of before . " " you will go there again soon , will not you , ? " say , get timid . " the will soon be you brother 's home again . " " yes ; but I shall not be there , " say . " I shall only hear of that happiness . I be go away again ; have not tell you , perhaps ? " " then the future will never join on to the past again , ? that book be quite close ? " the gray eye that have so often look up at she with entreating worship , look up at she now , with a last struggling ray of hope in they , and meet they with she large sincere gaze . " that book never will be close , , " she say , with grave sadness ; " I desire no future that will break the tie of the past . but the tie to my brother be one of the strongest . I can do nothing willingly that will divide I always from he . " " be that the only reason that would keep we apart forever , ? " say , with a desperate determination to have a definite answer . " the only reason , " say , with calm decision . and she believe it . at that moment she feel as if the enchanted cup have be dash to the ground . the reactionary excitement that give she a proud self - mastery have not subsid , and she look at the future with a sense of calm choice . they sit hand in hand without look at each other or speak for a few minute ; in 's mind the first scene of love and parting be more present than the actual moment , and she be look at in the . feel that he ought to have be thoroughly happy in that answer of hers ; she be as open and transparent as a rock - pool . why be he not thoroughly happy ? be never satisfied with anything short of a omniscience that would detect the subtlest fold of the heart . in the have be four day at she aunt 's give the early sunshine quite a new brightness in the care - dim eye of that affectionate woman , and make a epoch for she cousin great and small , who be learn she word and action by heart , as if she have be a transient avatar of perfect wisdom and beauty . she be stand on the causeway with she aunt and a group of cousins feed the chicken , at that quiet moment in the life of the farmyard before the afternoon milking - time . the great building round the hollow yard be as dreary and tumbledown as ever , but over the old garden - wall the straggling rose - bushes be begin to toss they summer weight , and the gray wood and old brick of the house , on its higher level , have a look of sleepy age in the broad afternoon sunlight , that suit the quiescent time . , with she bonnet over she arm , be smile down at the hatch of small fluffy chicken , when she aunt exclaim ,-- " goodness I ! who be that gentleman come in at the gate ? " it be a gentleman on a tall bay horse ; and the flanks and neck of the horse be streak black with fast riding . feel a beating at head and heart , horrible as the sudden leaping to life of a savage enemy who have feign death . " who be it , my dear ? " say , see in 's face the evidence that she know . " it be , " say , rather faintly . " my cousin Lucy's - - a gentleman who be very intimate at my cousin 's . " be already close to they , have jump off he horse , and now raise he hat as he advance . " hold the horse , , " say . to the twelve
twelve - year - old boy . " no , thank you , " say Stephen , pull at the horse 's impatiently toss head . " I must be go again immediately . I have a message to deliver to you , , on private business . may I take the liberty of ask you to walk a few yard with I ? " he have a half - jade , half - irritated look , such as a man get when he have be dog by some care or annoyance that make he bed and he dinner of little use to he . he speak almost abruptly , as if he errand be too pressing for he to trouble himself about what would be think by Moss of he visit and request . , rather nervous in the presence of this apparently haughty gentleman , be inwardly wonder whether she would be do right or wrong to invite he again to leave he horse and walk in , when , feel all the embarrassment of the situation , and unable to say anything , put on she bonnet , and turn to walk toward the gate . turn too , and walk by she side , lead he horse . not a word be speak till they be out in the lane , and have walk four or five yard , when , who have be look straight before she all the while , turn again to walk back , say , with haughty resentment ,-- " there be no need for I to go any farther . I do not know whether you consider it gentlemanly and delicate conduct to place I in a position that force I to come out with you , or whether you wish to insult I still further by thrust a interview upon I in this way . " " of course you be angry with I for come , " say , bitterly . " of course it be of no consequence what a man have to suffer ; it be only you woman 's dignity that you care about . " give a slight start , such as might have come from the slightest possible electric shock . " as if it be not enough that I be entangle in this way ; that I be mad with love for you ; that I resist the strongest passion a man can feel , because I try to be true to other claim ; but you must treat I as if I be a coarse brute , who would willingly offend you . and when , if I have my own choice , I should ask you to take my hand and my fortune and my whole life , and do what you like with they ! I know I forgot myself . I take a unwarrantable liberty . I hate myself for have do it . but I repent immediately ; I have be repent ever since . you ought not to think it unpardonable ; a man who love with he whole soul , as I do you , be liable to be master by he feeling for a moment ; but you know -- you must believe -- that the worst pain I could have be to have pain you ; that I would give the world to recall the error . " da not speak , da not turn she head . the strength that have come from resentment be all gone , and she lip be quiver visibly . she could not trust herself to utter the full forgiveness that rise in answer to that confession . they be come nearly in front of the gate again , and she pause , trembl . " you must not say these thing ; I must not hear they , " she say , look down in misery , as come in front of she , to prevent she from go farther toward the gate . " I be very sorry for any pain you have to go through ; but it be of no use to speak . " " yes , it _i of use , " say , impetuously . " it would be of use if you would treat I with some sort of pity and consideration , instead of do I vile injustice in you mind . I could bear everything more quietly if I know you do not hate I for a insolent coxcomb . look at I ; see what a hunt devil I be ; I have be ride thirty mile every day to get away from the thought of you . " do not -- da not -- look . she have already see the harassed face . but she say gently ,-- " I do not think any evil of you . " " then , dearest , look at I , " say , in deepest , tenderest tone of entreaty . " do not go away from I yet . give I a moment 's happiness ; make I feel you have forgive I . " " yes , I do forgive you , " say , shake by those tone , and all the more frightened at herself . " but pray let I go in again . pray go away . " a great tear fall from under she lowered eyelid . " I can not go away from you ; I can not leave you , " say , with still more passionate pleading . " I shall come back again if you send I away with this coldness ; I can not answer for myself . but if you will go with I only a little way I can live on that . you see plainly enough that you anger have only make I ten time more unreasonable . " turn . but
but , the bay horse , begin to make such spirited remonstrance against this frequent change of direction , that , catch sight of pee through the gate , call out , " here ! just come and hold my horse for five minute . " " oh , no , " say , hurriedly , " my aunt will think it so strange . " " never mind , " answer impatiently ; " they do not know the people at 's . lead he up and down just here for five minute , " he add to , who be now close to they ; and then he turn to 's side , and they walk on . it be clear that she _must go on now . " take my arm , " say , entreatingly ; and she take it , feel all the while as if she be slide downward in a nightmare . " there be no end to this misery , " she begin , struggle to repel the influence by speech . " it be wicked -- base -- ever allow a word or look that Lucy -- that other might not have see . think of . " " I do think of she -- bless she . if I do not - - -- " have laid he hand on 's that rest on he arm , and they both feel it difficult to speak . " and I have other tie , " go on , at last , with a desperate effort , " even if do not exist . " " you be engage to ? " say Stephen , hastily . " be it so ? " " I consider myself engage to he ; I do not mean to marry any one else . " be silent again until they have turn out of the sun into a side lane , all grassy and shelter . then he burst out impetuously ,-- " it be unnatural , it be horrible . , if you love I as I love you , we should throw everything else to the wind for the sake of belonging to each other . we should break all these mistaken tie that be make in blindness , and determine to marry each other . " " I would rather die than fall into that temptation , " say , with deep , slow distinctness , all the gather spiritual force of painful year come to she aid in this extremity . she draw she arm from he as she speak . " tell I , then , that you do not care for I , " he say , almost violently . " tell I that you love some one else better . " it dart through 's mind that here be a mode of release herself from outward struggle , -- to tell Stephan that she whole heart be 's . but she lip would not utter that , and she be silent . " if you do love I , dearest , " say , gently , take she hand again and lay it within he arm , " it be better -- it be right that we should marry each other . we can not help the pain it will give . it be come upon we without we seek ; it be natural ; it have take hold of I in spite of every effort I have make to resist it . know , I have be try to be faithful to tacit engagement , and I have only make thing worse ; I would better have give way at first . " be silent . if it be _not wrong -- if she be once convinced of that , and need no longer beat and struggle against this current , soft and yet strong as the summer stream ! " 's ' dearest , " say Stephen , lean to look entreatingly in she face . " what could we care about in the whole world beside , if we belong to each other ? " she breath be on he face , he lip be very near hers , but there be a great dread dwell in he love for she . she lip and eyelid quiver ; she open she eye full on he for a instant , like a lovely wild animal timid and struggle under caress , and then turn sharp round toward home again . " and after all , " he go on , in a impatient tone , try to defeat he own scruple as well as hers , " I be break no positive engagement ; if 's affections have be withdraw from I and give to some one else , I should have feel no right to assert a claim on she . if you be not absolutely pledge to , we be neither of we bound . " " you do not believe that ; it be not you real feeling , " say , earnestly . " you feel , as I do , that the real tie lie in the feeling and expectation we have raise in other mind . else all pledge might be break , when there be no outward penalty . there would be no such thing as faithfulness . " be silent ; he could not pursue that argument ; the opposite conviction have wrotch in he too strongly through he previous time of struggle . but it soon present itself in a new form . " the not be fulfil , " he say , with impetuous insistence . " it be unnatural ; we can only pretend to give ourselves to any one else . there be wrong in that too ; there may be misery in it for _them_ as well as for we . , you must
must see that ; you do see that . " he be look eagerly at she face for the least sign of compliance ; he large , firm , gentle grasp be on she hand . she be silent for a few moment , with she eye fix on the ground ; then she draw a deep breath , and say , look up at he with solemn sadness ,-- " oh , it be difficult , -- life be very difficult ! it seem right to I sometimes that we should follow we strongest feeling ; but then , such feeling continually come across the tie that all we former life have make for we , -- the tie that have make other dependent on we , -- and would cut they in two . if life be quite easy and simple , as it might have be in paradise , and we could always see that one be first toward whom -- I mean , if life do not make duty for we before love come , love would be a sign that two people ought to belong to each other . but I see -- I feel it be not so now ; there be thing we must renounce in life ; some of we must resign love . many thing be difficult and dark to I ; but I see one thing quite clearly , -- that I must not , cannot , seek my own happiness by sacrificing other . love be natural ; but surely pity and faithfulness and memory be natural too . and they would live in I still , and punish I if I do not obey they . I should be haunt by the suffering I have cause . we love would be poisone . do not urge I ; help I , -- help I , _because_ I love you . " have become more and more earnest as she go on ; she face have become flushed , and she eye fuller and fuller of appeal love . have the fibre of nobleness in he that vibrate to she appeal ; but in the same moment -- how could it be otherwise ?-- that plead beauty gain new power over he . " , " he say , in scarcely more than a whisper , while he arm stole round she , " I will do , I will bear anything you wish . but --one kiss -- one -- the last -- before we part . " one kiss , and then a long look , until say tremulously , " let I go , -- let I make haste back . " she hurry along , and not another word be speak . stood still and beckon when they come within sight of and the horse , and go on through the gate . be stand alone at the door of the old porch ; she have send all the cousin in , with kind thoughtfulness . it might be a joyful thing that have a rich and handsome lover , but she would naturally feel embarrassed at come in again ; and it might not be joyful . in either case wait anxiously to receive by herself . the speak face tell plainly enough that , if there be joy , it be of a very agitating , dubious sort . " sit down here a bit , my dear . " she draw into the porch , and sit down on the bench by she ; there be no privacy in the house . " oh , aunt , I be very wretched ! I wish I could have die when I be fifteen . it seem so easy to give thing up then ; it be so hard now . " the poor child throw she arm round she aunt 's neck , and fall into long , deep sob . leave she good aunt Gritty at the end of the week , and go to to pay she visit to aunt accord to agreement . in the mean time very unexpected thing have happen , and there be to be a family party at to discuss and celebrate a change in the fortune of the Tulliver , which be likely finally to carry away the shadow of they demerit like the last limb of a eclipse , and cause they hitherto obscured virtue to shine forth in full - reound splendor . it be pleasant to know that a new ministry just come into office be not the only fellow - man who enjoy a period of high appreciation and full - blow eulogy ; in many respectable family throughout this realm , relative become creditable meet with a similar cordiality of recognition , which in its fine freedom from the coercion of any antecedent , suggest the hopeful possibility that we may some day without any notice find ourselves in full millennium , with cockatrice who have cease to bite , and wolf that no longer show they tooth with any but the blandest intention . come so early as to have the start even of aunt ; for she longe to have some undisturbed talk with about the wonderful news . it seem , do it not ? say , with she prettiest air of wisdom , as if everything , even other people 's misfortune ( poor creature ! ) be conspir now to make poor dear aunt , and cousin , and naughty too , if she be not obstinately bend on the contrary , as happy as they deserv to be after all they trouble . to think that the very day -- the _very day _-- after have come back from , that unfortunate young , whom have place at the , have be pitch off he horse in a drunken fit , and be lie at
at . 's in a dangerous state , so that thWakey have signify he wish that the new purchaser should enter on the premise at once ! it be very dreadful for that unhappy young man , but it do seem as if the misfortune have happen then , rather than at any other time , in order that cousin might all the sooner have the fit reward of he exemplary conduct , -- papa think so very highly of he . must certainly go to the now , and keep house for ; that be rather a loss to Lucy in the matter of household comfort ; but then , to think of poor aunty be in she old place again , and gradually get comfort about she there ! on this last point have she cunning project , and when she and have make they dangerous way down the bright stair into the handsome parlor , where the very sunbeam seem cleaner than elsewhere , she direct she manoeuvre , as any other great tactician would have do , against the weaker side of the enemy . " aunt Pullet , " she say , seat herself on the sofa , and caressingly adjust that lady be float cap - string , " I want you to make up you mind what linen and thing you will give toward housekeeping ; because you be always so generous , -- you give such nice thing , you know ; and if you set the example , aunt Glegg will follow . " " that she never can , my dear , " say , with unusual vigor , " for she have not get the linen to follow suit wi' mine , I can tell you . she would niver the taste , not if she would spend the money . big check and live thing , like stags and fox , all she table - linen be , -- not a spot nor a diamond among th'ey . but it be poor work divide one 's linen before one die ,-- I niver think to ha 's do that , , " continue , shak she head and look at she sister , " when you and I choose the double diamont , the first flax iver we would spun , and the know where yours be gone . " " I have no choice , I be sure , sister , " say poor , accustom to consider herself in the light of a accuse person . " I be sure it be no wish of ' mine , iver , as I should lie awake of ' night think of ' my best bleach linen all over the country . " " take a peppermint , , " say uncle Pullet , feel that he be offer a cheap and wholesome form of comfort , which he be recommend by example . " oh , but , aunt Pullet , " say , " you have so much beautiful linen . and suppose you have have daughter ! then you must have divide it when they be marry . " " well , I do not say as I will not do it , " say , " for now 's so lucky , it be nothing but right he friend should look on he and help he . there be the tablecloth I buy at you sale , Bessy ; it be nothing but good natur ' of ' I to buy th'ey , for they have be lie in the chest ever since . but I be not go to give any more of ' my Indy muslin and thing , if she be to go into service again , when she might stay and keep I company , and do my sew for I , if she be not want at she brother 's . " " go into service " be the expression by which the mind represent to itself the position of teacher or governess ; and 's return to that menial condition , now circumstance offer she more eligible prospect , be likely to be a sore point with all she relative , besides . in she crude form , with she hair down she back , and altogether in a state of dubious promise , be a most undesirable niece ; but now she be capable of be at once ornamental and useful . the subject be revive in aunt and uncle 's presence , over the tea and muffin . " Hegh , hegh ! " say , good - naturedly patt on the back , " nonsense , nonsense ! do not let we hear of you take a place again , . why , you must ha ' pick up half - a - dozen sweetheart at the bazaar ; be not there one of th'ey the right sort of article ? come , now ? " " , " say he wife , with that shade of increase politeness in she severity which she always put on with she crisper fronts , " you will excuse I , but you be far too light for a man of you year . it be respect and duty to she aunt , and the rest of she kin as be so good to she , should have keep my niece from fixing about go away again without consult we ; not sweetheart , if I be to use such a word , though it be never hear in _my family . " " why , what do they call we , when we go to see th'ey , then , eh , neighbor Pullet ? they think we sweet enough then , " say , wink pleasantly ; while , at the suggestion of sweetness , take a little more sugar . " , " say , "
" if you be go to be undelicate , let I know . " " , , you husband 's only joke , " say ; " let he joke while he be get health and strength . there be poor get he mouth draw all o' one side , and could not laugh if he be to try . " " I will trouble you for the muffineer , then , , " say , " if I may be so bold to interrupt you joking . though it be other people must see the joke in a niece 's put a slight on she mother 's eldest sister , as be the head of ' the family ; and only come in and out on short visit , all the time she be be in the town , and then settle to go away without my knowledge , -- as I would lay cap out on purpose for she to make them up for I , -- and I as have divide my money so equal ---- " " , " Tulliver break in anxiously , " I be sure never think of ' go away without stay at you house as well as the other . not as it be my wish she should go away at all , but quite contrairy . I be sure I be innocent . I have say over and over again , ' my dear , you 've no call to go away . ' but there be ten day or a fortnight Maggie will have before she be fix to go ; she can stay at you house just as well , and I will step in when I can , and so will Lucy . " " Bessy , " say , " if you would exercise a little more thought , you might know I should hardly think it be worth while to unpin a bed , and go to all that trouble now , just at the end of ' the time , when we house be not above a quarter of a hour 's walk from 's . she can come the first thing in the morning , and go back the last at night , and be thankful she be get a good aunt so close to she to come and sit with . I know _I_ should , when I be she age . " " , , " say , " it 'uld do you bed good to have somebody to sleep in 'em . there be that striped room smell dreadful mouldy , and the glass mildew like anything . I be sure I think I should be strike with death when you take I in . " " oh , there be ! " exclaim , clapp she hand . " he be come on , as I tell he . I be afraid he be not go to keep he promise . " jump up to kiss as he enter , with strong feeling , at this first meeting since the prospect of return to the have be open to he ; and she keep he hand , lead he to the chair by she side . to have no cloud between herself and be still a perpetual yearning in she , that have it be root deeper than all change . he smile at she very kindly this evening , and say , " well , , how 's aunt ? " " come , come , sir , " say put out he hand . " why , you be such a big man , you carry all before you , it , seem . you be come into you luck a good deal earlier than we old folk do ; but I wish you joy , I wish you joy . you will get the all for you own again some day , I will be bound . you will not stop half - way up the hill . " " but I hope he will bear in mind as it be he mother 's family as he owe it to , " say . " if he have not have they to take after , he would ha ' be poorly off . there be never any failure , nor law , nor wastefulness in we family , nor die without will -- -- " " no , nor sudden death , " say aunt Pullet ; " allay the doctor call in . but have the skin ; I say that from the first . and I do not know what _you_ mean to do , sister , but I mean to give he a tablecloth of all my three biggest size but one , besides sheet . I do not say what more I shall do ; but _that I shall do , and if I should die to - morrow , , you will bear it in mind ,-- though you will be blundere with the key , and never remember as that on the third shelf of ' the left - hand wardrobe , behind the night - cap with the broad tie , -- not the narrow - frilled un , -- be the key of the drawer in the , where the key of ' the be . you will make a mistake , and I shall niver be worthy to know it . you have a memory for my pill and draught , wonderful , -- I will allays say that of you , -- but you be lose among the key . " this gloomy prospect of the confusion that would ensue on she decease be very affecting to . " you carry it too far , , -- that lock in and out , " say , in a tone of some disgust at this folly . "
" you go beyond you own family . there be nobody can say I do not lock up ; but I do what be reasonable , and no more . and as for the linen , I shall look out what be serviceable , to make a present of to my nephey ; I have get cloth as have never be whitened , better worth have than other people 's fine holland ; and I hope he will lie down in it and think of he aunt . " thank , but evad any promise to meditate nightly on she virtue ; and effect a diversion for he by ask about 's intention concern steam . have have she far - sighted view in begging to come on . it appear , when it be time to go home , that the man - servant be to ride the horse , and cousin be to drive home he mother and Lucy . " you must sit by yourself , aunty , " say that contrive young lady , " because I must sit by ; I have a great deal to say to he . " in the eagerness of she affectionate anxiety for , could not persuade herself to defer a conversation about she with , who , she think , with such a cup of joy before he as this rapid fulfilment of he wish about the , must become pliant and flexible . she nature suppli she with no key to 's ; and she be puzzl as well as pain to notice the unpleasant change on he countenance when she give he the history of the way in which have use he influence with he father . she have count on this revelation as a great stroke of policy , which be to turn 's heart toward at once , and , besides that , prove that the elder thWakey be ready to receive with all the honor of a daughter - in - law . nothing be want , then , but for dear , who always have that pleasant smile when he look at cousin , to turn completely round , say the opposite of what he have always say before , and declare that he , for he part , be delighted that all the old grievance should be heale , and that should have with all suitable despatch ; in 's opinion nothing could be easier . but to mind strongly mark by the positive and negative quality that create severity , -- strength of will , conscious rectitude of purpose , narrowness of imagination and intellect , great power of self - control , and a disposition to exert control over other ,-- prejudice come as the natural food of tendency which can get no sustenance out of that complex , fragmentary , doubt -provoking knowledge which we call truth . let a prejudice be bequeath , carry in the air , adopt by hearsay , catch in through the eye ,-- however it may come , these mind will give it a habitation ; it be something to assert strongly and bravely , something to fill up the void of spontaneous idea , something to impose on other with the authority of conscious right ; it be at once a staff and a baton . every prejudice that will answer these purpose be self - evident . we good , upright 's mind be of this class ; he inward criticism of he father 's fault do not prevent he from adopt he father 's prejudice ; it be a prejudice against a man of lax principle and lax life , and it be a meeting - point for all the disappointed feeling of family and personal pride . other feeling add they force to produce 's bitter repugnance to , and to 's union with he ; and notwithstand 's power over she strong - willed cousin , she get nothing but a cold refusal ever to sanction such a marriage ; " but of course could do as she like , -- she have declare she determination to be independent . for 's part , he hold himself bound by he duty to he father 's memory , and by every manly feeling , never to consent to any relation with the Wakem . " thus , all that have effect by she zealous mediation be to fill 's mind with the expectation that 's perverse resolve to go into a situation again would presently metamorphose itself , as she resolve be apt to do , into something equally perverse , but entirely different , -- a marriage with . along by the tide in less than a week be at . 's again ,-- outwardly in much the same position as when she visit there have just begin . it be easy for she to fill she morning apart from without any obvious effort ; for she have she promise visit to pay to she aunt , and it be natural that she should give she mother more than usual of she companionship in these last week , especially as there be preparation to be think of for 's housekeeping . but would hear of no pretext for she remain away in the evening ; she must always come from aunt 's before dinner , --" else what shall I have of you ? " say , with a tearful pout that could not be resist . and have unaccountably take to dine at 's as often as possible , instead of avoid that , as he use to do . at first he begin he morning with a resolution that he would not dine there , not even go in the evening , till be away . he have even devise a plan of start off on a journey in this agreeable weather ; the headach which
which he have constantly be allege as a ground for stupidity and silence be a sufficient ostensible motive . but the journey be not take , and by the fourth morning no distinct resolution be form about the evening ; they be only foreseen as time when would still be present for a little while , -- when one more touch , one more glance , might be snatch . for why not ? there be nothing to conceal between they ; they know , they have confess they love , and they have renounce each other ; they be go to part . honor and conscience be go to divide they ; , with that appeal from she inmost soul , have decide it ; but surely they might cast a lingering look at each other across the gulf , before they turn away never to look again till that strange light have forever fad out of they eye . , all this time , move about with a quiescence and even torpor of manner , so contrast with she usual fitful brightness and ardor , that would have have to seek some other cause for such a change , if she have not be convince that the position in which stand between and she brother , and the prospect of she self - impos wearisome banishment , be quite enough to account for a large amount of depression . but under this torpor there be a fierce battle of emotion , such as in all she life of struggle have never know or forebod ; it seem to she as if all the worst evil in she have lain in ambush till now , and have suddenly start up full - armed , with hideous , overpower strength ! there be moment in which a cruel selfishness seem to be get possession of she ; why should not Lucy , why should not Philip , suffer ? She_ have have to suffer through many year of she life ; and who have renounce anything for she ? and when something like that fulness of existence -- love , wealth , ease , refinement , all that she nature crave -- be bring within she reach , why be she to forego it , that another might have it ,-- another , who perhaps need it less ? but amidst all this new passionate tumult there be the old voice make themselves hear with rise power , till , from time to time , the tumult seem quell . Was_ that existence which temp she the full existence she dream ? where , then , would be all the memory of early striving ; all the deep pity for another 's pain , which have be nurture in she through year of affection and hardship ; all the divine presentiment of something higher than mere personal enjoyment , which have make the sacredness of life ? she might as well hope to enjoy walk by maim she foot , as hope to enjoy a existence in which she set out by maim the faith and sympathy that be the best organ of she soul . and then , if pain be so hard to _her_ , what be it to other ? " ah , ! preserve I from inflicting -- give I strength to bear it . " how have she sunk into this struggle with a temptation that she would once have think herself as secure from as from deliberate crime ? when be that first hateful moment in which she have be conscious of a feeling that clashed with she truth , affection , and gratitude , and have not shake it from she with horror , as if it have be a loathsome thing ? and yet , since this strange , sweet , subdue influence do not , should not , conquer she , -- since it be to remain simply she own suffering , -- she mind be meet 's in that thought of he , that they might still snatch moment of mute confession before the parting come . for be not he suffer too ? she see it daily -- see it in the sickened look of fatigue with which , as soon as he be not compelle to exert himself , he relapse into indifference toward everything but the possibility of watch she . could she refuse sometimes to answer that beseech look which she feel to be follow she like a low murmur of love and pain ? she refuse it less and less , till at last the evening for they both be sometimes make of a moment 's mutual gaze ; they think of it till it come , and when it have come , they think of nothing else . one other thing see now and then to care for , and that be to s ; it be a way of speak to . perhaps he be not distinctly conscious that he be impell to it by a secret long -- run counter to all he self - confess resolve -- to deepen the hold he have on she . watch you own speech , and notice how it be guide by you less conscious purpose , and you will understand that contradiction in . be a less frequent visitor , but he come occasionally in the evening , and it happen that he be there when say , as they sit out on the lawn , near sunset ,-- " now 's tale of visit to aunt be complete , I mean that we shall go out boat every day until she go . she have not have half enough boating because of these tiresome visit , and she like it better than anything . do not you , ? " " better than any sort of locomotion , I hope you mean , "
" say , smile at , who be lol backward in a low garden - chair ; " else she will be sell she soul to that ghostly boatman who haunt the Floss , only for the sake of be drift in a boat forever . " " should you like to be she boatman ? " say . " because , if you would , you can come with we and take a oar . if the Floss be but a quiet lake instead of a river , we should be independent of any gentleman , for can row splendidly . as it be , we be reduce to ask service of knights and squire , who do not seem to offer they with great alacrity . " she look playful reproach at , who be saunter up and down , and be just singe in pianissimo falsetto ,-- " the thirst that from the soul doth rise Doth ask a drink divine . " he take no notice , but still keep aloon ; he have do so frequently during 's recent visit . " you do not seem inclin for boating , " say , when he come to sit down by she on the bench . " do not row suit you now ? " " oh , I hate a large party in a boat , " he say , almost irritably . " I will come when you have no one else . " Lucy colore , fear that would be hurt ; it be quite a new thing for to speak in that way ; but he have certainly not be well of late . colore too , but less from a feeling of personal offence than from a vague suspicion that 's moodiness have some relation to , who have start up from she chair as he speak , and have walk toward the hedge of laurel to look at the descende sunlight on the river . " as do not know she be exclude other by invite I , " say , " I be bound to resign . " " no , indeed , you shall not , " say , much vex . " I particularly wish for you company to - morrow . the tide will suit at half - past ten ; it will be a delicious time for a couple of hour to row to and walk back , before the sun get too hot . and how can you object to four people in a boat ? " she add , look at . " I do not object to the people , but the number , " say , who have recover himself , and be rather asham of he rudeness . " if I vote for a fourth at all , of course it would be you , . but we will not divide the pleasure of escort the lady ; we will take it alternately . I will go the next day . " this incident have the effect of draw 's attention with freshened solicitude toward and ; but when they re-enter the house , music be propose , and and be occupy with cribbage , sit apart near the table where the book and work be place , do nothing , however , but listen abstractedly to the music . presently turn to a duet which he insist that and should s ; he have often do the same thing before ; but this evening think he divine some double intention in every word and look of 's , and watch he keenly , angry with himself all the while for this clinging suspicion . for have not Maggie virtually deny any ground for he doubt on she side ? and she be truth itself ; it be impossible not to believe she word and glance when they have last spoken together in the garden . Stephen might be strongly fascinate by she ( what be more natural ? ) , but feel himself rather base for intruding on what must be he friend 's painful secret . still he watch . Stephen , move away from the piano , saunter slowly toward the table near which sit , and turn over the newspaper , apparently in mere idleness . then he seat himself with he back to the piano , drag a newspaper under he elbow , and thrust he hand through he hair , as if he have be attract by some bit of local news in the " . " he be in reality look at who have not take the slightest notice of he approach . she have always additional strength of resistance when be present , just as we can restrain we speech better in a spot that we feel to be hallow . but at last she hear the word " dearest " uttere in the softest tone of pain entreaty , like that of a patient who ask for something that ought to have be give without ask . she have never hear that word since the moment in the lane at , when it have come from again and again , almost as involuntarily as if it have be a inarticulate cry . could hear no word , but he have move to the opposite side of the piano , and could see start and blush , raise she eye a instant toward 's face , but immediately look apprehensively toward himself . it be not evident to she that have observ she ; but a pang of shame , under the sense of this concealment , make she move from she chair and walk to she mother 's side to watch the game at cribbage . go home soon after in a state of hideous doubt mingl with wretched certainty . it be impossible for he now to resist the conviction that
that there be some mutual consciousness between and ; and for half the night he irritable , susceptible nerve be press upon almost to frenzy by that one wretch fact ; he could attempt no explanation that would reconcile it with she word and action . when , at last , the need for belief in rise to its habitual predominance , he be not long in imagine the truth , -- she be struggle , she be banish herself ; this be the clue to all he have see since he return . but athwart that belief there come other possibility that would not be drive out of sight . he imagination wrotch out the whole story ; be madly in love with she ; he must have tell she so ; she have reject he , and be hurrie away . but would he give she up , know -- feel the fact with heart -crush despair -- that she be make half helpless by she feel toward he ? when the morning come , be too ill to think of keep he engagement to go in the boat . in he present agitation he could decide on nothing ; he could only alternate between contradictory intention . first , he think he must have a interview with , and entreat she to confide in he ; then , again , he distrust he own interference . have he not be thrust himself on all along ? she have utter word long ago in she young ignorance ; it be enough to make she hate he that these should be continually present with she as a bond . and have he any right to ask she for a revelation of feeling which she have evidently intend to withhold from he ? he would not trust himself to see she , till he have assure himself that he could act from pure anxiety for she , and not from egoistic irritation . he write a brief note to , and send it early by the servant , say that he be not well enough to fulfil he engagement to . would take he excuse , and fill he place ? have arrange a charming plan , which have make she quite content with 's refusal to go in the boat . she discover that she father be to drive to Lindum this morning at ten ; be the very place she want to go to , to make purchase ,-- important purchase , which must by no means be put off to another opportunity ; and aunt Tulliver must go too , because she be concerned in some of the purchase . " you will have you row in the boat just the same , you know , " she say to Maggie when they go out of the breakfast - room and upstairs together ; " will be here it half - past ten , and it be a delicious morning . now do not say a word against it , you dear dolorous thing . what be the use of my be a fairy godmother , if you set you face against all the wonder I work for you ? do not think of awful cousin ; you may disobey he a little . " do not persist in objecting . she be almost glad of the plan , for perhaps it would bring she some strength and calmness to be alone with again ; it be like revisit the scene of a quieter life , in which the very struggle be repose , compare with the daily tumult of the present . she prepare herself for the boat and at half - past ten sat wait in the drawing - room . the ring of the door - bell be punctual , and she be think with half - sad , affectionate pleasure of the surprise would have in find that he be to be with she alone , when she distinguished a firm , rapid step across the hall , that be certainly not 's ; the door open , and enter . in the first moment they be both too much agitate to speak ; for have learn from the servant that the other be go out . have start up and sit down again , with she heart beat violently ; and , throw down he cap and glove , come and sit by she in silence . she think would be come soon ; and with great effort -- for she tremble visibly -- she rise to go to a distant chair . " he be not come , " say , in a low tone . " I be go in the boat . " " oh , we can not go , " say , sinke into she chair again . " do not expect -- she would be hurt . why be not come ? " " he be not well ; he ask I to come instead . " " Lucy be go to , " say , take off she bonnet with hurried , trembling finger . " we must not go . " " very well , " say , dreamily , look at she , as he rest he arm on the back of he chair . " then we will stay here . " he be look into she deep , deep eye , far off and mysterious at the starlit blackness , and yet very near , and timidly love . sit perfectly still -- perhaps for moment , perhaps for minute -- until the helpless trembling have cease , and there be a warm glow on she check . " the man be wait ; he have take the cushion , " she say . " will you go and tell he ? " " what shall I tell he ? " say
say , almost in a whisper . he be look at the lip now . make no answer . " let we go , " Stephen murmure entreatingly , rise , and take she hand to raise she too . " we shall not be long together . " and they go . feel that she be be lead down the garden among the rose , be help with firm , tender care into the boat , have the cushion and cloak arrange for she foot , and she parasol open for she ( which she have forget ) , all by this stronger presence that seem to bear she along without any act of she own will , like the add self which come with the sudden exalting influence of a strong tonic , and she feel nothing else . be exclude . they glide rapidly along , Stephen row , help by the backward - flow tide , past the tree and house ; on between the silent sunny fields and pasture , which seem fill with a natural joy that have no reproach for theirs . the breath of the young , unwearied day , the delicious rhythmic dip of the oar , the fragmentary song of a pass bird hear now and then , as if it be only the overflowing of brimful gladness , the sweet solitude of a twofold consciousness that be mingl into one by that grave , untiring gaze which need not be avert , -- what else could there be in they minds for the first hour ? some low , subdue , languid exclamation of love come from from time to time , as he go on rowing idly , half automatically ; otherwise they speak no word ; for what could word have be but a inlet to think ? and thought do not belong to that enchant haze in which they be envelope , -- it belong to the past and the future that lay outside the haze . be only dimly conscious of the bank , as they pass they , and dwelt with no recognition on the villag ; she know there be several to be pass before they reach , where they always stop and leave the boat . at all time she be so liable to fit of absence , that she be likely enough to let she waymark pass unnoticed . but at last , who have be row more and more idly , cease to row , laid down the oar , fold he arm , and look down on the water as if watch the pace at which the boat glide without he help . this sudden change rouse . she look at the far - stretch field , at the bank close by , and feel that they be entirely strange to she . a terrible alarm take possession of she . " oh , have we pass , where we be to stop ? " she exclaim , look back to see if the place be out of sight . no village be to be see . she turn around again , with a look of distressed questioning at . he go on watch the water , and say , in a strange , dreamy , absent tone , " yes , a long way . " " oh , what shall I do ? " cry , in a agony . " we shall not get home for hour , and ? of , help I ! " she clasp she hand and break into a sob , like a frightene child ; she think of nothing but of meet , and see she look of pained surprise and doubt , perhaps of just upbraid . move and sit near she , and gently draw down the clasped hand . " , " he say , in a deep tone of slow decision , " let we never go home again , till no one can part we , -- till we be marry . " the unusual tone , the startling word , arrest 's sob , and she sit quite still , wonder ; as if Stephen might have see some possibility that would alter everything , and annul the wretched fact . " see , , how everything have come without we seek , -- in spite of all we effort . we never think of be alo together again ; it have all be do by other . see how the tide be carry we out , away from all those unnatural bond that we have be try to make faster round we , and try in vain . it will carry we on to , and we can land there , and get some carriage , and hurry on to and then to , -- and never pause a moment till we be bound to each other , so that only death can part we . it be the only right thing , dearest ; it be the only way of escape from this wretch entanglement . everything have concur to point it out to we . we have contrive nothing , we have think of nothing ourselves . " speak with deep , earnest pleading . listen , pass from she start wonderment to the yearning after that belief that the tide be do it all , that she might glide along with the swift , silent stream , and not struggle any more . but across that stealing influence come the terrible shadow of past thought ; and the sudden horror lest now , at last , the moment of fatal intoxication be close upon she , call up feeling of angry resistance toward . " let I go ! " she say , in a agitate tone , flash a indignant look at he , and try to get she hand
hand free . " you have want to deprive I of any choice . you know we be come too far ; you have da to take advantage of my thoughtlessness . it be unmanly to bring I into such a position . " Sting by this reproach , he release she hand , move back to he former place , and fold he arm , in a sort of desperation at the difficulty 's word have make present to he . if she would not consent to go on , he must curse himself for the embarrassment he have lead she into . but the reproach be the unendurable thing ; the one thing worse than part with she be , that she should feel he have act unworthily toward she . at last he say , in a tone of suppress rage ,-- " I do not notice that we have pass Luckreth till we have get to the next village ; and then it come into my mind that we would go on . I can not justify it ; I ought to have tell you . it be enough to make you hate I , since you do not love I well enough to make everything else indifferent to you , as I do you . shall I stop the boat and try to get you out here ? I will tell that I be mad , and that you hate I ; and you shall be clear of I forever . no one can blame you , because I have behave unpardonably to you . " be paralyze ; it be easier to resist 's pleading than this picture he have call up of himself suffer while she be vindicate ; easier even to turn away from he look of tenderness than from this look of angry misery , that seem to place she in selfish isolation from he . he have call up a state of feeling in which the reason which have act on she conscience seem to be transmit into mere self - regard . the indignant fire in she eyes be quench , and she begin to look at he with timid distress . she have reproach he for be hurrie into irrevocable trespass , -- she , who have be so weak herself . " as if I should not feel what happen to you -- just the same , " she say , with reproach of another kind , -- the reproach of love , ask for more trust . this yield to the idea of 's suffering be more fatal than the other yielding , because it be less distinguishable from that sense of other 's claim which be the moral basis of she resistance . he feel all the relenting in she look and tone ; it be heaven opening again . he move to she side , and take she hand , lean he elbow on the back of the boat , and say nothing . he dread to utter another word , he dread to make another movement , that might provoke another reproach or denial from she . hang on she consent ; everything else be hopeless , confuse , sicken misery . they glide along in this way , both rest in that silence as in a haven , both dread lest they feeling should be divide again , -- till they become aware that the cloud have gather , and that the slightest perceptible freshening of the breeze be grow and grow , so that the whole character of the day be alte . " you will be chill , , in this thin dress . let I raise the cloak over you shoulders . get up a instant , dearest . " obey ; there be a unspeakable charm in be tell what to do , and have everything decide for she . she sit down again cover with the cloak , and take to he oar again , make haste ; for they must try to get to as fast as they could . be hardly conscious of have say or do anything decisive . all yielding be attend with a less vivid consciousness than resistance ; it be the partial sleep of thought ; it be the submergence of we own personality by another . every influence tend to lull she into acquiescence . that dreamy glid in the boat which have last for four hour , and have bring some weariness and exhaustion ; the recoil of she fatigue sensation from the impracticable difficulty of get out of the boat at this unknown distance from home , and walk for long mile , -- all help to bring she into more complete subjection to that strong , mysterious charm which make a last parting from seem the death of all joy , and make the thought of wounde he like the first touch of the torture iron before which resolution shrank . and then there be the present happiness of be with he , which be enough to absorb all she languid energy . presently observ a vessel come after they . several vessel , among they the steamer to , have pass they with the early tide , but for the last hour they have see none . he look more and more eagerly at this vessel , as if a new thought have come into he mind along with it , and then he look at hesitatingly . " Maggie , dearest , " he say at last , " if this vessel should be go to , or to any convenient place on the coast northward , it would be we best plan to get they to take we on board . you be fatigue , and it may soon rain ; it may be a wretched business , get to in this boat . it
it be only a trading vessel , but I dare say you can be make tolerably comfortable . we will take the cushion out of the boat . it be really we best plan . they will be glad enough to take we . I have get plenty of money about I . I can pay they well . " 's heart begin to beat with reawaken alarm at this new proposition ; but she be silent , -- one course seem as difficult as another . hail the vessel . it be a Dutch vessel go to , the english mate inform he , and , if this wind hold , would be there in less than two day . " we have get out too far with we boat , " say Stephen . " I be try to make for . but I be afraid of the weather ; and this lady -- my wife -- will be exhaust with fatigue and hunger . take we on board -- will you ?-- and haul up the boat . I will pay you well . " , now really faint and trembl with fear , be t aken on board , make a interesting object of contemplation to admir . the mate fear the lady would have a poor time of it on board , for they have no accommodation for such entirely unlooked - for passenger , -- no private cabin larger than a old - fashioned church - pew . but at least they have cleanliness , which make all other inconvenience tolerable ; and the boat cushion be spread into a couch for on the poop with all alacrity . but to pace up and down the deck lean on -- be upheld by he strength -- be the first change that she need ; then come food , and then quiet recline on the cushion , with the sense that no new resolution _could be take that day . everything must wait till to - morrow . sit beside she with she hand in he ; they could only speak to each other in low tone ; only look at each other now and then , for it would take a long while to dull the curiosity of the five man on board , and reduce these handsome young stranger to that minor degree of interest which belong , in a sailor 's regard , to all object nearer than the horizon . but be triumphantly happy . every other thought or care be throw into unmarked perspective by the certainty that must be he . the leap have be take now ; he have be torture by scruple , he have fight fiercely with overmastering inclination , he have hesitate ; but repentance be impossible . he murmure forth in fragmentary sentence he happiness , he adoration , he tenderness , he belief that they life together must be heaven , that she presence with he would give rapture to every common day ; that to satisfy she lightest wish be dearer to he than all other bliss ; that everything be easy for she sake , except to part with she ; and now they never _would part ; he would belong to she forever , and all that be he be hers , -- have no value for he except as it be hers . such thing , uttere in low , break tone by the one voice that have first stir the fibre of young passion , have only a feeble effect -- on experienced minds at a distance from they . to poor they be very near ; they be like nectar hold close to thirsty lip ; there be , there _must be , then , a life for mortal here below which be not hard and chill , -- in which affection would no longer be self - sacrifice . 's passionate word make the vision of such a life more fully present to she than it have ever be before ; and the vision for the time exclude all reality , -- all except the return sun -gleam which break out on the water as the evening approach , and mingl with the visionary sunlight of promise happiness ; all except the hand that press hers , and the voice that speak to she , and the eye that look at she with grave , unspeakable love . there be to be no rain , after all ; the cloud roll off to the horizon again , make the great purple rampart and long purple isle of that wondrous land which reveal itself to we when the sun go down , -- the land that the evening star watch over . be to sleep all night on the poop ; it be better than go below ; and she be cover with the warmest wrapping the ship could furnish . it be still early , when the fatigue of the day bring on a drowsy longe for perfect rest , and she lay down she head , look at the faint , die flush in the west , where the one golden lamp be get brighter and brighter . then she look up at , who be still seate by she , hang over she as he lean he arm against the vessel 's side . behind all the delicious vision of these last hour , which have flow over she like a soft stream , and make she entirely passive , there be the dim consciousness that the condition be a transient one , and that the morrow must bring back the old life of struggle ; that there be thought which would presently avenge themselves for this oblivion . but now nothing be distinct to she ; she be be lull to sleep with that soft stream still flow over she , with those delicious
delicious vision melte and fad like the wondrous aerial land of the west . when be go to sleep , , weary too with he unaccustomed amount of rowing , and with the intense inward life of the last twelve hour , but too restless to sleep , walk and lounge about the deck with he cigar far on into midnight , not see the dark water , hardly conscious there be stars , live only in the near and distant future . at last fatigue conquer restlessness , and he roll himself up in a piece of tarpaulin on the deck near 's foot . she have fall asleep before nine , and have be sleep for six hour before the faintest hint of a midsummer daybreak be discernible . she awoke from that vivid dreaming which make the margin of we deeper rest . she be in a boat on the wide water with , and in the gather darkness something like a star appear , that grow and grow till they see it be the seat in 's , and it come nearer and nearer , till they see the be and the boatman be , -- no , not , but she brother , who row past without look at she ; and she rise to stretch out she arm and call to he , and they own boat turn over with the movement , and they begin to sink , till with one spasm of dread she seem to awake , and find she be a child again in the parlor at evening twilight , and be not really angry . from the soothed sense of that false waking she pass to the real waking , -- to the plash of water against the vessel , and the sound of a footstep on the deck , and the awful starlit sky . there be a moment of utter bewilderment before she mind could get disentangle from the confused web of dream ; but soon the whole terrible truth urge itself upon she . be not by she now ; she be alone with she own memory and she own dread . the irrevocable wrong that must blot she life have be commit ; she have bring sorrow into the life of other , -- into the life that be knit up with hers by trust and love . the feeling of a few short week have hurry she into the sins she nature have most recoile from , -- breach of faith and cruel selfishness ; she have rent the tie that have give meaning to duty , and have make herself a outlawed soul , with no guide but the wayward choice of she own passion . and where would that lead she ? where have it lead she now ? she have say she would rather die than fall into that temptation . she feel it now , -- now that the consequence of such a fall have come before the outward act be complete . there be at least this fruit from all she year of strive after the highest and best , -- that she soul though betrayed , beguil , ensnar , could never deliberately consent to a choice of the lower . and a choice of what ? of ! not a choice of joy , but of conscious cruelty and hardness ; for could she ever cease to see before she and , with they murder trust and hope ? she life with could have no sacredness ; she must forever sink and wander vaguly , drive by uncertain impulse ; for she have let go the clue of life , -- that clue which once in the far - off year she young need have clutch so strongly . she have renounce all delight then , before she know they , before they have come within she reach . have be right when he tell she that she know nothing of renunciation ; she have think it be quiet ecstasy ; she see it face to face now , -- that sad , patient , loving strength which hold the clue of life , -- and see that the thorn be forever press on its brow . the yesterday , which could never be revoke , -- if she could have change it now for any length of inward silent endurance , she would have bow beneath that cross with a sense of rest . day break come and the redden eastern light , while she past life be grasp she in this way , with that tighten clutch which come in the last moment of possible rescue . she could see now lie on the deck still fast asleep , and with the sight of he there come a wave of anguish that find its way in a long - suppress sob . the worst bitterness of parting -- the thought that urge the sharpest inward cry for help -- be the pain it must give to _he _. but surmount everything be the horror at she own possible failure , the dread lest she conscience should be benumb again , and not rise to energy till it be too late . too late ! it be too late already not to have cause misery ; too late for everything , perhaps , but to rush away from the last act of baseness , -- the tasting of joy that be wring from crush heart . the sun be rise now , and start up with the sense that a day of resistance be begin for she . she eyelash be still wet with tear , as , with she shawl over she head , she sit look at the slowly rounding sun . something rouse too , and get up from he hard bed , he come to sit beside she . the sharp instinct of
of anxious love see something to give he alarm in the very first glance . he have a hovering dread of some resistance in 's nature that he would be unable to overcome . he have the uneasy consciousness that he have rob she of perfect freedom yesterday ; there be too much native honor in he , for he not to feel that , if she will should recoil , he conduct would have be odious , and she would have a right to reproach he . but do not feel that right ; she be too conscious of fatal weakness in herself , too full of the tenderness that come with the foreseen need for inflict a wound . she let he take she hand when he come to sit down beside she , and smile at he , only with rather a sad glance ; she could say nothing to pain he till the moment of possible parting be nearer . and so they drank they cup of coffee together , and walk about the deck , and hear the captain 's assurance that they should be in at by five o'clock , each with a inward burthen ; but in he it be a undefined fear , which he trust to the come hour to dissipate ; in she it be a definite resolve on which she be try silently to tighten she hold . be continually , through the morning , express he anxiety at the fatigue and discomfort she be suffer , and allude to land and to the change of motion and repose she would have in a carriage , want to assure himself more completely by presuppose that everything would be as he have arrange it . for a long while contente herself with assure he that she have have a good night 's rest , and that she do not mind about be on the vessel , -- it be not like be on the open sea , it be only a little less pleasant than be in a boat on the Floss . but a suppressed resolve will betray itself in the eyes , and become more and more uneasy as the day advanced , under the sense that have entirely lose she passiveness . he longe , but do not dare , to speak of they marriage , of where they would go after it , and the step he would take to inform he father , and the rest , of what have happen . he longe to assure himself of a tacit assent from she . but each time he look at she , he gather a stronger dread of the new , quiet sadness with which she meet he eye . and they be more and more silent . " here we be in sight of , " he say at last . " now , dearest , " he add , turn toward she with a look that be half beseech , " the worst part of you fatigue be over . on the land we can command swiftness . in another hour and a half we shall be in a chaise together , and that will seem rest to you after this . " feel it be time to speak ; it would only be unkind now to assent by silence . she speak in the lowest tone , as he have do , but with distinct decision . " we shall not be together ; we shall have parte . " the blood rush to 's face . " we shall not , " he say . " I will die first . " it be as he have dread -- there be a struggle come . but neither of they dared to say another word till the boat be let down , and they be take to the landing - place . here there be a cluster of gazer and passengers await the departure of the steamboat to 's . have a dim sense , when she have land , and be hurrie she along on he arm , that some one have advanc toward she from that cluster as if he be come to speak to she . but she be hurry along , and be indifferent to everything but the come trial . a porter guide they to the nearest inn and posting - house , and give the order for the chaise as they pass through the yard . take no notice of this , and only say , " ask they to show we into a room where we can sit down . " when they enter , do not sit down , and , whose face have a desperate determination in it , be about to ring the bell , when she say , in a firm voice ,-- " I be not go ; we must part here . " " , " he say , turn round toward she , and speak in the tone of a man who feel a process of torture begin , " do you mean to kill I ? what be the use of it now ? the whole thing be done . " " no , it be not do , " say . " too much be do , -- more than we can ever remove the trace of . but I will go no farther . do not try to prevail with I again . I could not choose yesterday . " what be he to do ? he da not go near she ; she anger might leap out , and make a new barrier . he walk backward and forward in maddening perplexity . " , " he say at last , pause before she , and speak in a tone of imploring wretchedness , " have some pity -- hear I -- forgive I for
for what I do yesterday . I will obey you now ; I will do nothing without you full consent . but do not blight we life forever by a rash perversity that can answer no good purpose to any one , that can only create new evils . sit down , dearest ; wait -- think what you be go to do . do not treat I as if you could not trust I . " he have choose the most effective appeal ; but 's will be fix unswervingly on the come wrench . she have make up she mind to suffer . " we must not wait , " she say , in a low but distinct voice ; " we must part at once . " " we _can not part , , " say , more impetuously . " I can not bear it . what be the use of inflict that misery on I ? the blow -- whatever it may have be -- have be struck now . will it help any one else that you should drive I mad ? " " I will not begin any future , even for you , " say , tremulously , " with a deliberate consent to what ought not to have be . what I tell you at I feel now ; I would rather have die than fall into this temptation . it would have be better if we have part forever then . but we must part now . " " we will _not part , " burst out , instinctively place he back against the door , forget everything he have say a few moment before ; " I will not endure it . you will make I desperate ; I sha ' not know what i do . " tremble . she feel that the parting could not be effect suddenly . she must rely on a slower appeal to 's better self ; she must be prepare for a harder task than that of rushing away while resolution be fresh . she sit down . Stephen , watch she with that look of desperation which have come over he like a lurid light , approach slowly from the door , seat himself close beside she , and grasp she hand . she heart beat like the heart of a frightened bird ; but this direct opposition help she . she feel she determination grow stronger . " remember what you feel week ago , " she begin , with beseech earnestness ; " remember what we both felt , -- that we owe ourselves to other , and must conquer every inclination which could make we false to that debt . we have fail to keep we resolution ; but the wrong remain the same . " " no , it do _not remain the same , " say Stephen . " we have prove that it be impossible to keep we resolution . we have prove that the feeling which draw we toward each other be too strong to be overcome . that natural law surmount every other ; we can not help what it clash with . " " it be not so , ; I be quite sure that be wrong . I have try to think it again and again ; but I see , if we judge in that way , there would be a warrant for all treachery and cruelty ; we should justify break the most sacred tie that can ever be form on earth . if the past be not to bind we , where can duty lie ? we should have no law but the inclination of the moment . " " but there be tie that can not be keep by mere resolution , " say Stephen , start up and walk about again . " what be outward faithfulness ? would they have thank we for anything so hollow as constancy without love ? " do not answer immediately . she be undergo a inward as well as a outward contest . at last she say , with a passionate assertion of she conviction , as much against herself as against he ,-- " that seem right -- at first ; but when I look further , I be sure it be _not right . Faithfulness and constancy mean something else besides do what be easiest and pleasantest to ourselves . they mean renouncing whatever be oppose to the reliance other have in we ,-- whatever would cause misery to those whom the course of we life have make dependent on we . if we -- if I have be better , nobler , those claim would have be so strongly present with I ,-- I should have feel they press on my heart so continually , just as they do now in the moment when my conscience be awake , -- that the opposite feeling would never have grow in I , as it have do ; it would have be quench at once , I should have pray for help so earnestly , I should have rush away as we rush from hideous danger . I feel no excuse for myself , none . I should never have fail toward and as I have do , if I have not be weak , selfish , and hard , -- able to think of they pain without a pain to myself that would have destroy all temptation . oh , what be feel now ? she believe in I -- she love I -- she be so good to I . think of she ---- " 's voice be get choked as she utter these last word . " I _can not think of she , " say Stephen , stampe as if with pain . " I can think of nothing but you , . you demand
demand of a man what be impossible . I feel that once ; but I can not go back to it now . and where be the use of _your_ think of it , except to torture I ? you can not save they from pain now ; you can only tear yourself from I , and make my life worthless to I . and even if we could go back , and both fulfil we engagement , -- if that be possible now , -- it would be hateful , horrible , to think of you ever be 's wife , -- of you ever be the wife of a man you do not love . we have both be rescue from a mistake . " a deep flush come over 's face , and she could not speak . see this . he sit down again , take she hand in he , and look at she with passionate entreaty . " ! Dearest ! if you love I , you be mine . who can have so great a claim on you as I have ? my life be bound up in you love . there be nothing in the past that can annul we right to each other ; it be the first time we have either of we love with we whole heart and soul . " be still silent for a little while , look down . be in a flutter of new hope ; he be go to triumph . but she raise she eye and meet he with a glance that be fill with the anguish of regret , not with yielding . " no , not with my whole heart and soul , , " she say with timid resolution . " I have never consent to it with my whole mind . there be memory , and affections , and longing after perfect goodness , that have such a strong hold on I ; they would never quit I for long ; they would come back and be pain to I -- repentance . I could not live in peace if I put the shadow of a wilful sin between myself and . I have cause sorrow already -- I know -- I feel it ; but I have never deliberately consent to it ; I have never say , ' they shall suffer , that I may have joy . ' it have never be my will to marry you ; if you be to win consent from the momentary triumph of my feeling for you , you would not have my whole soul . if I could wake back again into the time before yesterday , I would choose to be true to my calmer affections , and live without the joy of love . " loose she hand , and rise impatiently , walk up and down the room in suppressed rage . " ! " he burst out at last , " what a miserable thing a woman 's love be to a man 's ! I could commit crime for you , -- and you can balance and choose in that way . but you _do not love I ; if you have a tithe of the feeling for I that I have for you , it would be impossible to you to think for a moment of sacrifice I . but it weigh nothing with you that you be rob I of _my_ life 's happiness . " press she finger together almost convulsively as she hold they clasp on she lap . a great terror be upon she , as if she be ever and anon see where she stand by great flash of lightning , and then again stretch forth she hand in the darkness . " no , I do not sacrifice you -- I could not sacrifice you , " she say , as soon as she could speak again ; " but I can not believe in a good for you , that I feel , that we both feel , be a wrong toward other . we can not choose happiness either for ourselves or for another ; we can not tell where that will lie . we can only choose whether we will indulge ourselves in the present moment , or whether we will renounce that , for the sake of obey the divine voice within we , -- for the sake of be true to all the motives that sanctify we life . I know this belief be hard ; it have slipp away from I again and again ; but I have feel that if I let it go forever , I should have no light through the darkness of this life . " " but , , " say Stephen , seat himself by she again , " be it possible you do not see that what happen yesterday have alte the whole position of thing ? what infatuation be it , what obstinate prepossession , that blind you to that ? it be too late to say what we might have do or what we ought to have do . admit the very worst view of what have be do , it be a fact we must act on now ; we position be alte ; the right course be no longer what it be before . we must accept we own action and start afresh from they . suppose we have be marry yesterday ? it be nearly the same thing . the effect on other would not have be different . it would only have make this difference to ourselves , " add bitterly , " that you might have acknowledge then that you tie to I be stronger than to other . " again a deep flush come over 's face , and she be silent . think again that he
he be begin to prevail , -- he have never yet believe that he should _not prevail ; there be possibility which we mind shrink from too completely for we to fear they . " , " he say , in he deepest , tenderest tone , lean toward she , and put he arm round she , " you _are_ mine now , -- the world believe it ; duty must spre out of that now . " in a few hour you will be legally mine , and those who have claim on we will submit , -- they will see that there be a force which declare against they claim . " 's eye open wide in one terrified look at the face that be close to hers , and she start up , pale again . " oh , I can not do it , " she say , in a voice almost of agony ; " , do not ask I -- do not urge I . I can not argue any longer ,-- I do not know what be wise ; but my heart will not let I do it . I see , -- I feel they trouble now ; it be as if it be brand on my mind . _I_ have suffer , and have no one to pity I ; and now I have make other suffer . it would never leave I ; it would embitter you love to I . I _do_ care for -- in a different way ; I remember all we say to each other ; I know how he think of I as the one promise of he life . he be give to I that I might make he lot less hard ; and I have forsake he . and -- she have be deceive ; she who trust I more than any one . I can not marry you ; I can not take a good for myself that have be wring out of they misery . it be not the force that ought to rule we , -- this that we feel for each other ; it would rmend I away from all that my past life have make dear and holy to I . I can not set out on a fresh life , and forget that ; I must go back to it , and cling to it , else I shall feel as if there be nothing firm beneath my foot . " " , ! " say Stephen , rise too and grasp she arm , " you rave . how can you go back without marry I ? you do not know what will be say , dearest . you see nothing as it really be . " " yes , I do . but they will believe I . I will confess everything . Lucy will believe I -- she will forgive you , and -- and -- oh , _some_ good will come by clinging to the right . dear , dear , let I go !-- do not drag I into deeper remorse . my whole soul have never consent ; it do not consent now . " Stephen let go she arm , and sank back on he chair , half - stun by despairing rage . he be silent a few moment , not look at she ; while she eye be turn toward he yearningly , in alarm at this sudden change . at last he say , still without look at she ,-- " , then , -- leave I ; do not torture I any longer , -- I can not bear it . " Involuntarily she lean toward he and put out she hand to touch he . but he shrank from it as if it have be burn iron , and say again ,-- " leave I . " be not conscious of a decision as she turn away from that gloomy avert face , and walk out of the room ; it be like a automatic action that fulfil a forgotten intention . what come after ? a sense of stair descend as if in a dream , of flagstone , of a chaise and horse stand , then a street , and a turn into another street where a stage - coach be stand , take in passenger , and the darting think that that coach would take she away , perhaps toward home . but she could ask nothing yet ; she only get into the coach . -- where she mother and brother be , , , the scene of she very care and trials -- be the have toward which she mind ten ; the sanctuary where sacr relic lay , where she would be rescue from more falling . the thought of be like a horrible throbbing pain , which yet , as such pain do , seem to urge all other thought into activity . but among she thought , what other would say and think of she conduct be hardly present . love and deep pity and remorseful anguish leave no room for that . the coach be take she to , farther away from home ; but she do not learn that until she be set down in the old city at midnight . it be no matter ; she could sleep there , and start home the next day . she have she purse in she pocket , with all she money in it , -- a bank - note and a sovereign ; she have keep it in she pocket from forgetfulness , after go out to make purchase the day before yesterday . do she lie down in the gloomy bedroom of the old inn that night with she will bend unwaveringly on the path of penitent sacrifice ? the great struggles of life be
be not so easy as that ; the great problem of life be not so clear . in the darkness of that night she see 's face turn toward she in passionate , reproachful misery ; she live through again all the tremulous delights of he presence with she that make existence a easy floating in a stream of joy , instead of a quiet resolved endurance and effort . the love she have renounce come back upon she with a cruel charm ; she feel herself open she arm to receive it once more ; and then it seem to slip away and fade and vanish , leave only the die sound of a deep , thrill voice that say , " go , forever go . " the final rescue_ chapter I the return to the four and five o'clock on the afternoon of the fifth day from that on which and have leave . 's , be stand on the gravel walk outside the old house at . he be master there now ; he have half fulfil he father 's die wish , and by year of steady self - government and energetic work he have bring himself near to the attainment of more than the old respectability which have be the proud inheritance of the Dodsons and Tullivers . but 's face , as he stand in the hot , still sunshine of that summer afternoon , have no gladness , no triumph in it . he mouth wear its bitterest expression , he severe brow it be hardest and deepest fold , as he draw down he hat farther over he eye to shelter they from the sun , and thrust he hand deep into he pocket , begin to walk up and down the gravel . no news of he sister have be hear since have come back in the steamer from , and put a end to all improbable supposition of a accident on the water by stating that he have see she land from a vessel with . would the next news be that she be marry , -- or what ? probably that she be not marry ; 's mind be set to the expectation of the worst that could happen , -- not death , but disgrace . as he be walk with he back toward the entrance gate , and he face toward the rushing mill - stream , a tall , dark - eye figure , that we know well , approach the gate , and pause to look at he with a fast - beat heart . she brother be the human be of whom she have be most afraid from she childhood upward ; afraid with that fear which spring in we when we love one who be inexorable , unbending , unmodifiable , with a mind that we can never mould ourselves upon , and yet that we can not endure to alienate from we . that deep - rooted fear be shak now ; but she mind be unswervingly bent on return to she brother , as the natural refuge that have be give she . in she deep humiliation under the retrospect of she own weakness , -- in she anguish at the injury she have inflict , -- she almost desire to endure the severity of 's reproof , to submit in patient silence to that harsh , disapprove judgment against which she have so often rebel ; it see no more than just to she now , -- who be weaker than she be ? she crave that outward help to she better purpose which would come from complete , submissive confession ; from be in the presence of those whose look and word would be a reflection of she own conscience . have be keep on she bed at for a day with that prostrat headache which be likely to follow on the terrible strain of the previous day and night . there be a expression of physical pain still about she brow and eye , and she whole appearance , with she dress so long unchanged , be wear and distress . she lift the latch of the gate and walk in slowly . do not hear the gate ; he be just then close upon the roaring dam ; but he presently turn , and lift up he eye , see the figure whose worn look and loneliness seem to he a confirmation of he worst conjecture . he pause , trembl and white with disgust and indignation . pause too , three yard before he . she feel the hatred in he face , feel it rush through she fibre ; but she must speak . " , " she begin faintly , " I be come back to you ,-- I be come back home -- for refuge -- to tell you everything . " " you will find no home with I , " he answer , with tremulous rage . " you have disgrace we all . you have disgrace my father 's name . you have be a curse to you best friend . you have be base , deceitful ; no motive be strong enough to restrain you . I wash my hand of you forever . you do not belong to I . " they mother have come to the door now . she stand paralyze by the double shock of see and hear 's word . " , " say , with more courage , " I be perhaps not so guilty as you believe I to be . I never mean to give way to my feeling . I struggl against they . I be carry too far in the boat to come back on . I come back as soon as I could . " " I can not believe in you any more , " say ,
, gradually pass from the tremulous excitement of the first moment to cold inflexibility . " you have be carry on a clandestine relation with , -- as you do before with another . he go to see you at my aunt 's ; you walk alone with he in the lane ; you must have behave as no modest girl would have do to she cousin 's lover , else that could never have happen . the people at see you pass ; you pass all the other place ; you know what you be do . you have be use as a screen to deceive , -- the kindest friend you ever have . go and see the return you have make she . she be ill ; unable to speak . my mother can not go near she , lest she should remind she of you . " be half stunned , -- too heavily presse upon by she anguish even to discern any difference between she actual guilt and she brother 's accusation , still less to vindicate herself . " , " she say , crush she hand together under she cloak , in the effort to speak again , " whatever I have do , I repent it bitterly . I want to make amend . I will endure anything . I want to be keep from do wrong again . " " what _will_ keep you ? " say , with cruel bitterness . " not religion ; not you natural feeling of gratitude and honor . and he -- he would deserve to be shoot , if it be not ---- but you be ten time worse than he be . I loathe you character and you conduct . you struggl with you feeling , you say . yes ! _I_ have have feeling to struggle with ; but I conquer they . I have have a harder life than you have have ; but I have find _my comfort in do my duty . but I will sanction no such character as yours ; the world shall know that feel the difference between right and wrong . if you be in want , I will provide for you ; let my mother know . but you shall not come under my roof . it be enough that I have to bear the thought of you disgrace ; the sight of you be hateful to I . " be turn away with despair in she heart . but the poor frightened mother 's love leape out now , stronger than all dread . " my child ! I will go with you . you have get a mother . " oh , the sweet rest of that embrace to the heart - stricken Maggie ! more helpful than all wisdom be one dratch of simple human pity that will not forsake we . turn and walk into the house . " come in , my child , " whisper . " he will let you stay and sleep in my bed . he will not deny that if I ask he . " " no , mother , " say , in a low tone , like a moan . " I will never go in . " " then wait for I outside . I will get ready and come with you . " when he mother appear with she bonnet on , come out to she in the passage , and put money into she hand . " my house be yours , mother , always , " he say . " you will come and let I know everything you want ; you will come back to I . " poor Tulliver take the money , too frightened to say anything . the only thing clear to she be the mother 's instinct that she would go with she unhappy child . be wait outside the gate ; she take she mother 's hand and they walk a little way in silence . " mother , " say , at last , " we will go to 's cottage . Luke will take I in . he be very good to I when I be a little girl . " " he have get no room for we , my dear , now ; he wife 's get so many child . I do not know where to go , if it be not to one of ' you aunt ; and I hardly durst , " say poor , quite destitute of mental resource in this extremity . be silent a little while , and then say ,-- " let we go to 's , mother ; he wife will have room for we , if they have no other lodger . " so they go on they way to . , to the old house by the river - side . himself be at home , with a heaviness at heart which resist even the new joy and pride of possesse a two - month ' - old baby , quite the liveliest of its age that have ever be bear to prince or packman . he would perhaps not so thoroughly have understand all the dubiousness of 's appearance with on the quay at if he have not witness the effect it produce on when he go to report it ; and since then , the circumstance which in any case give a disastrous character to she elopement have pass beyond the more polite circle of 's , and have become matter of common talk , accessible to the grooms and errand - boy . so that when he open the door and see stand before he in she sorrow and weariness , he have no question to ask except one which he da only ask himself , -- where be ? , for he part ,
, hope he might be in the warmest department of a asylum understood to exist in the other world for gentleman who be likely to be in fallen circumstance there . the lodging be vacant , and both Jakin the larger and the less be commande to make all thing comfortable for " the old and the young " ; alas that she be still " ! " the ingenious be sorely perplex as to how this result could have come about ; how could have go away from she , or could have let she go away from he , when he have the chance of keep she with he . but he be silent , and would not allow he wife to ask he a question ; would not present himself in the room , lest it should appear like intrusion and a wish to pry ; have the same chivalry toward dark - ey as in the day when he have buy she the memorable present of book . but after a day or two be go to the again for a few hour to see to 's household matter . have wish this ; after the first violent outburst of feeling which come as soon as she have no longer any active purpose to fulfil , she be less in need of she mother 's presence ; she even desire to be alone with she grief . but she have be solitary only a little while in the old sit - room that look on the river , when there come a tap at the door , and turn round she sad face as she say " come in , " she see enter , with the baby in he arm and Mumps at he heel . " we will go back , if it disturb you , , " say . " no , " say , in a low voice , wish she could smile . , close the door behind he , come and stand before she . " you see , we have get a little un , , and I want would you to look at it , and take it in you arm , if you would be so good . for we make free to name it after you , and it 'uld be better for you takin ' a bit o' notice on it . " could not speak , but she put out she arm to receive the tiny baby , while snuff at it anxiously , to ascertain that this transference be all right . 's heart have swell at this action and speech of 's ; she know well enough that it be a way he have choose to show he sympathy and respect . " sit down , , " she say presently , and he sit down in silence , finde he tongue unmanageable in quite a new fashion , refuse to say what he want it to say . " , " she say , after a few moment , look down at the baby , and hold it anxiously , as if she fear it might slip from she mind and she finger , " I have a favor to ask off you . " " do not you speak so , , " say , grasp the skin of 's neck ; " if there be anything I can do for you , I should look upon it as a day 's earning . " " I want you to go to 's , and ask to speak to he , and tell he that I be here , and should be very grateful if he would come to I while my mother be away . she will not come back till evening . " " Eh , , I would do it in a minute , -- it be but a step , -- but 's wife lie dead ; she be to be bury to - morrow ; die the day I come from . it be all the more pity she should ha ' die just now , if you want he . I hardly like to go a - nigh he yet . " " oh no , , " say , " we must let it be , -- till after a few day , perhaps , when you hear that he be go about again . but perhaps he may be go out of town -- to a distance , " she add , with a new sense of despondency at this idea . " not he , , " say . " _he will none go away . he be not one of ' they gentlefolk as go to cry at waterin ' - place when they wife die ; he be get summat else to do . he look fine and sharp after the parish , he do . he christen the little un ; an' he be _at I to know what I do of a , as I do not come to church . but I tell he I be upo ' the travel three part of ' the , -- a ' then I be so used to bein ' on my leg , I can not sit so long on end ,-- 'an ' lor , sir , ' say I , 'a packman can do wi' a small ' lowance of ' church ; it taste strong , ' say I ; ' there be no call to lay it on thick . ' Eh , , how good the little un be wi ' you ! it be like as if it know you ; it partly do , I will be bound , -- like the bird know the mornin '. " 's tongue be now evidently loose from its unwonted bondage , and might even
even be in danger of do more work than be require of it . but the subject on which he longe to be inform be so steep and difficult of approach , that he tongue be likely to run on along the level rather than to carry he on that unbeaten road . he feel this , and be silent again for a little while , ruminat much on the possible form in which he might put a question . at last he say , in a more timid voice than usual ,-- " will you give I leave to ask you only one thing , ? " be rather start , but she answer , " yes , , if it be about myself -- not about any one else . " " well , , it be this . Do_ you owe anybody a grudge ? " " no , not any one , " say , look up at he inquiringly . " why ? " " oh , lor , , " say , pinch 's neck harder than ever . " I wish you do , an' tell I ; I would leather he till I could not see -- I would -- a ' the might do what he like to I arter . " " oh , , " say , smile faintly , " you be a very good friend to I . but I should not like to punish any one , even if they would do I wrong ; I have do wrong myself too often . " this view of thing be puzzl to , and throw more obscurity than ever over what could possibly have happene between and . but further question would have be too intrusive , even if he could have fram they suitably , and he be oblige to carry baby away again to a expectant mother . " you would like for company , , " he say when he have take the baby again . " he be rare company , be ; he know iverything , a ' make no bother about it . if I tell he , he will lie before you a ' watch you , as still , -- just as he watch my pack . you would better let I leave he a bit ; he will get fond on you . Lors , it be a fine thing to haheve a dumb brute fond on you ; it will stick to you , a ' make no jaw . " " yes , do leave he , please , " say . " I think I should like to have for a friend . " " Mumps , lie down there , " say , point to a place in front of , " and niver do you stir till you be speak to . " Mumps lay down at once , and make no sign of restlessness when he master leave the room . 's it be soon know throughout 's that be come back ; she have not , then , elop in order to be marry to , -- at all event , have not marry she ; which come to the same thing , so far as she culpability be concerned . we judge other accord to result ; how else ?-- not know the process by which result be arrive at . if , after a few month of well - chosen travel , have return as , with a post-marital _trousseau_ , and all the advantages possess even by the most unwelcome wife of a only son , public opinion , which at . 's , as else where , always know what to think , would have judge in strict consistency with those result . public opinion , in these case , be always of the feminine gender , -- not the world , but the world 's wife ; and she would have see that two handsome young people -- the gentleman of quite the first family in 's -- have find themselves in a false position , have be lead into a course which , to say the least of it , be highly injudicious , and productive of sad pain and disappointment , especially to that sweet young thing , . have certainly not behave well ; but then , young man be liable to those sudden infatuate attachment ; and bad as it might seem in to admit the faintest advance from she cousin 's lover ( indeed it _have be say that she be actually engage to young ,-- old Wakem himself have mention it ) , still , she be very young , -- " and a deform young man , you know !-- and young so very fascinating ; and , they say , he positively worship she ( to be sure , that can not last ! ) , and he run away with she in the boat quite against she will , and what could she do ? she could not come back then ; no one would have speak to she ; and how very well that maize - color satinette become she complexion ! it seem as if the fold in front be quite come in ; several of she dress be make so , -- they say he think nothing too handsome to buy for she . poor ! she be very pitiable ; but then there be no positive engagement ; and the air at the coast will do she good . after all , if young feel no more for she than that it be better for she not to marry he . what a wonderful marriage for a girl like , -- quite romantic ? why , young guest will put up for the borough at the next election . nothing like commerce nowadays !
! that young nearly go out of he mind ; he always _was_ rather queer ; but he be go abroad again to be out of the way , -- quite the best thing for a deformed young man . unit declare she will never visit and ,--such nonsense ! pretend to be better than other people . could not be carry on if we inquire into private conduct in that way , -- and tell we to think no evil , -- and my belief be , that have no card send she . " but the result , we know , be not of a kind to warrant this extenuation of the past . have return without a _trousseau , without a husband , -- in that degraded and outcast condition to which error be well known to lead ; and the world 's wife , with that fine instinct which be give she for the preservation of , see at once that 's conduct have be of the most aggravated kind . could anything be more detestable ? a girl so much indebt to she friend -- whose mother as well as herself have receive so much kindness from the -- to lay the design of win a young man 's affection away from she own cousin , who have behave like a sister to she ! win he affections ? that be not the phrase for such a girl as ; it would have be more correct to say that she have be actuate by mere unwomanly boldness and unbridled passion . there be always something questionable about she . that connection with young , which , they say , have be carry on for year , look very ill , -- disgust , in fact ! but with a girl of that disposition ! to the world 's wife there have always be something in 's very _physique_ that a refin instinct feel to be prophetic of harm . as for poor , he be rather pitiable than otherwise ; a young man of five - and - twenty be not to be too severely judge in these case , -- he be really very much at the mercy of a designing , bold girl . and it be clear that he have give way in spite of himself : he have shake she off as soon as he could ; indeed , they have part so soon look very black indeed -- _for she _. to be sure , he have write a letter , lay all the blame on himself , and tell the story in a romantic fashion so as to try and make she appear quite innocent ; of course he would do that ! but the refin instinct of the world 's wife be not to be deceive ; providentially !-- else what would become of ? why , she own brother have turn she from he door ; he have see enough , you might be sure , before he would do that . a truly respectable young man , ; quite likely to rise in the world ! he sister 's disgrace be naturally a heavy blow to he . it be to be hope that she would go out of the neighborhood , -- to , or anywhere , -- so as to purify the air of . 's from the stain of she presence , extremely dangerous to daughter there ! no good could happen to she ; it be only to be hope she would repent , and that would have mercy on she : he have not the care of society on he hand , as the world 's wife have . it require nearly a fortnight for fine instinct to assure itself of these inspiration ; indeed , it be a whole week before 's letter come , tell he father the fact , and add that he be go across to , -- have draw upon the agent at for money , -- be incapable of any resolution at present . , all this while , be too entirely fill with a more agonizing anxiety to spend any thought on the view that be be take of she conduct by the world of 's ; anxiety about , , , beat on she poor heart in a hard , drive , ceaseless storm of mingled love , remorse , and pity . if she have think of rejection and injustice at all , it would have see to she that they have do they worst ; that she could hardly feel any stroke from they intolerable since the word she have hear from she brother 's lip . across all she anxiety for the loved and the injured , those word shot again and again , like a horrible pang that would have bring misery and dread even into a heaven of delight . the idea of ever recovere happiness never glimmer in she mind for a moment ; it seem as if every sensitive fibre in she be too entirely preoccupy by pain ever to vibrate again to another influence . life stretch before she as one act of penitence ; and all she crave , as she dwelt on she future lot , be something to guarantee she from more falling ; she own weakness haunt she like a vision of hideous possibility , that make no peace conceivable except such as lay in the sense of a sure refuge . but she be not without practical intentions ; the love of independence be too strong a inheritance and a habit for she not to remember that she must get she bread ; and when other project look vague , she fall back on that of return to she plain sew , and so get enough to pay for she lod at 's . she mean to persuade she mother to
to return to the by and by , and live with again ; and somehow or other she would maintain herself at 's . would perhaps help she and advise she . she remembe he part word at the bazaar . she remember the momentary feeling of reliance that have spring in she when he be talk with she , and she wait with yearning expectation for the opportunity of confid everything to he . she mother call every day at 's to learn how Lucy be ; the report be always sad ,-- nothing have yet rouse she from the feeble passivity which have come on with the first shock . but of , have learn nothing ; naturally , no one whom she meet would speak to she about what related to she daughter . but at last she summon courage to go and see sister , who of course would know everything , and have be even to see at the in 's absence , though he have say nothing of what have pass on the occasion . as soon as she mother be gone , put on she bonnet . she have resolve on walking to the Rectory and ask to see ; he be in deep grief , but the grief of another do not jar upon we in such circumstance . it be the first time she have be beyond the door since she return ; nevertheless she mind be so bent on the purpose of she walk , that the unpleasantness of meet people on the way , and be star at , do not occur to she . but she have no sooner pass beyond the narrower street which she have to thread from 's dwelling , than she become aware of unusual glance cast at she ; and this consciousness make she hurry along nervously , afraid to look to right or left . presently , however , she come full on and , old acquaintance of she family ; they both look at she strangely , and turn a little aside without speak . all hard look be pain to , but she self - reproach be too strong for resentment . no wonder they will not speak to I , she think ; they be very fond of . but now she know that she be about to pass a group of gentleman , who be stand at the door of the billiard - room , and she could not help see young step out a little with he glass at he eye , and bow to she with that air of _nonchalance_ which he might have bestow on a friendly barmaid . 's pride be too intense for she not to feel that s , even in the midst of she sorrow ; and for the first time the thought take strong hold of she that she would have other obloquy cast on she besides that which be feel to be due to she breach of faith toward . but she be at the Rectory now ; there , perhaps , she would find something else than retribution . Retribution may come from any voice ; the hardest , cruelest , most imbrute urchin at the street - corner can inflict it ; surely help and pity be rarer thing , more needful for the righteous to bestow . she be show up at once , after be announce , into 's study , where he sit amongst pile - up book , for which he have little appetite , lean he cheek against the head of he youngest child , a girl of three . the child be send away with the servant , and when the door be close , say , place a chair for ,-- " I be come to see you , ; you have anticipate I ; I be glad you do . " look at he with she childlike directness as she have do at the bazaar , and say , " I want to tell you everything . " but she eye fill fast with tear as she say it , and all the pent - up excitement of she humiliate walk would have it 's vent before she could say more . " do tell I everything , " say , with quiet kindness in he grave , firm voice . " think of I as one to whom a long experience have be grant , which may enable he to help you . " in rather broken sentence , and with some effort at first , but soon with the greater ease that come from a sense of relief in the confidence , tell the brief story of a struggle that must be the beginning of a long sorrow . only the day before , have be make acquaint with the contents of 's letter , and he have believe they at once , without the confirmation of 's statement . that involuntary plaint of hers , " _Oh , I must go , " have remain with he as the sign that she be undergo some inward conflict . dwelt the longest on the feeling which have make she come back to she mother and brother , which make she cling to all the memory of the past . when she have end , be silent for some minute ; there be a difficulty on he mind . he rise , and walk up and down the hearth with he hand behind he . at last he seat himself again , and say , look at ,-- " you prompt to go to you nearest friend , -- to remain where all the tie of you life have be form , -- be a true prompting , to which the Church in its original constitution and discipline respond , open its arm to the penitent , watch over
over its child to the last ; never abandon they until they be hopelessly reprobate . and the ought to represent the feeling of the community , so that every parish should be a family knit together by brotherhood under a spiritual father . but the idea of discipline and Christian fraternity be entirely relaxed , -- they can hardly be say to exist in the public mind ; they hardly survive except in the partial , contradictory form they have take in the narrow community of schismatic ; and if I be not support by the firm faith that the Church must ultimately recover the full force of that constitution which be alone fitte to human need , I should often lose heart at observe the want of fellowship and sense of mutual responsibility among my own flock . at present everything seem ten toward the relaxation of tie , -- toward the substitution of wayward choice for the adherence to obligation , which have its root in the past . you conscience and you heart have give you true light on this point , ; and I have say all this that you may know what my wish about you -- what my advice to you -- would be , if they spring from my own feeling and opinion unmodify by counteracting circumstance . " pause a little while . there be a entire absence of effusive benevolence in he manner ; there be something almost cold in the gravity of he look and voice . if have not know that he benevolence be persever in proportion to its reserve , she might have be chill and frightene . as it be , she listen expectantly , quite sure that there would be some effective help in he word . he go on . " you inexperience of the world , , prevent you from anticipate fully the very unjust conception that will probably be form concern you conduct ,-- conception which will have a baneful effect , even in spite of known evidence to disprove they . " " oh , I do , -- I begin to see , " say , unable to repress this utterance of she recent pain . " I know I shall be insult . I shall be think worse than I be . " " you perhaps do not yet know , " say , with a touch of more personal pity , " that a letter be come which ought to satisfy every one who have know anything of you , that you choose the steep and difficult path of a return to the right , at the moment when that return be most of all difficult . " " oh , where be he ? " say poor , with a flush and tremor that no presence could have hinder . " he be go abroad ; he have write of all that pass to he father . he have vindicate you to the utmost ; and I hope the communication of that letter to you cousin will have a beneficial effect on she . " wait for she to get calm again before he go on . " that letter , as I say , ought to suffice to prevent false impression concern you . but I be bound to tell you , , that not only the experience of my whole life , but my observation within the last three day , make I fear that there be hardly any evidence which will save you from the painful effect of false imputation . the person who be the most incapable of a conscientious struggle such as yours be precisely those who will be likely to shrink from you , because they will not believe in you struggle . I fear you life here will be attend not only with much pain , but with many obstruction . for this reason -- and for this only -- I ask you to consider whether it will not perhaps be better for you to take a situation at a distance , accord to you former intention . I will exert myself at once to obtain one for you . " " oh , if I could but stop here ! " say . " I have no heart to begin a strange life again . I should have no stay . I should feel like a lonely wanderer , cut off from the past . I have write to the lady who offer I a situation to excuse myself . if I remain here , I could perhaps atone in some way to -- to other ; I could convince they that I be sorry . and , " she add , with some of the old proud fire flash out , " I will not go away because people say false thing of I . they shall learn to retract they . if I must go away at last , because -- because other wish it , I will not go now . " " well , " say , after some consideration , " if you determine on that , , you may rely on all the influence my position give I . I be bound to ay and countenance you by the very duty of my office as a parish priest . I will add , that personally I have a deep interest in you peace of mind and welfare . " " the only thing I want be some occupation that will enable I to get my bread and be independent , " say . " I shall not want much . I can go on lodging where I be . " " I must think over the subject maturely , " say , " and in a few day I shall be better able to ascertain the general feeling . I shall come to see
see you ; I shall bear you constantly in mind . " when have leave he , stood ruminat with he hand behind he , and he eye fix on the carpet , under a painful sense of doubt and difficulty . the tone of 's letter , which he have read , and the actual relation of all the person concerned , force upon he powerfully the idea of a ultimate marriage between and as the least evil ; and the impossibility of they proximity in Ogg's on any other supposition , until after year of separation , throw a insurmountable prospective difficulty over 's stay there . on the other hand , he enter with all the comprehension of a man who have know spiritual conflict , and live through year of devoted service to he fellow- men , into that state of 's heart and conscience which make the consent to the marriage a desecration to she ; she conscience must not be tamper with ; the principle on which she have act be a safer guide than any balancing of consequence . he experience tell he that intervention be too dubious a responsibility to be lightly incur ; the possible issue either of a endeavor to restore the former relation with and , or of counselling submission to this irruption of a new feeling , be hide in a darkness all the more impenetrable because each immediate step be clog with evil . the great problem of the shifting relation between passion and duty be clear to no man who be capable of apprehend it ; the question whether the moment have come in which a man have fall below the possibility of a renunciation that will carry any efficacy , and must accept the sway of a passion against which he have struggle as a trespass , be one for which we have no master - key that will fit all case . the casuist have become a byword of reproach ; but they pervert spirit of minute discrimination be the shadow of a truth to which eye and heart be too often fatally seal , -- the truth , that moral judgment must remain false and hollow , unless they be check and enlighten by a perpetual reference to the special circumstance that mark the individual lot . all people of broad , strong sense have a instinctive repugnance to the man of maxim ; because such people early discern that the mysterious complexity of we life be not to be embrace by maxim , and that to lace ourselves up in formula of that sort be to repress all the divine prompting and inspiration that spre from grow insight and sympathy . and the man of maxim be the popular representative of the minds that be guide in they moral judgment solely by general rule , think that these will lead they to justice by a ready - make patent method , without the trouble of exerting patience , discrimination , impartiality , -- without any care to assure themselves whether they have the insight that come from a hardly earned estimate of temptation , or from a life vivid and intense enough to have create a wide fellow - feel with all that be human . show that be capable of surprising Us when be at home again , she mother bring she news of a unexpected line of conduct in aunt . as long as have not be hear of , . have half close she shutter and draw down she blind . she feel assure that be drown ; that be far more probable than that she niece and legatee should have do anything to wound the family honor in the tenderest point . when at last she learn from that have come home , and gather from he what be she explanation of she absence , she burst forth in severe reproof of for admit the worst of he sister until he be compelle . if you be not to stand by you " kin " as long as there be a shred of honor attributable to they , pray what be you to stand by ? Lightly to admit conduct in one of you own family that would force you to alter you will , have never be the way of the Dodson ; and though have always augure ill of 's future at a time when other people be perhaps less clear-sighted , yet fair play be a jewel , and it be not for she own friend to help to rob the girl of she fair fame , and to cast she out from family shelter to the scorn of the outer world , until she have become unequivocally a family disgrace . the circumstance be unprecedented in 's experience ; nothing of that kind have happen among the Dodson before ; but it be a case in which she hereditary rectitude and personal strength of character find a common channel along with she fundamental idea of clanship , as they do in she lifelong regard to equity in money matter . she quarrell with , whose kindness , flow entirely into compassion for , make he as hard in he judgment of as himself be ; and fume against she sister Tulliver because she do not at once come to she for advice and help , shut herself up in she own room with 's " ' " from morning till night , deny herself to all visitor , till bring from the news of 's letter . then feel that she have adequate fighting - ground ; then she lay aside , and be ready to meet all comer . while could do nothing but shake she head and cry , and wish that cousin Abbot have die , or any number of funeral have happen rather than this , which have never happen before
before , so that there be no know how to act , and could never enter 's again , because " acquaintance " knew of it all , . only hope that Wooll , or any one else , would come to she with they false tale about she own niece , and she would know what to say to that ill - advise person ! again she have a scene of remonstrance with , all the more severe in proportion to the greater strength of she present position . but , like other immovable thing , seem only the more rigidly fix under that attempt to shake he . poor tom ! he judge by what he have be able to see ; and the judgment be painful enough to himself . he think he have the demonstration of fact observe through year by he own eye , which give no warning of they imperfection , that 's nature be utterly untrustworthy , and too strongly mark with evil tendency to be safely treat with leniency . he would act on that demonstration at any cost ; but the thought of it make he day bitter to he . , like every one of we , be imprison within the limit of he own nature , and he education have simply glide over he , leave a slight deposit of polish ; if you be inclin to be severe on he severity , remember that the responsibility of tolerance lie with those who have the wider vision . there have arisen in a repulsion toward that derive it be very intensity from they early childish love in the time when they have clasp tiny finger together , and they later sense of nearness in a common duty and a common sorrow ; the sight of she , as he have tell she , be hateful to he . in this branch of the family aunt find a stronger nature than she own ; a nature in which family feeling have lose the character of clanship by take on a doubly deep dye of personal pride . allow that ought to be punish , -- she be not a woman to deny that ; she know what conduct be , -- but punish in proportion to the misdeed prove against she , not to those which be cast upon she by people outside she own family who might wish to show that they own kin be better . " you aunt scolde I so as niver be , my dear , " say poor , when she come back to , " as I do not go to she before ; she say it be not for she to come to I first . but she speak like a sister , too ; _have she allay be , and hard to please , -- oh dear !-- but she be say the kindest word as have ever be speak by you yet , my child . for she say , for all she be be so set again ' have one extry in the house , and make extry spoon and thing , and put she about in she way , you shall have a shelter in she house , if you will go to she dutiful , and she will uphold you against folk as say harm of you when they 've no call . and I tell she I think you could not bear to see anybody but I , you be so beat down with trouble ; but she say , '_I_ will not throw ill word at she ; there be they out of ' th ' family ' ull be ready enough to do that . but I will give she good advice ; a ' she must be humble . ' it be wonderful ; for I be sure she use to throw everything I do wrong at I , -- if it be the raisin - wine as turn out bad , or the pie too hot , or whativer it be . " " oh , mother , " say poor Maggie , shrink from the thought of all the contact she bruise mind would have to bear , " tell she I be very grateful ; I will go to see she as soon as I can ; but I can not see any one just yet , except . I have be to he , -- he will advise I , and help I to get some occupation . I can not live with any one , or be dependent on they , tell aunt Glegg ; I must get my own bread . but do you hear nothing of -- ? have you never see any one that have mention he ? " " no , my dear ; but I have be to 's , and I see you uncle , and he say they get she to listen to the letter , and she take notice of ' , and ask question , and the doctor think she be on the turn to be better . what a world this be , -- what trouble , oh dear ! the law be the first begin , and it be go from bad to worse , all of a sudden , just when the luck seem on the turn ? " this be the first lamentation that Tulliver have let slip to , but old habit have be revive by the interview with sister Glegg . " my poor , poor mother ! " burst out , cut to the heart with pity and compunction , and throw she arm round she mother 's neck ; " I be always naughty and troublesome to you . and now you might have be happy if it have not be for I . " " Eh , my dear , "
" say , lean toward the warm young cheek ; " I must put up wi' my child ,-- I shall never have no more ; and if they bring I bad luck , I must be fond on it . there be nothing else much to be fond on , for my furnitur ' go long ago . and you would get to be very good once ; I can not think how it be turn out the wrong way so ! " two or three more day pass , and hear nothing of ; anxiety about he be become she predominant trouble , and she summon courage at last to inquire about he of , on he next visit to she . he do not even know if be at home . the elder thWakey be make moody by a accumulation of annoyance ; the disappointment in this young , to whom , apparently , he be a good deal attach , have be follow close by the catastrophe to he son 's hope after he have do violence to he own strong feeling by conceding to they , and have incautiously mention this concession in 's ; and he be almost fierce in he brusqueness when any one ask he a question about he son . but could hardly have be ill , or it would have be know through the call in of the medical man ; it be probable that he be go out of the town for a little while . sicken under this suspense , and she imagination begin to live more and more persistently in what be endure . what do he believe about she ? at last bring she a letter , without a postmark , direct in a hand which she know familiarly in the letter of she own name , -- a hand in which she name have be write long ago , in a pocket Shakespeare which she possess . she mother be in the room , and , in violent agitation , hurry upstairs that she might read the letter in solitude . she read it with a throbb brow . " , -- I believe in you ; I know you never mean to deceive I ; I know you try to keep faith to I and to all . I believe this before I have any other evidence of it than you own nature . the night after I last part from you I suffer torment . I have see what convince I that you be not free ; that there be another whose presence have a power over you which mine never possess ; but through all the suggestion -- almost murderous suggestion -- of rage and jealousy , my mind make its way to believe in you truthfulness . I be sure that you mean to cleave to I , as you have say ; that you have reject he ; that you struggle to renounce he , for 's sake and for mine . but I could see no issue that be not fatal for _you ;_ and that dread shut out the very thought of resignation . I foresee that he would not relinquish you , and I believe then , as I believe now , that the strong attraction which draw you together proceed only from one side of you character , and belong to that partial , divide action of we nature which make half the tragedy of the human lot . I have feel the vibration of chord in you nature that I have continually feel the want of in he . but perhaps I be wrong ; perhaps I feel about you as the artist do about the scene over which he soul have brood with love ; he would tremble to see it confide to other hand ; he would never believe that it could bear for another all the meaning and the beauty it bear for he . " I da not trust myself to see you that morning ; I be fill with selfish passion ; I be shatte by a night of conscious delirium . I tell you long ago that I have never be resign even to the mediocrity of my power ; how could I be resign to the loss of the one thing which have ever come to I on earth with the promise of such deep joy as would give a new and bless meane to the forego pain , -- the promise of another self that would lift my aching affection into the divine rapture of a ever - spring , ever - satisfied want ? " but the misery of that night have prepare I for what come before the next . it be no surprise to I . I be certain that he have prevail on you to sacrifice everything to he , and I wait with equal certainty to hear of you marriage . I measure you love and he by my own . but I be wrong , . there be something stronger in you than you love for he . " I will not tell you what I go through in that interval . but even in its utmost agony -- even in those terrible throe that love must suffer before it can be disembody of selfish desire -- my love for you suffice to withhold I from suicide , without the aid of any other motive . in the midst of my egoism , I yet could not bear to come like a death - shadow across the feast of you joy . I could not bear to forsake the world in which you still liv and might need I ; it be part of the faith I have vowe to you , -- to wait and endure . , that be a proof of what I write now to assure you of
of , -- that no anguish I have have to bear on you account have be too heavy a price to pay for the new life into which I have enter in love you . I want you to put aside all grief because of the grief you have cause I . I be nurture in the sense of privation ; I never expect happiness ; and in know you , in love you , I have have , and still have , what reconcile I to life . you have be to my affections what light , what color be to my eye , what music be to the inward ear , yoyou have raise a dim unrest into a vivid consciousness . the new life I have find in caring for you joy and sorrow more than for what be directly my own , have transform the spirit of rebellious murmuring into that willing endurance which be the birth of strong sympathy . I think nothing but such complete and intense love could have initiate I into that enlarge life which grow and grow by appropriate the life of other ; for before , I be always drag back from it by ever - present painful self - consciousness . I even think sometimes that this gift of transfer life which have come to I in love you , may be a new power to I . " then , dear one , in spite of all , you have be the blessing of my life . let no self - reproach weigh on you because of I . it be I who should rather reproach myself for have urge my feeling upon you , and hurrie you into word that you have feel as fetter . you mean to be true to those word ; you _have_ be true . I can measure you sacrifice by what I have know in only one half - hour of you presence with I , when I dream that you might love I best . but , , I have no just claim on you for more than affectionate remembrance . " for some time I have shrink from writing to you , because I have shrink even from the appearance of wishing to thrust myself before you , and so repeat my original error . but you will not misconstrue I . I know that we must keep apart for a long while ; cruel tongue would force we apart , if nothing else do . but I shall not go away . the place where you be be the one where my mind must live , wherever I might travel . and remember that I be unchangeably yours , -- yours not with selfish wish , but with a devotion that exclude such wish . " comfort you , my loving , large - soul . if every one else have misconceive you , remember that you have never be doubt by he whose heart recognize you ten year ago . " do not believe any one who say I be ill , because I be not see out of door . I have only have nervous headach , -- no worse than I have sometimes have they before . but the overpowering heat incline I to be perfectly quiescent in the daytime . I be strong enough to obey any word which shall tell I that I can serve you by word or deed . " yours to the last , " _. " as knelt by the bed sobb , with that letter presse under she , she feeling again and again gather themselves in a whispered cry , always in the same word ,-- " of , be there any happiness in love that could make I forget _their_ pain ? " and by the end of the week have make up he mind that there be only one way in which he could secure to Maggie a suitable living at 's . even with he twenty year 's experience as a parish priest , he be aghast at the obstinate continuance of imputation against she in the face of evidence . Hitherto he have be rather more adore and appeal to than be quite agreeable to he ; but now , in attempt to open the ear of woman to reason , and they conscience to justice , on behalf of , he suddenly find himself as powerless as he be aware he would have be if he have attempt to influence the shape of bonnet . could not be contradict ; he be listen to in silence ; but when he leave the room , a comparison of opinion among he hearer yield much the same result as before . have undeniably act in a blamable manner , even do not deny that ; how , then , could he think so lightly of she as to put that favorable interpretation on everything she have do ? even on the supposition that require the utmost stretch of belief , -- namely , that none of the thing say about be true , -- still , since they _had_ be say about she , they have cast a odor round she which must cause she to be shrink from by every woman who have to take care of she own reputation -- and of Society . to have take by the hand and say , " I will not believe unproved evil of you ; my lip shall not utter it ; my ear shall be close against it ; I , too , be a erring mortal , liable to stumble , apt to come short of my most earnest effort ; you lot have be harder than mine , you temptation greater ; let we help each other to stand and walk without more fall , " -- to have do this would
would have demand courage , deep pity , self - knowledge , generous trust ; would have demand a mind that taste no piquancy in evil - speak , that feel no self - exaltation in condemning , that cheat itself with no large word into the belief that life can have any moral end , any high religion , which exclude the striving after perfect truth , justice , and love toward the individual man and woman who come across we own path . the lady of . be not beguil by any wide speculative conception ; but they have they favorite abstraction , call , which serve to make they conscience perfectly easy in do what satisfy they own egoism ,-- think and speak the worst of , and turn they back upon she . it be naturally disappointe to , after two year of superfluous incense from he feminine parishioner , to find they suddenly maintain they view in opposition to he ; but then they maintain they in opposition to a higher authority , which they have venerate longer . that have furnish a very explicit answer to person who might inquire where they social duty begin , and might be inclined to take wide view as to the starting - point . the answer have not turn on the ultimate good of , but on " a certain man " who be find in trouble by the wayside . not that . 's be empty of woman with some tenderness of heart and conscience ; probably it have as fair a proportion of human goodness in it as any other small trading town of that day . but until every good man be brave , we must expect to find many good woman timid , -- too timid even to believe in the correctness of they own best prompting , when these would place they in a minority . and the man at . 's be not all brave , by any means ; some of they be even fond of scandal , and to a extent that might have give they conversation a effeminate character , if it have not be distinguished by masculine joke , and by a occasional shrug of the shoulders at the mutual hatred of woman . it be the general feeling of the masculine mind at . 's that woman be not to be interfere with in they treatment of each other . and thus every direction in which have turn , in the hope of procure some kind recognition and some employment for , prove a disappointment to he . could not think of take as a nursery governess , even temporarily , -- a young woman about whom " such thing have be say , " and about whom " gentleman joke " ; and , who have a spinal complaint , and want a reader and companion , feel quite sure that 's mind must be of a quality with which she , for she part , could not risk _any contact . why do not miss accept the shelter offer she by she aunt ? it do not become a girl like she to refuse it . or else , why do she not go out of the neighborhood , and get a situation where she be not know ? ( it be not , apparently , of so much importance that she should carry she dangerous tendency into strange family unknown at 's . ) she must be very bold and harden to wish to stay in a parish where she be so much sta at and whisper about . , have great natural firmness , begin , in the presence of this opposition , as every firm man would have do , to contract a certain strength of determination over and above what would have be call forth by the end in view . he himself want a daily governess for he younger child ; and though he have hesitat in the first instance to offer this position to , the resolution to protest with the utmost force of he personal and priestly character against she be crush and drive away by slander , be now decisive . gratefully accept a employment that give she duty as well as a support ; she day would be fill now , and solitary evening would be a welcome rest . she no longer need the sacrifice she mother make in stay with she , and be persuade to go back to the . but now it begin to be discover that , exemplary as he have hitherto appear , have he crotchet , possibly he weakness . the masculine mind of 's smile pleasantly , and do not wonder that like to see a fine pair of eye dailly , or that he be inclin to take so lenient a view of the past ; the feminine mind , regard at that period as less powerful , take a more melancholy view of the case . if should be beguil into marrying that ! it be not safe to be too confident , even about the best of man ; a apostle have fall , and weep bitterly afterwards ; and though 's denial be not a close precedent , he repentance be likely to be . have not take she daily walk to the Rectory for many week , before the dreadful possibility of she some time or other become the rector 's wife have be talk of so often in confidence , that lady be begin to discuss how they should behave to she in that position . for , it have be understood , have sit in the schoolroom half a hour one morning , when be give she lesson , -- nay , he have sit there every morning ; he have once walk home with she , -- he almost _always_
_always_ walk home with she , -- and if not , he go to see she in the evening . what a artful creature she be ! what a _mother for those child ! it be enough to make poor Mrs . turn in she grave , that they should be put under the care of this girl only a few week after she death . would he be so lost to propriety as to marry she before the year be out ? the masculine mind be sarcastic , and think _not . the see a alleviation to the sorrow of witnesse a folly in they rector ; at least they brother would be safe ; and they knowledge of 's tenacity be a constant ground of alarm to they , lest he should come back and marry . they be not among those who disbelieve they brother 's letter ; but they have no confidence in 's adherence to she renunciation of he ; they suspect that she have shrunk rather from the elopement than from the marriage , and that she linger in 's , rely on he return to she . they have always think she disagreeable ; they now think she artful and proud ; have quite as good grounds for that judgment as you and I probably have for many strong opinion of the same kind . Formerly they have not altogether delighte in the contemplate match with , but now they dread of a marriage between and add its momentum to they genuine pity and indignation on behalf of the gentle forsaken girl , in make they desire that he should return to she . as soon as be able to leave home , she be to seek relief from the oppressive heat of this by go to the coast with the ; and it be in they plan that should be induce to join they . on the very first hint of gossip concern and , the report be convey in 's letter to she brother . have frequent tiding through she mother , or aunt , or , of 's gradual progress toward recovery , and she thought ten continually toward she uncle 's house ; she hunger for a interview with , if it be only for five minute , to utter a word of penitence , to be assure by Lucy's own eye and lip that she do not believe in the willing treachery of those whom she have love and trust . but she know that even if she uncle 's indignation have not close he house against she , the agitation of such a interview would have be forbidden to . only to have see she without speak would have be some relief ; for be haunt by a face cruel in it be very gentleness ; a face that have be turn on hers with glad , sweet look of trust and love from the twilight time of memory ; change now to a sad and weary face by a first heart - stroke . and as the day pass on , that pale image become more and more distinct ; the picture grow and grow into more speaking definiteness under the avenging hand of remorse ; the soft hazel eye , in they look of pain , be bend forever on , and pierce she the more because she could see no anger in they . but be not yet able to go to church , or any place where could see she ; and even the hope of that depart , when the news be tell she by aunt , that be really go away in a few day to Scarborough with the , who have be hear to say that they expect they brother to meet they there . only those who have know what hardest inward conflict be , can know what feel as she sit in she loneliness the evening after hear that news from , -- only those who have know what it be to dread they own selfish desire as the watch mother would dread the sleeping - potion that be to still she own pain . she sit without candle in the twilight , with the window wide open toward the river ; the sense of oppressive heat add itself undistinguishably to the of she lot . seat on a chair against the window , with she arm on the windowsill she be look blankly at the flowing river , swift with the backward - rushing tide , struggle to see still the sweet face in its unreproaching sadness , that see now from moment to moment to sink away and be hide behind a form that thrust itself between , and make darkness . hear the door open , she think be come in with she supper , as usual ; and with that repugnance to trivial speech which come with languor and wretchedness , she shrank from turn round and say she want nothing ; good little would be sure to make some well - mean remark . but the next moment , without she have discern the sound of a footstep , she feel a light hand on she shoulder , and hear a voice close to she say , " ! " the face be there , -- change , but all the sweeter ; the hazel eye be there , with they heart - piercing tenderness . " ! " the soft voice say . " ! " answer a voice with a sharp ring of anguish in it ; and throw she arm round 's neck , and lean she pale cheek against the burn brow . " I steal out , " say , almost in a whisper , while she sit down close to and hold she hand , " when papa and the rest be away . be come with I
I . I ask she to help I . but I must only stay a little while , because it be so late . " it be easier to say that at first than to say anything else . they sit look at each other . it seem as if the interview must end without more speech , for speech be very difficult . feel that there would be something scorch in the word that would recall the irretrievable wrong . but soon , as look , every distinct thought begin to be overflow by a wave of loving penitence , and word burst forth with a sob . " bless you for come , . " the sob come thick on each other after that . " , dear , be comforte , " say now , put she cheek against 's again . " do not grieve . " and she sit still , hope to soothe with that gentle caress . " I do not mean to deceive you , , " say , as soon as she could speak . " it always make I wretch that I feel what I do not like you to know . it be because I think it would all be conquer , and you might never see anything to wound you . " " I know , dear , " say . " I know you never mean to make I unhappy . it be a trouble that have come on we all ; you have more to bear than I have -- and you give he up , when -- you do what it must have be very hard to do . " they be silent again a little while , sit with clasped hand , and cheek lean together . " Lucy , " begin again , " _he_ struggle too . he want to be true to you . he will come back to you . forgive he -- he will be happy then -- -- " these word be wring forth from 's deepest soul , with a effort like the convulse clutch of a drowning man . tremble and be silent . a gentle knock come at the door . it be , the maid , who enter and say ,-- " I dare not stay any longer , . they will find it out , and there will be such anger at you come out so late . " rise and say , " very well , , -- in a minute . " " I be to go away on , , " she add , when Alice have close the door again . " when I come back , and be strong , they will let I do as I like . I shall come to you when I please then . " " , " say , with another great effort , " I pray to continually that I may never be the cause of sorrow to you any more . " she press the little hand that she hold between hers , and look up into the face that be bend over hers . never forget that look . " , " she say , in a low voice , that have the solemnity of confession in it , " you be better than I be . I can not ---- " she break off there , and say no more . but they clasp each other again in a last embrace . the last conflict in the second week of , be again sit in she lonely room , battle with the old shadowy enemie that be forever slain and rise again . it be past midnight , and the rain be beate heavily against the window , drive with fitful force by the rushing , loud - moan wind . for the day after 's visit there have be a sudden change in the weather ; the heat and drink have give way to cold variable wind , and heavy falls of rain at interval ; and she have be forbidden to risk the contemplate journey until the weather should become more settled . in the county higher up the Floss the rains have be continuous , and the completion of the harvest have be arrest . and now , for the last two day , the rains on this lower course of the river have be incessant , so that the old man have shake they head and talk of sixty year ago , when the same sort of weather , happene about the equinox , bring on the great flood , which sweep the bridge away , and reduce the town to great misery . but the younger generation , who have see several small flood , think lightly of these sombre recollection and foreboding ; and , naturally prone to take a hopeful view of he own luck , laugh at he mother when she regret they have take a house by the riverside , observe that but for that they would have have no boat , which be the most lucky of possession in case of a flood that oblige they to go to a distance for food . but the careless and the fearful be alike sleep in they bed now . there be hope that the rain would abate by the morrow ; threatening of a worse kind , from sudden thaw after fall of snow , have often pass off , in the experience of the younger one ; and at the very worst , the bank would be sure to break lower down the river when the tide come in with violence , and so the water would be carry off , without cause more than temporary inconvenience , and loss that would be feel only by the poorer sort , whom charity would relieve . all be in they
they bed now , for it be past midnight ; all except some solitary watcher such as . she be seat in she little parlor toward the river , with one candle , that leave everything dim in the room except a letter which lay before she on the table . that letter , which have come to she to - day , be one of the cause that have keep she up far on into the night , unconscious how the hour be go , careless of seek rest , with no image of rest come across she mind , except of that far , far off rest from which there would be no more waking for she into this struggling earthly life . two day before receive that letter , she have be to the Rectory for the last time . the heavy rain would have prevent she from go since ; but there be another reason . , at first enlighten only by a few hint as to the new turn which gossip and slander have take in relation to , have recently be make more fully aware of it by a earnest remonstrance from one of he male parishioners against the indiscretion of persisting in the attempt to overcome the prevalent feeling in the parish by a course of resistance . , have a conscience void of offence in the matter , be still inclin to persevere , -- be still averse to give way before a public sentiment that be odious and contemptible ; but he be finally wrotch upon by the consideration of the peculiar responsibility attach to he office , of avoid the appearance of evil , -- a " appearance " that be always dependent on the average quality of surround mind . where these minds be low and gross , the area of that " appearance " be proportionately widened . perhaps he be in danger of acting from obstinacy ; perhaps it be he duty to succumb . conscientious people be apt to see they duty in that which be the most painful course ; and to recede be always painful to . he make up he mind that he must advise to go away from . 's for a time ; and he perform that difficult task with as much delicacy as he could , only state in vague term that he find he attempt to countenance she stay be a source of discord between himself and he parishioner , that be likely to obstruct he usefulness as a clergyman . he beg she to allow he to write to a clerical friend of he , who might possibly take she into he own family as governess ; and , if not , would probably know of some other available position for a young woman in whose welfare feel a strong interest . poor Maggie listen with a trembling lip ; she could say nothing but a faint " thank you , I shall be grateful " ; and she walk back to she lodging , through the driving rain , with a new sense of desolation . she must be a lonely wanderer ; she must go out among fresh face , that would look at she wonderingly , because the day do not seem joyful to she ; she must begin a new life , in which she would have to rouse herself to receive new impressions ; and she be so unspeakably , sickeningly weary ! there be no home , no help for the erring ; even those who pitie be constrain to hardness . but ought she to complain ? ink she to shrink in this way from the long penance of life , which be all the possibility she have of lighten the load to some other sufferer , and so change that passionate error into a new force of unselfish human love ? all the next day she sit in she lonely room , with a window darken by the cloud and the drive rain , think of that future , and wrestl for patience ; for what repose could poor Maggie ever win except by wrestling ? and on the third day -- this day of which she have just sit out the close -- the letter have come which be lie on the table before she . the letter be from . he be come back from ; he be at again , unknown to any of he friend , and have write to she from that place , enclose the letter to a person whom he trust in 's . from begin to end it be a passionate cry of reproach ; a appeal against she useless sacrifice of he , of herself , against that pervert notion of right which lead she to crush all he hope , for the sake of a mere idea , and not any substantial good ,--_his_ hope , whom she love , and who love she with that single overpowering passion , that worship , which a man never give to a woman more than once in he life . " they have write to I that you be to marry . as if I should believe that ! perhaps they have tell you some such fable about I . perhaps they tell you I have be 's travell . ' my body have be drag about somewhere ; but _i_ have never travel from the hideous place where you leave I ; where I start up from the stupor of helpless rage to find you go . " ! whose pain can have be like mine ? whose injury be like mine ? who besides I have meet that long look of love that have bur not itself into my soul , so that no other image can come there ? , call I back to you ! call I back to
to life and goodness ! I be banish from both now . I have no motive ; I be indifferent to everything . two month have only deepen the certainty that I can never care for life without you . write I one word ; say ' come ! ' in two day I should be with you . , have you forget what it be to be together , -- to be within reach of a look , to be within hearing of each other 's voice ? " when first read this letter she feel as if she real temptation have only just begin . at the entrance of the chill dark cavern , we turn with unworn courage from the warm light ; but how , when we have trodden far in the damp darkness , and have begin to be faint and weary ; how , if there be a sudden opening above we , and we be invite back again to the life - nourishing day ? the leap of natural longe from under the pressure of pain be so strong , that all less immediate motive be likely to be forget -- till the pain have be escape from . for hour feel as if she struggle have be in vain . for hour every other think that she strove to be thrust aside by the image of Stephen wait for the single word that would bring he to she . she do not _read the letter : she hear he utter it , and the voice shook she with its old strange power . all the day before she have be fill with the vision of a lonely future through which she must carry the burthan of regret , upheld only by clinging faith . and here , close within she reach , urge itself upon she even as a claim , be another future , in which hard endurance and effort be to be exchange for easy , delicious lean on another 's loving strength ! and yet that promise of joy in the place of sadness do not make the dire force of the temptation to . it be 's tone of misery , it be the doubt in the justice of she own resolve , that make the balance tremble , and make she once start from she seat to reach the pen and paper , and write " ! " but close upon that decisive act , she mind recoil ; and the sense of contradiction with she past self in she moment of strength and clearness come upon she like a pang of conscious degradation . no , she must wait ; she must pray ; the light that have forsake she would come again ; she should feel again what she have felt when she have fle away , under a inspiration strong enough to conquer agony , -- to conquer love ; she should feel again what she have felt when stand by she , when 's letter have stir all the fibre that bound she to the calmer past . she sit quite still , far on into the night , with no impulse to change she attitude , without active force enough even for the mental act of prayer ; only wait for the light that would surely come again . it come with the memory that no passion could long quench ; the long past come back to she , and with it the fountains of self - renounce pity and affection , of faithfulness and resolve . the word that be mark by the quiet hand in the little old book that she have long ago learn by heart , rush even to she lip , and find a vent for themselves in a low murmur that be quite lost in the loud driving of the rain against the window and the loud moan and roar of the wind . " I have receive the , I have receive it from hand ; I will bear it , and bear it till death , as thou hast lay it upon I . " but soon other word rise that could find no utterance but in a sob ,-- " forgive I , Stephen ! it will pass away . you will come back to she . " she take up the letter , hold it to the candle , and let it burn slowly on the hearth . to -morrow she would write to he the last word of parting . " I will bear it , and bear it till death . but how long it will be before death come ! I be so young , so healthy . how shall I have patience and strength ? be I to struggle and fall and repent again ? have life other trials as hard for I still ? " with that cry of self - despair , fall on she knee against the table , and bury she sorrow - stricken face . she soul go out to the Pity that would be with she to the end . surely there be something be teach she by this experience of great need ; and she must be learn a secret of human tenderness and long - suffering , that the less erring could hardly know ? " of , if my life be to be long , let I live to bless and comfort ---- " at that moment feel a start sensation of sudden cold about she knee and foot ; it be water flow under she . she start up ; the stream be flow under the door that lead into the passage . she be not bewilder for a instant ; she know it be the flood ! the tumult of emotion she have be endure for the last twelve hour seem to have leave a great calm in
in she ; without screaming , she hurrie with the candle upstairs to 's bedroom . the door be ajar ; she go in and shook he by the shoulder . " , the flood be come ! it be in the house ; let we see if we can make the boat safe . " she lighte he candle , while the poor wife , snatch up she baby , burst into scream ; and then she hurrie down again to see if the water be rise fast . there be a step down into the room at the door lead from the staircase ; she see that the water be already on a level with the step . while she be look , something come with a tremendous crash against the window , and send the leaded pane and the old wooden framework inward in shiver , the water pour in after it . " it be the boat ! " cry . " , come down to get the boat ! " and without a moment 's shudder of fear , she plunge through the water , which be rise fast to she knee , and by the glimmering light of the candle she have leave on the stair , she mount on to the window - sill , and crept into the boat , which be leave with the prow lod and protrud through the window . be not long after she , hurry without shoe or stocking , but with the lanthorn in he hand . " why , they be both here , -- both the boats , " say , as he get into the one where be . " it be wonderful this fastening be not break too , as well as the mooring . " in the excitement of get into the other boat , unfasten it , and mastere a oar , be not strike with the danger Maggie incur . we be not apt to fear for the fearless , when we be companion in they danger , and 's mind be absorb in possible expedient for the safety of the helpless indoor . the fact that have be up , have wake he , and have take the lead in activity , give a vague impression of she as one who would help to protect , not need to be protect . she too have get possession of a oar , and have push off , so as to release the boat from the overhanging window - frame . " the water 's rising so fast , " say , " I doubt it will be in at the chamber before long , -- th ' house be so low . I have more mind to get and the child and the mother into the boat , if I could , and trusten to the water , -- for th ' old house be none so safe . and if I let go the boat -- but _you _, " he exclaim , suddenly lift the light of he lanthorn on , as she stand in the rain with the oar in she hand and she black hair streame . have no time to answer , for a new tidal current swept along the line of the house , and drive both the boat out on to the wide water , with a force that carry they far past the meeting current of the river . in the first moments feel nothing , think of nothing , but that she have suddenly pass away from that life which she have be dread ; it be the transition of death , without it be agony , -- and she be alone in the darkness with . the whole thing have be so rapid , so dreamlike , that the thread of ordinary association be break ; she sank down on the seat clutch the oar mechanically , and for a long while have no distinct conception of she position . the first thing that wake she to fuller consciousness be the cessation of the rain , and a perception that the darkness be divide by the faintest light , which part the overhanging gloom from the immeasurable watery level below . she be drive out upon the flood , -- that awful visitation of which she father use to talk of ; which have make the nightmare of she childish dream . and with that think there rush in the vision of the old home , and , and she mother , -- they have all listen together . " of , where be I ? which be the way home ? " she cry out , in the dim loneliness . what be happen to they at the ? the flood have once nearly destroy it . they might be in danger , in distress , -- she mother and she brother , alone there , beyond reach of help ! she whole soul be strain now on that think ; and she see the long - love face look for help into the darkness , and find none . she be float in smooth water now , -- perhaps far on the overflooded field . there be no sense of present danger to check the outgoing of she mind to the old home ; and she strain she eye against the curtain of gloom that she might seize the first sight of she whereabout , -- that she might catch some faint suggestion of the spot toward which all she anxiety ten . oh , how welcome , the widening of that dismal watery level , the gradual uplifting of the cloudy firmament , the slowly define blackness of object above the glassy dark ! yes , she must be out on the field ; those be the top of hedgerow tree . which way do the river
river lie ? look behind she , she see the line of black tree ; look before she , there be none ; then the river lay before she . she seize a oar and begin to paddle the boat forward with the energy of wake hope ; the dawning seem to advance more swiftly , now she be in action ; and she could soon see the poor dumb beasts crowd piteously on a mound where they have take refuge . onward she paddle and row by turn in the grow twilight ; she wet clothes clung round she , and she streaming hair be dash about by the wind , but she be hardly conscious of any bodily sensation ,-- except a sensation of strength , inspire by mighty emotion . along with the sense of danger and possible rescue for those long - remembe being at the old home , there be a undefined sense of reconcilement with she brother ; what quarrel , what harshness , what unbelief in each other can subsist in the presence of a great calamity , when all the artificial vesture of we life be gone , and we be all one with each other in primitive mortal need ? Vaguly feel this , in the strong resurgent love toward she brother that sweep away all the later impressions of hard , cruel offence and misunderstanding , and leave only the deep , underlying , unshakable memory of early union . but now there be a large dark mass in the distance , and near to she Maggie could discern the current of the river . the dark mass must be -- yes , it be -- . 's . ah , now she know which way to look for the first glimpse of the well - know tree -- the gray willow , the now yellow chestnut -- and above they the old roof ! but there be no color , no shape yet ; all be faint and dim . more and more strongly the energie seem to come and put themselves forth , as if she life be a store - up force that be be spend in this hour , unneeded for any future . she must get she boat into the current of the Floss , else she would never be able to pass the and approach the house ; this be the thought that occur to she , as she imagine with more and more vividness the state of thing round the old home . but then she might be carry very far down , and be unable to guide she boat out of the current again . for the first time distinct idea of danger begin to press upon she ; but there be no choice of coursis , no room for hesitation , and she float into the current . swiftly she go now without effort ; more and more clearly in the lessening distance and the grow light she begin to discern the object that she know must be the well - know tree and roof ; nay , she be not far off a rushing , muddy current that must be the strangely altered . great ! there be float mass in it , that might dash against she boat as she pass , and cause she to perish too soon . what be those mass ? for the first time 's heart begin to beat in a agony of dread . she sit helpless , dimly conscious that she be be float along , more intensely conscious of the anticipated clash . but the horror be transient ; it pass away before the oncoming warehous of 's . she have pass the mouth of the , then ; _now , she must use all she skill and power to manage the boat and get it if possible out of the current . she could see now that the bridge be break down ; she could see the mast of a strand vessel far out over the watery field . but no boats be to be see move on the river , -- such as have be laid hand on be employ in the flood street . with new resolution , seize she oar , and stand up again to paddle ; but the now ebb tide add to the swiftness of the river , and she be carry along beyond the bridge . she could hear shout from the window overlook the river , as if the people there be call to she . it be not till she have pass on nearly to that she could get the boat clear of the current . then with one yearning look toward she uncle 's house that lay farther down the river , she take to both she oar and row with all she might across the watery field , back toward the . be begin to awake now , and as she approach the Dorlcote field , she could discern the tints of the tree , could see the old fir far to the right , and the home chestnut , -- oh , how deep they lay in the water , -- deeper than the tree on this side the hill ! and the roof of the -- where be it ? those heavy fragment hurry down the , -- what have they mean ? but it be not the house , -- the house stood firm ; drown up to the first story , but still firm , -- or be it break in at the end toward the ? with pante joy that she be there at last , -- joy that overcome all distress ,-- neare the front of the house . at first she hear no sound ; she see no object move . she boat be on a level with the upstairs window . she
she call out in a loud , piercing voice ,-- " , where be you ? mother , where be you ? here be ! " , from the window of the attic in the central gable , she hear 's voice ,-- " who be it ? have you bring a boat ? " " it be I , ,-- . where be mother ? " " she be not here ; she go to Garum the day before yesterday . I will come down to the lower window . " " , ? " say , in a voice of deep astonishment , as he open the middle window , on a level with the boat . " yes , ; have take care of I , to bring I to you . get in quickly . be there no one else ? " " no , " say , step into the boat ; " I fear the man be drown ; he be carry down the , I think , when part of the fell with the crash of tree and stone against it ; I have shoute again and again , and there have be no answer . give I the oar , . " it be not till have push off and they be on the wide water , -- he face to face with , -- that the full meaning of what have happen rush upon he mind . it come with so overpower a force , -- it be such a new revelation to he spirit , of the depth in life that have lain beyond he vision , which he have fancie so keen and clear , -- that he be unable to ask a question . they sit mutely gaze at each other ,-- Maggie with eye of intense life look out from a weary , beat face ; , with a certain awe and humiliation . thought be busy though the lip be silent ; and though he could ask no question , he guess a story of almost miraculous , divinely protect effort . but at last a mist gather over the blue - gray eye , and the lip find a word they could utter , -- the old childish " Magsie ! " could make no answer but a long , deep sob of that mysterious , wondrous happiness that be one with pain . as soon as she could speak , she say , " we will go to , ; we will go and see if she be safe , and then we can help the rest . " row with untired vigor , and with a different speed from poor 's . the boat be soon in the current of the river again , and soon they would be at . " stand high up out of the flood , " say . " perhaps they have get there . " nothing else be say ; a new danger be be carry toward they by the river . some wooden machinery have just give way on one of the wharve , and huge fragment be be float along . the sun be rise now , and the wide area of watery desolation be spread out in dreadful clearness around they ; in dreadful clearness float onward the hurrying , threaten mass . a large company in a boat that be work its way along under the house observe they danger , and shoute , " get out of the current ! " but that could not be do at once ; and , look before he , see death rushing on they . huge fragment , cling together in fatal fellowship , make one wide mass across the stream . " it be come , ! " say , in a deep , hoarse voice , loose the oar , and clasp she . the next instant the boat be no longer see upon the water , and the huge mass be hurrie on in hideous triumph . but soon the keel of the boat reappear , a black speck on the golden water . the boat reappear , but brother and sister have go down in a embrace never to be part ; live through again in one supreme moment the day when they have clasp they little hand in love , and roam the daisied field together . conclusion nature repair she ravage , -- repair they with she sunshine , and with human labor . the desolation wrotch by that flood have leave little visible trace on the face of the earth , five year after . the fifth autumn be rich in golden cornstack , rise in thick cluster among the distant hedgerow ; the wharve and warehouse on the Floss be busy again , with echoe of eager voice , with hopeful lading and unlading . and every man and woman mention in this history be still live , except those whose end we know . nature repair she ravage , but not all . the uptorn tree be not root again ; the parted hill be leave scarred ; if there be a new growth , the tree be not the same as the old , and the hill underneath they green vesture bear the mark of the past rending . to the eyes that have dwelt on the past , there be no thorough repair . Dorlcote be rebuild . and Dorlcote churchyard -- where the brick grave that hold a father whom we know , be find with the stone laid prostrate upon it after the flood -- have recover all its grassy order and decent quiet . near that brick grave there be a tomb erect , very soon after the flood , for two body that be find in close embrace ; and it be visit at different moment by two man who both
