by and to my dear , , in this nineteenth year of we bless union . prelude who that care much to know the history of man , and how the mysterious mixture behave under the varying experiment of , have not dwelt , at least briefly , on the life of , have not smile with some gentleness at the thought of the little girl walk forth one morning hand - in - hand with she still smaller brother , to go and seek martyrdom in the country of the ? out they toddle from rug , wide - eyed and helpless - look as two fawn , but with human heart , already beat to a national idea ; until domestic reality meet they in the shape of uncle , and turn they back from they great resolve . that child - pilgrimage be a fit begin . 's passionate , ideal nature demand a epic life : what be many - volume romance of chivalry and the social conquest of a brilliant girl to she ? she flame quickly burn up that light fuel ; and , feed from , soar after some illimitable satisfaction , some object which would never justify weariness , which would reconcile self - despair with the rapturous consciousness of life beyond self . she find she epo in the reform of a religious order . that spanish woman who live three hundred year ago , be certainly not the last of she kind . many Theresa have be bear who find for themselves no epic life wherein there be a constant unfolding of far - resonant action ; perhaps only a life of mistake , the offspring of a certain spiritual grandeur ill - match with the meanness of opportunity ; perhaps a tragic failure which find no sacred poet and sank unwept into . with dim light and tangle circumstance they try to shape they think and deed in noble agreement ; but after all , to common eye they struggle seem mere inconsistency and formlessness ; for these later - bear Theresas be help by no coherent social faith and order which could perform the function of knowledge for the ardently willing soul . they ardor alternate between a vague ideal and the common yearning of womanhood ; so that the one be disapprove as extravagance , and the other condemn as a lapse . some have feel that these blundering life be due to the inconvenient indefiniteness with which the have fashio the nature of woman : if there be one level of feminine incompetence as strict as the ability to count three and no more , the social lot of woman might be treat with scientific certitude . meanwhile the indefiniteness remain , and the limit of variation be really much wider than any one would imagine from the sameness of woman 's coiffure and the favorite love - story in prose and verse . here and there a cygnet be rear uneasily among the duckling in the brown pond , and never find the living stream in fellowship with its own oary - foot kind . here and there be bear a Saint Theresa , foundress of nothing , whose love heart - beat and sob after a unattained goodness tremble off and be disperse among hindrance , instead of centring in some long - recognizable deed . book I . . chapter I . " since I can do no good because a woman , reach constantly at something that be near it . -- the 's : not and . have that kind of beauty which seem to be throw into relief by poor dress . she hand and wrist be so finely form that she could wear sleeve not less bare of style than those in which the appear to italian painter ; and she profile as well as she stature and bearing seem to gain the more dignity from she plain garment , which by the side of provincial fashion give she the impressiveness of a fine quotation from the , -- or from one of we elder poet , -- in a paragraph of to - day 's newspaper . she be usually speak of as be remarkably clever , but with the addition that she sister have more common - sense . nevertheless , wear scarcely more trimming ; and it be only to close observer that she dress differ from she sister 's , and have a shade of coquetry in its arrangement ; for 's plain dressing be due to mix condition , in most of which she sister share . the pride of be lady have something to do with it : the Brooke connection , though not exactly aristocratic , be unquestionably " good :" if you inquire backward for a generation or two , you would not find any yard - measuring or parcel - tie forefather -- anything lower than a admiral or a clergyman ; and there be even a ancestor discernible as a gentleman who serve under , but afterwards conform , and manage to come out of all political trouble as the proprietor of a respectable family estate . young woman of such birth , live in a quiet country - house , and attend a village church hardly larger than a parlor , naturally regard frippery as the ambition of a huckster 's daughter . then there be well - breed economy , which in those day make show in dress the first item to be deduct from , when any margin be require for expense more distinctive of rank . such reason would have be enough to account for plain dress , quite apart from religious feeling ; but in 's case , religion alone would have determine it ; and mildly acquiesce in all she sister 's sentiment , only infus they with that common - sense which be
be able to accept momentous doctrine without any eccentric agitation . know many passage of 's and of by heart ; and to she the destiny of mankind , see by the light of , make the solicitude of feminine fashion appear a occupation for . she could not reconcile the anxiety of a spiritual life involve eternal consequence , with a keen interest in and artificial protrusion of drapery . she mind be theoretic , and year by its nature after some lofy conception of the world which might frankly include the parish of and she own rule of conduct there ; she be enamoure of intensity and greatness , and rash in embracing whatever seem to she to have those aspect ; likely to seek martyrdom , to make retractation , and then to incur martyrdom after all in a quarter where she have not seek it . certainly such element in the character of a marriageable girl tend to interfere with she lot , and hinder it from be decide accord to custom , by good look , vanity , and merely canine affection . with all this , she , the elder of the sister , be not yet twenty , and they have both be educated , since they be about twelve year old and have lose they parent , on plan at once narrow and promiscuous , first in a english family and afterwards in a swiss family at , they bachelor uncle and guardian try in this way to remedy the disadvantage of they orphaned condition . it be hardly a year since they have come to live at with they uncle , a man nearly sixty , of acquiescent temper , miscellaneous opinion , and uncertain vote . he have travel in he younger year , and be hold in this part of the county to have contract a too rambling habit of mind . 's conclusion be as difficult to predict as the weather : it be only safe to say that he would act with benevolent intention , and that he would spend as little money as possible in carry they out . for the most glutinously indefinite mind enclose some hard grains of habit ; and a man have be see lax about all he own interest except the retention of he snuff - box , concern which he be watchful , suspicious , and greedy of clutch . in the hereditary strain of energy be clearly in abeyance ; but in he niece it glow alike through fault and virtue , turn sometimes into impatience of she uncle 's talk or he way of " let thing be " on he estate , and make she long all the more for the time when she would be of age and have some command of money for generous scheme . she be regard as a heiress ; for not only have the sister seven hundred a - year each from they parent , but if marry and have a son , that son would inherit 's estate , presumably worth about three thousand a - year -- a rental which seem wealth to provincial family , still discuss 's late conduct on the question , innocent of future gold - field , and of that gorgeous plutocracy which have so nobly exalt the necessity of genteel life . and how should not marry ?-- a girl so handsome and with such prospect ? nothing could hinder it but she love of extreme , and she insistence on regulating life accord to notion which might cause a wary man to hesitate before he make she a offer , or even might lead she at last to refuse all offer . a young lady of some birth and fortune , who knelt suddenly down on a brick floor by the side of a sick laborer and praye fervidly as if she think herself live in the time of the Apostles -- who have strange whim of fasting like a Papist , and of sit up at night to read old theological book ! such a wife might awake you some fine morning with a new scheme for the application of she income which would interfere with political economy and the keeping of saddle - horse : a man would naturally think twice before he risk himself in such fellowship . woman be expect to have weak opinion ; but the great safeguard of society and of domestic life be , that opinion be not act on . Sane people do what they neighbor do , so that if any lunatic be at large , one might know and avoid they . the rural opinion about the new young lady , even among the cottager , be generally in favor of , as be so amiable and innocent - look , while 's large eye seem , like she religion , too unusual and strike . poor Dorothea ! compare with she , the innocent - look be know and worldly - wise ; so much subtler be a human mind than the outside tissue which make a sort of blazonry or clock - face for it . yet those who approach , though prejudice against she by this alarming hearsay , find that she have a charm unaccountably reconcilable with it . most man think she bewitch when she be on horseback . she love the fresh air and the various aspect of the country , and when she eye and cheek glow with mingled pleasure she look very little like a devotee . be a indulgence which she allow herself in spite of conscientious qualm ; she feel that she enjoy it in a pagan sensuous way , and always look forward to renounce it . she be open , ardent , and not in the least self - admiring ; indeed , it be pretty to see how she imagination
imagination adorn she sister Celia with attraction altogether superior to she own , and if any gentleman appear to come to the Grange from some other motive than that of see , she conclude that he must be in love with : , for example , whom she constently consider from 's point of view , inwardly debat whether it would be good for to accept he . that he should be regard as a suitor to herself would have see to she a ridiculous irrelevance . Dorothea , with all she eagerness to know the truth of life , retain very childlike idea about marriage . she feel sure that she would have accept the judicious Hooker , if she have be bear in time to save he from that wretch mistake he make in matrimony ; or when he blindness have come on ; or any of the other great man whose odd habit it would have be glorious piety to endure ; but a amiable handsome baronet , who say " exactly " to she remark even when she express uncertainty , -- how could he affect she as a lover ? the really delightful marriage must be that where you husband be a sort of father , and could teach you even Hebrow , if you wish it . these peculiarity of 's character cause to be all the more blame in neighbor family for not secure some middle - aged lady as guide and companion to he niece . but he himself dread so much the sort of superior woman likely to be available for such a position , that he allow himself to be dissuad by 's objection , and be in this case brave enough to defy the world -- that be to say , Cadwallader the rector 's wife , and the small group of gentry with whom he visit in the northeast corner of . so preside in she uncle 's household , and do not at all dislike she new authority , with the homage that belong to it . be go to dine at the to - day with another gentleman whom the girl have never see , and about whom feel some venerat expectation . this be the , note in the county as a man of profound learn , understood for many year to be engage on a great work concern religious history ; also as a man of wealth enough to give lustre to he piety , and have view of he own which be to be more clearly ascertain on the publication of he book . he very name carry a impressiveness hardly to be measure without a precise chronology of scholarship . Early in the day have return from the infant school which she have set go in the village , and be take she usual place in the pretty sitting - room which divide the bedroom of the sister , bend on finish a plan for some building ( a kind of work which she delighte in ) , when , who have be watch she with a hesitating desire to propose something , say -- " Dorothea , dear , if you do not mind -- if you be not very busy -- suppose we look at 's jewel to - day , and divide they ? it be exactely six month to - day since uncle give they to you , and you have not look at they yet . " 's face have the shadow of a pouting expression in it , the full presence of the pout be keep back by a habitual awe of Dorothea and principle ; two associate fact which might show a mysterious electricity if you touch they incautiously . to she relief , 's eye be full of laughter as she look up . " what a wonderful little almanac you be , ! be it six calendar or six lunar month ? " " it be the last day of now , and it be the first of when uncle give they to you . you know , he say that he have forget they till then . I believe you have never think of they since you lock they up in the cabinet here . " " well , dear , we should never wear they , you know . " speak in a full cordial tone , half caressing , half explanatory . she have she pencil in she hand , and be make tiny side - plan on a margin . colore , and look very grave . " I think , dear , we be want in respect to 's memory , to put they by and take no notice of they . and , " she add , after hesitat a little , with a rise sob of mortification , " necklace be quite usual now ; and , who be stricter in some thing even than you be , use to wear ornament . and generally -- surely there be woman in heaven now who wear jewel . " be conscious of some mental strength when she really apply herself to argument . " you would like to wear they ? " exclaim , a air of astonished discovery anima she whole person with a dramatic action which she have catch from that very who wear the ornament . " of course , then , let we have they out . why do you not tell I before ? but the key , the key ! " she press she hand against the side of she head and see to despair of she memory . " they be here , " say , with whom this explanation have be long meditate and prearrange . " pray open the large drawer of the cabinet and get out the jewel - box . " the casket be soon open before
before they , and the various jewel spread out , make a bright parterre on the table . it be no great collection , but a few of the ornament be really of remarkable beauty , the finest that be obvious at first be a necklace of purple amethyst set in exquisite gold work , and a pearl cross with five brilliant in it . immediately take up the necklace and fasten it round she sister 's neck , where it fit almost as closely as a bracelet ; but the circle suite the - style of 's head and neck , and she could see that it do , in the pier - glass opposite . " there , ! you can wear that with you indian muslin . but this cross you must wear with you dark dress . " be try not to smile with pleasure . " of , you must keep the cross yourself . " " no , no , dear , no , " say , put up she hand with careless deprecation . " yes , indeed you must ; it would suit you -- in you black dress , now , " say , insistingly . " you _might_ wear that . " " not for the world , not for the world . a cross be the last thing I would wear as a trinket . " shudder slightly . " then you will think it wick in I to wear it , " say , uneasily . " no , dear , no , " say , strok she sister 's cheek . " soul have complexion too : what will suit one will not suit another . " " but you might like to keep it for 's sake . " " no , I have other thing of mamma 's -- she sandal - wood box which I be so fond of -- plenty of thing . in fact , they be all yours , dear . we need discuss they no longer . there -- take away you property . " feel a little hurt . there be a strong assumption of superiority in this Puritanic toleration , hardly less try to the blond flesh of a unenthusiastic sister than a Puritanic persecution . " but how can I wear ornament if you , who be the elder sister , will never wear they ? " " , , that be too much to ask , that I should wear trinket to keep you in countenance . if I be to put on such a necklace as that , I should feel as if I have be pirouett . the world would go round with I , and I should not know how to walk . " have unclasp the necklace and draw it off . " it would be a little tight for you neck ; something to lie down and hang would suit you better , " she say , with some satisfaction . the complete unfitness of the necklace from all point of view for , make happier in take it . she be open some ring - box , which disclose a fine emerald with diamonds , and just then the sun pass beyond a cloud send a bright gleam over the table . " how very beautiful these gem be ! " say , under a new current of feeling , as sudden as the gleam . " it be strange how deeply color seem to penetrate one , like scent . I suppose that be the reason why gem be use as spiritual emblem in the Revelation of . they look like fragment of heaven . I think that be more beautiful than any of they . " " and there be a bracelet to match it , " say . " we do not notice this at first . " " they be lovely , " say , slipp the ring and bracelet on she finely turn finger and wrist , and hold they towards the window on a level with she eye . all the while she think be try to justify she delight in the color by merge they in she mystic religious joy . " you _would like those , , " say , rather falteringly , begin to think with wonder that she sister show some weakness , and also that emerald would suit she own complexion even better than purple amethyst . " you must keep that ring and bracelet -- if nothing else . but see , these agate be very pretty and quiet . " " yes ! I will keep these -- this ring and bracelet , " say . then , let she hand fall on the table , she say in another tone -- " yet what miserable man find such thing , and work at they , and sell they ! " she pause again , and think that she sister be go to renounce the ornament , as in consistency she ought to do . " yes , dear , I will keep these , " say , decidedly . " but take all the rest away , and the casket . " she take up she pencil without remove the jewel , and still look at they . she think of often have they by she , to feed she eye at these little fountain of pure color . " shall you wear they in company ? " say , who be watch she with real curiosity as to what she would do . glance quickly at she sister . across all she imaginative adornment of those whom she love , there dart now and then a keen discernment , which be not without a scorching quality . if ever attain perfect meekness , it would not be for lack of inward fire . " perhaps ,
, " she say , rather haughtily . " I can not tell to what level I may sink . " blush , and be unhappy : she see that she have offend she sister , and da not say even anything pretty about the gift of the ornament which she put back into the box and carry away . too be unhappy , as she go on with she plan-drawing , question the purity of she own feeling and speech in the scene which have end with that little explosion . 's consciousness tell she that she have not be at all in the wrong : it be quite natural and justifiable that she should have ask that question , and she repeat to herself that be inconsistent : either she should have take she full share of the jewel , or , after what she have say , she should have renounce they altogether . " I be sure -- at least , I trust , " think , " that the wearing of a necklace will not interfere with my prayer . and I do not see that I should be bound by 's opinion now we be go into society , though of course she herself ought to be bound by they . but be not always consistent . " thus , mutely bend over she tapestry , until she hear she sister call she . " here , , come and look at my plan ; I shall think I be a great architect , if I have not get incompatible stair and fireplace . " as bend over the paper , put she cheek against she sister 's arm caressingly . understand the action . see that she have be in the wrong , and pardon she . since they could remember , there have be a mixture of criticism and awe in the attitude of 's mind towards she elder sister . the younger have always wear a yoke ; but be there any yok creature without its private opinion ? chapter ii . " ' dime ; no f aquel caballero que hacia nosotro viene sobre un caballo rucio rodado que trae puesto en la cabeza un yelmo de oro ? ' 'Lo que veo y columbro , ' respondio , ' no e ksinow un hombre sobre un as no pardo como el mio , que trae sobre la cabeza una cosa que relumbra . ' ' Pue ese es el yelmo , ' dijo . " --cervantes . " ' not yon cavalier who cometh toward we on a dapple - gray steed , and weareth a golden helmet ? ' ' what I see , ' answer , 'i nothing but a man on a gray ass like my own , who carry something shiny on he head . ' ' just so , ' answer : 'and that resplendent object be the helmet of . ' " " ? " say , over the soup , in he easy smile way , take up 's remark that he be study 's . " well , now , ; I dine with he year ago at 's , and be there too -- the poet Wordsworth , you know . now there be something singular . I be at Cambridge when be there , and I never meet he -- and I dine with he twenty year afterwards at 's . there be a oddity in thing , now . but be there : he be a poet too . or , as I may say , be poet one , and be poet two . that be true in every sense , you know . " feel a little more uneasy than usual . in the beginning of dinner , the party be small and the room still , these mote from the mass of a magistrate 's mind fall too noticeably . she wonder how a man like would support such triviality . he manners , she think , be very dignified ; the set of he iron - gray hair and he deep eye - socket make he resemble the portrait of . he have the spare form and the pale complexion which become a student ; as different as possible from the blooming of the red-whiskered type represent by . " I be read the , " say this excellent baronet , " because I be go to take one of the farm into my own hand , and see if something can not be do in set a good pattern of farme among my tenant . do you approve of that , ? " " a great mistake , , " interpose , " go into electrify you land and that kind of thing , and make a parlor of you cow - house . it will not do . I go into a great deal myself at one time ; but I see it would not do . it lead to everything ; you can let nothing alone . no , no --see that you tenant do not sell they straw , and that kind of thing ; and give they draining - tile , you know . but you fancy farming will not do -- the most expensive sort of whistle you can buy : you may as well keep a pack of hound . " " surely , " say , " it be better to spend money in find out how man can make the most of the land which support they all , than in keep dog and horse only to gallop over it . it be not a sin to make yourself poor in perform experiment for the good of all . " she speak with more energy than be expect of so young a lady , but have appeal to she . he be accustom to do so
so , and she have often think that she could urge he to many good action when he be she brother - in - law . turn he eye very markedly on while she be speak , and seem to observe she newly . " young lady do not understand political economy , you know , " say , smile towards . " I remember when we be all read . There_ be a book , now . I take in all the new idea at one time -- human perfectibility , now . but some say , history move in circle ; and that may be very well argue ; I have argue it myself . the fact be , human reason may carry you a little too far -- over the hedge , in fact . it carry I a good way at one time ; but I see it would not do . I pull up ; I pull up in time . but not too hard . I have always be in favor of a little theory : we must have thought ; else we shall be lande back in the dark age . but talk of book , there be be 's . ' I be read that of a morning . you know ? " " no " say , not keep pace with 's impetuous reason , and think of the book only . " I have little leisure for such literature just now . I have be use up my eyesight on old character lately ; the fact be , I want a reader for my evening ; but I be fastidious in voice , and I can not endure listen to a imperfect reader . it be a misfortune , in some sensis : I feed too much on the inward source ; I live too much with the dead . my mind be something like the ghost of a ancient , wandere about the world and try mentally to construct it as it use to be , in spite of ruin and confuse change . but I find it necessary to use the utmost caution about my eyesight . " this be the first time that have speak at any length . he deliver himself with precision , as if he have be call upon to make a public statement ; and the balance sing - song neatness of he speech , occasionally correspond to by a movement of he head , be the more conspicuous from its contrast with good 's scrappy slovenliness . say to herself that be the most interesting man she have ever see , not except even , the clergyman who have give conference on the history of the Waldense . to reconstruct a past world , doubtless with a view to the highest purpose of truth -- what a work to be in any way present at , to assist in , though only as a lamp - holder ! this elevate think lift she above she annoyance at be twit with she ignorance of political economy , that never -explain science which be thrust as a extinguisher over all she light . " but you be fond of riding , , " presently take a opportunity of say . " I should have think you would enter a little into the pleasure of hunting . I wish you would let I send over a chestnut horse for you to try . it have be train for a lady . I see you on cantering over the hill on a nag not worthy of you . my groom shall bring for you every day , if you will only mention the time . " " thank you , you be very good . I mean to give up riding . I shall not ride any more , " say , urge to this brusque resolution by a little annoyance that would be solicite she attention when she want to give it all to . " no , that be too hard , " say , in a tone of reproach that show strong interest . " you sister be give to self - mortification , be she not ? " he continue , turn to , who sit at he right hand . " I think she be , " say , feel afraid lest she should say something that would not please she sister , and blush as prettily as possible above she necklace . " she like give up . " " if that be true , , my give - up would be self - indulgence , not self - mortification . but there may be good reason for choose not to do what be very agreeable , " say . be speak at the same time , but it be evident that be observe , and she be aware of it . " exactly , " say . " you give up from some high , generous motive . " " no , indeed , not exactly . I do not say that of myself , " answer , redden . unlike , she rarely blush , and only from high delight or anger . at this moment she feel angry with the perverse . why do he not pay attention to , and leave she to listen to ?-- if that learn man would only talk , instead of allow himself to be talk to by , who be just then inform he that the Reformation either mean something or it do not , that he himself be a Protestant to the core , but that be a fact ; and as to refuse a acre of you ground for a chapel , all man need the bridle of religion , which , properly speak , be the dread of a Hereafter . " I make a great study of
of theology at one time , " say , as if to explain the insight just manifest . " I know something of all school . I know in he best day . do you know ? " say , " no . " " well , be perhaps not enough of a thinker ; but if I go into parliament , as I have be ask to do , I should sit on the independent bench , as do , and work at philanthropy . " bow , and observe that it be a wide field . " yes , " say , with a easy smile , " but I have document . I begin a long while ago to collect document . they want arrange , but when a question have strike I , I have write to somebody and get a answer . I have document at my back . but now , how do you arrange you document ? " " in pigeon - hole partly , " say , with rather a start air of effort . " ah , pigeon - hole will not do . I have try pigeon - hole , but everything get mix in pigeon - hole : I never know whether a paper be in or . " " I wish you would let I sort you papers for you , uncle , " say . " I would letter they all , and then make a list of subject under each letter . " gravely smile approval , and say to , " you have a excellent secretary at hand , you perceive . " " no , no , " say , shak he head ; " I can not let young lady meddle with my document . young lady be too flighty . " feel hurt . would think that she uncle have some special reason for deliver this opinion , whereas the remark lay in he mind as lightly as the broken wing of a insect among all the other fragment there , and a chance current have send it alight on _her _. when the two girl be in the drawing - room alone , say -- " how very ugly be ! " " ! he be one of the most distinguished - look man I ever see . he be remarkably like the portrait of . he have the same deep eye - socket . " " have those two white mole with hair on they ? " " oh , I dare say ! when people of a certain sort look at he , " say , walk away a little . " be so sallow . " " all the better . I suppose you admire a man with the complexion of a cochon de lait . " " ! " exclaim , look after she in surprise . " I never hear you make such a comparison before . " " why should I make it before the occasion come ? it be a good comparison : the match be perfect . " be clearly forget herself , and think so . " I wonder you show temper , . " " it be so painful in you , , that you will look at human being as if they be merely animal with a toilet , and never see the great soul in a man 's face . " " have a great soul ? " be not without a touch of naive malice . " yes , I believe he have , " say , with the full voice of decision . " everything I see in he corresponds to he pamphlet on . " " he talk very little , " say " there be no one for he to talk to . " think privately , " Dorothea quite despise ; I believe she would not accept he . " feel that this be a pity . she have never be deceive as to the object of the baronet 's interest . sometimes , indeed , she have reflect that would perhaps not make a husband happy who have not she way of look at thing ; and stifle in the depth of she heart be the feeling that she sister be too religious for family comfort . notions and scruple be like spilt needles , make one afraid of treading , or sit down , or even eat . when be at the tea - table , come to sit down by she , not have feel she mode of answer he at all offensive . why wshould he ? he think it probable that like he , and manners must be very mark indeed before they cease to be interpret by preconception either confident or distrustful . she be thoroughly charme to he , but of course he theorize a little about he attachment . he be make of excellent human dough , and have the rare merit of know that he talents , even if let loose , would not set the smallest stream in the county on fire : hence he like the prospect of a wife to whom he could say , " what shall we do ? " about this or that ; who could help she husband out with reason , and would also have the property qualification for do so . as to the excessive religiousness allege against , he have a very indefinite notion of what it consiste in , and think that it would die out with marriage . in short , he feel himself to be in love in the right place , and be ready to endure a great deal of predominance , which , after all , a man could always put down when he like . have no idea that he should ever like to put down the predominance of this
this handsome girl , in whose cleverness he delight . why not ? a man 's mind -- what there be of it -- have always the advantage of be masculine , -- as the smallest birch - tree be of a higher kind than the most soaring palm , -- and even he ignorance be of a sounder quality . might not have originate this estimate ; but a kind Providence furnish the limpest personality with a little gunk or starch in the form of tradition . " let I hope that you will rescind that resolution about the horse , , " say the persevering admirer . " I assure you , ride be the most healthy of exercis . " " I be aware of it , " say , coldly . " I think it would do good -- if she would take to it . " " but you be such a perfect horsewoman . " " excuse I ; I have have very little practice , and I should be easily throw . " " then that be a reason for more practice . every lady ought to be a perfect horsewoman , that she may accompany she husband . " " you see how widely we differ , . I have make up my mind that I ought not to be a perfect horsewoman , and so I should never correspond to you pattern of a lady . " look straight before she , and speak with cold brusquerie , very much with the air of a handsome boy , in amusing contrast with the solicitous amiability of she admirer . " I should like to know you reason for this cruel resolution . it be not possible that you should think horsemanship wrong . " " it be quite possible that I should think it wrong for I . " " oh , why ? " say , in a tender tone of remonstrance . have come up to the table , teacup in hand , and be listen . " we must not inquire too curiously into motive , " he interpose , in he measured way . " know that they be apt to become feeble in the utterance : the aroma be mix with the grosser air . we must keep the germinating grain away from the light . " Dorothea colore with pleasure , and look up gratefully to the speaker . here be a man who could understand the higher inward life , and with whom there could be some spiritual communion ; nay , who could illuminate principle with the widest knowledge a man whose learn almost amount to a proof of whatever he believe ! 's inference may seem large ; but really life could never have go on at any period but for this liberal allowance of conclusion , which have facilitate marriage under the difficulty of civilization . have any one ever pinch into its pilulous smallness the cobweb of pre-matrimonial acquaintanceship ? " certainly , " say good . " shall not be urge to tell reason she would rather be silent upon . I be sure she reason would do she honor . " he be not in the least jealous of the interest with which have look up at : it never occur to he that a girl to whom he be meditat a offer of marriage could care for a dried bookworm towards fifty , except , indeed , in a religious sort of way , as for a clergyman of some distinction . however , since have become engage in a conversation with about the clergy , betake himself to , and talk to she about she sister ; spoke of a house in town , and ask whether dislike . away from she sister , talk quite easily , and say to himself that the second be certainly very agreeable as well as pretty , though not , as some people pretend , more clever and sensible than the elder sister . he feel that he have choose the one who be in all respects the superior ; and a man naturally like to look forward to have the best . he would be the very Mawworm of bachelor who pretend not to expect it . chapter III . " say , goddess , what ensue , when , the affable archangel . . . the story hear attentive , and be fill with admiration , and deep muse , to hear of thing so high and strange . " -- Paradise lose , . if it have really occur to to think of as a suitable wife for he , the reason that might induce she to accept he be already plan in she mind , and by the evening of the next day the reason have bud and bloom . for they have have a long conversation in the morning , while , who do not like the company of 's mole and sallowness , have escape to the vicarage to play with the curate 's ill - shod but merry child . Dorothea by this time have look deep into the ungauged reservoir of 's mind , see reflect there in vague labyrinthine extension every quality she herself bring ; have open much of she own experience to he , and have understood from he the scope of he great work , also of attractively labyrinthine extent . for he have be as instructive as 's " affable archangel ; " and with something of the archangelic manner he tell she how he have undertake to show ( what indeed have be attempt before , but not with that thoroughness , justice of comparison , and effectiveness of arrangement at which aim ) that all the mythical system or erratic mythical fragment in the world be corruption of a tradition originally revealead . have once
once master the true position and take a firm foot there , the vast field of mythical construction become intelligible , nay , luminous with the reflecte light of correspondences . but to gather in this great harvest of truth be no light or speedy work . he note already make a formidable range of volume , but the crowning task would be to condense these voluminous still - accumulate result and bring they , like the earlier vintage of Hippocratic book , to fit a little shelf . in explain this to , express himself nearly as he would have do to a fellow - student , for he have not two style of talk at command : it be true that when he use a or phrase he always give the with scrupulous care , but he would probably have do this in any case . a learn provincial clergyman be accustom to think of he acquaintance as of " lord , knyghte , and other noble and worthi man , that conne Latyn but lytille . " be altogether captivate by the wide embrace of this conception . here be something beyond the shallow of lady ' school literature : here be a live Bossuet , whose work would reconcile complete knowledge with devote piety ; here be a modern who unite the glory of doctor and saint . the sanctity seem no less clearly mark than the learning , for when be impell to open she mind on certain them which she could speak of to no one whom she have before see at , especially on the secondary importance of ecclesiastical form and article of belief compare with that spiritual religion , that submergence of self in communion with divine perfection which seem to she to be express in the best book of widly distant age , she find in a listener who understand she at once , who could assure she of he own agreement with that view when duly tempere with wise conformity , and could mention historical example before unknown to she . " he think with I , " say to herself , " or rather , he think a whole world of which my thought be but a poor twopenny mirror . and he feeling too , he whole experience -- what a lake compare with my little pool ! " argue from word and disposition not less unhesitatingly than other young lady of she age . be small measurable thing , but interpretation be illimitable , and in girl of sweet , ardent nature , every sign be apt to conjure up wonder , hope , belief , vast as a sky , and color by a diffused thimbleful of matter in the shape of knowledge . they be not always too grossly deceive ; for himself may have fall by good - luck on a true description , and wrong reason sometimes lands poor mortal in right conclusion : start a long way off the true point , and proceed by loops and zigzag , we now and then arrive just where we ought to be . because be hasty in she trust , it be not therefore clear that be unworthy of it . he stay a little longer than he have intend , on a slight pressure of invitation from , who offer no bait except he own document on machine - breaking and rick - burn . be call into the library to look at these in a heap , while he host pick up first one and then the other to read aloud from in a skipping and uncertain way , pass from one unfinished passage to another with a " yes , now , but here ! " and finally push they all aside to open the journal of he youthful continental travel . " look here -- here be all about . , the ruin of -- you be a great , now . I do not know whether you have give much study to the topography . I spend no end of time in make out these thing -- , now . here , now !--'we start the next morning for , the double - peak . ' all this volume be about , you know , " wound up , rub he thumb transversely along the edge of the leave as he hold the book forward . make a dignified though somewhat sad audience ; bow in the right place , and avoid look at anything documentary as far as possible , without show disregard or impatience ; mindful that this desultoriness be associate with the institution of the country , and that the man who take he on this severe mental scamper be not only a amiable host , but a landholder and custos rotulorum . be he endurance aide also by the reflection that be the uncle of ? certainly he seem more and more bent on make she talk to he , on draw she out , as remark to herself ; and in look at she he face be often light up by a smile like pale wintry sunshine . before he leave the next morning , while take a pleasant walk with along the gravell terrace , he have mention to she that he feel the disadvantage of loneliness , the need of that cheerful companionship with which the presence of youth can lighten or vary the serious toil of maturity . and he deliver this statement with as much careful precision as if he have be a diplomatic envoy whose word would be attend with result . indeed , be not use to expect that he should have to repeat or revise he communication of a practical or personal kind . the inclination which he have deliberately state on the 2d of he would think it enough to refer to by the mention of that
that date ; judge by the standard of he own memory , which be a volume where a vide supra could serve instead of repetition , and not the ordinary long - use blotting - book which only tell of forgotten writing . but in this case 's confidence be not likely to be falsify , for hear and retain what he say with the eager interest of a fresh young nature to which every variety in experience be a epoch . it be three o'clock in the beautiful breezy autumn day when drive off to he Rectory at , only five mile from ; and , who have on she bonnet and shawl , hurrie along the shrubbery and across the park that she might wander through the bordering wood with no other visible companionship than that of , the Great dog , who always take care of the young lady in they walk . there have risen before she the girl 's vision of a possible future for herself to which she look forward with trembling hope , and she want to wander on in that visionary future without interruption . she walk briskly in the brisk air , the color rise in she cheek , and she straw bonnet ( which we contemporary might look at with conjectural curiosity as at a obsolete form of basket ) fall a little backward . she would perhaps be hardly characterize enough if it be omit that she wear she brown hair flatly braide and coil behind so as to expose the outline of she head in a daring manner at a time when public feeling require the meagreness of nature to be dissimulate by tall barricade of frizzed curl and bow , never surpass by any great race except the . this be a trait of 's asceticism . but there be nothing of a ascetic 's expression in she bright full eye , as she look before she , not consciously see , but absorb into the intensity of she mood , the solemn glory of the afternoon with its long swathes of light between the far - off row of lime , whose shadow touch each other . all people , young or old ( that be , all people in those ant - reform time ) , would have think she a interesting object if they have refer the glow in she eye and cheek to the newly awaken ordinary image of young love : the illusion of about have be sufficiently consecrate in poetry , as the pathetic loveliness of all spontaneous trust ought to be . miss adore young pumpkin , and dream along endless vista of unwearying companionship , be a little drama which never ti we fathers and mother , and have be put into all costume . let but have a figure which would sustain the disadvantage of the shortwaisted swallow - tail , and everybody feel it not only natural but necessary to the perfection of womanhood , that a sweet girl should be at once convinced of he virtue , he exceptional ability , and above all , he perfect sincerity . but perhaps no person then live -- certainly none in the neighborhood of -- would have have a sympathetic understanding for the dream of a girl whose notion about marriage take they color entirely from a exalt enthusiasm about the end of life , a enthusiasm which be light chiefly by its own fire , and include neither the nicety of the trousseau , the pattern of plate , nor even the honor and sweet joy of the blooming matron . it have now enter 's mind that might wish to make she he wife , and the idea that he would do so touch she with a sort of reverential gratitude . how good of he -- nay , it would be almost as if a win messenger have suddenly stand beside she path and hold out he hand towards she ! for a long while she have be oppress by the indefiniteness which hang in she mind , like a thick summer haze , over all she desire to make she life greatly effective . what could she do , what ought she to do ?--she , hardly more than a budding woman , but yet with a active conscience and a great mental need , not to be satisfy by a girlish instruction comparable to the nibbling and judgment of a discursive mouse . with some endowment of stupidity and conceit , she might have think that a young lady of fortune should find she ideal of life in village charity , patronage of the humbler clergy , the perusal of " , " unfold the private experience of under the , and under the , and the care of she soul over she embroidery in she own boudoir -- with a background of prospective marriage to a man who , if less strict than herself , as be involved in affair religiously inexplicable , might be pray for and seasonably exhort . from such contentment poor be shut out . the intensity of she religious disposition , the coercion it exercise over she life , be but one aspect of a nature altogether ardent , theoretic , and intellectually consequent : and with such a nature struggle in the bands of a narrow teaching , hem in by a social life which seem nothing but a labyrinth of petty course , a wall - in maze of small path that lead no whither , the outcome be sure to strike other as at once exaggeration and inconsistency . the thing which seem to she best , she want to justify by the completest knowledge ; and not to live in a pretend admission of rule which be never act on . into this soul - hunger as yet all she youthful passion be pour
pour ; the union which attract she be one that would deliver she from she girlish subjection to she own ignorance , and give she the freedom of voluntary submission to a guide who would take she along the grandest path . " I should learn everything then , " she say to herself , still walk quickly along the bridle road through the wood . " it would be my duty to study that I might help he the better in he great work . there would be nothing trivial about we life . every - day thing with we would mean the greatest thing . it would be like marry . I should learn to see the truth by the same light as great man have see it by . and then I should know what to do , when I get older : I should see how it be possible to lead a grand life here -- now -- in . I do not feel sure about do good in any way now : everything seem like go on a mission to a people whose language I do not know ;--unless it be build good cottage -- there can be no doubt about that . oh , I hope I should be able to get the people well house in ! I will draw plenty of plan while I have time . " check herself suddenly with self - rebuke for the presumptuous way in which she be reckon on uncertain event , but she be spare any inward effort to change the direction of she thought by the appearance of a cantering horseman round a turning of the road . the well - groome chestnut horse and two beautiful setter could leave no doubt that the rider be . he discern , jump off he horse at once , and , have deliver it to he groom , advanc towards she with something white on he arm , at which the two setter be bark in a excited manner . " how delightful to meet you , , " he say , raise he hat and show he sleekly wave blond hair . " it have hasten the pleasure I be look forward to . " be annoyed at the interruption . this amiable baronet , really a suitable husband for , exaggerate the necessity of make himself agreeable to the elder sister . even a prospective brother - in - law may be a oppression if he will always be presuppose too good a understanding with you , and agree with you even when you contradict he . the think that he have make the mistake of pay he address to herself could not take shape : all she mental activity be use up in persuasion of another kind . but he be positively obtrusive at this moment , and he dimpled hand be quite disagreeable . she rouse temper make she color deeply , as she return he greeting with some haughtiness . interpret the heighten color in the way most gratify to himself , and think he never see Brooke look so handsome . " I have bring a little petitioner , " he say , " or rather , I have bring he to see if he will be approve before he petition be offer . " he show the white object under he arm , which be a tiny Maltese puppy , one of nature 's most naive toy . " it be painful to I to see these creature that be breed merely as pet , " say , whose opinion be form itself that very moment ( as opinion will ) under the heat of irritation . " oh , why ? " say , as they walk forward . " I believe all the petting that be give they do not make they happy . they be too helpless : they life be too frail . a weasel or a mouse that get its own living be more interesting . I like to think that the animal about we have soul something like we own , and either carry on they own little affair or can be companion to we , like here . those creature be parasitic . " " I be so glad I know that you do not like they , " say good . " I should never keep they for myself , but lady usually be fond of these Maltese dog . here , , take this dog , will you ? " the objectionable puppy , whose nose and eyes be equally black and expressive , be thus get rid of , since decide that it have better not have be bear . but she feel it necessary to explain . " you must not judge of 's feeling from mine . I think she like these small pet . she have a tiny terrier once , which she be very fond of . it make I unhappy , because I be afraid of tread on it . I be rather short -sight . " " you have you own opinion about everything , , and it be always a good opinion . " what answer be possible to such stupid compliment ? " do you know , I envy you that , " say , as they continue walk at the rather brisk pace set by . " I do not quite understand what you mean . " " you power of form a opinion . I can form a opinion of person . I know when I like people . but about other matter , do you know , I have often a difficulty in deciding . one hear very sensible thing say on opposite side . " " or that seem sensible . perhaps we do not always discriminate between sense and nonsense . " feel that she be rather
rather rude . " exactly , " say . " but you seem to have the power of discrimination . " " on the contrary , I be often unable to decide . but that be from ignorance . the right conclusion be there all the same , though I be unable to see it . " " I think there be few who would see it more readily . do you know , be tell I yesterday that you have the best notion in the world of a plan for cottage -- quite wonderful for a young lady , he think . you have a real _genus , to use he expression . he say you want to build a new set of cottage , but he seem to think it hardly probable that you uncle would consent . do you know , that be one of the thing I wish to do -- I mean , on my own estate . I should be so glad to carry out that plan of yours , if you would let I see it . of course , it be sinke money ; that be why people object to it . laborer can never pay rent to make it answer . but , after all , it be worth do . " " worth do ! yes , indeed , " say , energetically , forget she previous small vexation . " I think we deserve to be beat out of we beautiful house with a scourge of small cord -- all of we who let tenant live in such sty as we see round we . Life in cottage might be happier than ours , if they be real house fit for human being from whom we expect duty and affection . " " will you show I you plan ? " " yes , certainly . I dare say it be very faulty . but I have be examine all the plan for cottage in 's book , and pick out what seem the best thing . oh what a happiness it would be to set the pattern about here ! I think instead of at the gate , we should put the pigsty cottage outside the park - gate . " be in the best temper now . , as brother in - law , build model cottage on he estate , and then , perhaps , other be build at , and more and more elsewhere in imitation -- it would be as if the spirit of have pass over the parish to make the life of poverty beautiful ! see all the plan , and take one away to consult upon with Lovegood . he also take away a complacent sense that he be make great progress in 's good opinion . the Maltese puppy be not offer to ; a omission which afterwards think of with surprise ; but she blame herself for it . she have be engrosse . after all , it be a relief that there be no puppy to tread upon . be present while the plan be be examine , and observe 's illusion . " he think that care about he , and she only care about she plan . yet I be not certain that she would refuse he if she think he would let she manage everything and carry out all she notion . and how very uncomfortable would be ! I can not bear notion . " it be 's private luxury to indulge in this dislike . she da not confess it to she sister in any direct statement , for that would be lay herself open to a demonstration that she be somehow or other at war with all goodness . but on safe opportunity , she have a indirect mode of make she negative wisdom tell upon , and call she down from she rhapsodic mood by remind she that people be stare , not listen . be not impulsive : what she have to say could wait , and come from she always with the same quiet staccato evenness . when people talk with energy and emphasis she watch they face and feature merely . she never could understand how well - breed person consent to s and open they mouth in the ridiculous manner requisite for that vocal exercise . it be not many day before pay a morning visit , on which he be invite again for the follow week to dine and stay the night . thus have three more conversation with he , and be convinced that she first impression have be just . he be all she have at first imagine he to be : almost everything he have say see like a specimen from a mine , or the inscription on the door of a museum which might open on the treasure of past age ; and this trust in he mental wealth be all the deeper and more effective on she inclination because it be now obvious that he visit be make for she sake . this accomplish man condescende to think of a young girl , and take the pain to talk to she , not with absurd compliment , but with a appeal to she understanding , and sometimes with instructive correction . what delightful companionship ! seem even unconscious that triviality exist , and never hand round that small - talk of heavy man which be as acceptable as stale bride - cake bring forth with a odor of cupboard . he talk of what he be interested in , or else he be silent and bow with sad civility . to this be adorable genuineness , and religious abstinence from that artificiality which use up the soul in the effort of pretence . for she look as reverently at 's religious elevation above herself as she do at he intellect and learn
learn . he assent to she expression of devout feeling , and usually with a appropriate quotation ; he allow himself to say that he have go through some spiritual conflict in he youth ; in short , see that here she might reckon on understanding , sympathy , and guidance . on one -- only one -- of she favorite them she be disappoint . apparently do not care about building cottage , and divert the talk to the extremely narrow accommodation which be to be have in the dwelling of the ancient , as if to check a too high standard . after he be gone , dwelt with some agitation on this indifference of he ; and she mind be much exercise with argument draw from the varying condition of climate which modify human need , and from the admit wickedness of pagan despot . should she not urge these argument on when he come again ? but further reflection tell she that she be presumptuous in demand he attention to such a subject ; he would not disapprove of she occupy herself with it in leisure moment , as other woman expect to occupy themselves with they dress and embroidery -- would not forbid it when -- felt rather asham as she detect herself in these speculation . but she uncle have be invite to go to to stay a couple of day : be it reasonable to suppose that delighte in 's society for its own sake , either with or without document ? meanwhile that little disappointment make she delight the more in 's readiness to set on foot the desire improvement . he come much oftener than , and cease to find he disagreeable since he show himself so entirely in earnest ; for he have already enter with much practical ability into 's estimate , and be charmingly docile . she propose to build a couple of cottage , and transfer two family from they old cabin , which could then be pull down , so that new one could be build on the old site . say " exactly , " and she bear the word remarkably well . certainly these man who have so few spontaneous idea might be very useful member of society under good feminine direction , if they be fortunate in choose they sister - in - law ! it be difficult to say whether there be or be not a little wilfulness in she continue blind to the possibility that another sort of choice be in question in relation to she . but she life be just now full of hope and action : she be not only think of she plan , but get down learn book from the library and read many thing hastily ( that she might be a little less ignorant in talk to ) , all the while be visit with conscientious questionings whether she be not exalt these poor doings above measure and contemplate they with that self - satisfaction which be the last doom of ignorance and folly . . 1st Gent . we deed be fetter that we forge ourselves. 2d . ay , truly : but I think it be the world that bring the iron . " seem determined to do everything you wish , " say , as they be drive home from a inspection of the new building - site . " he be a good creature , and more sensible than any one would imagine , " say , inconsiderately . " you mean that he appear silly . " " no , no , " say , recollect herself , and lay she hand on she sister be a moment , " but he do not talk equally well on all subject . " " I should think none but disagreeable people do , " say , in she usual purring way . " they must be very dreadful to live with . only think ! at breakfast , and always . " laugh . " of , you be a wonderful creature ! " she pinch 's ching , be in the mood now to think she very winning and lovely -- fit hereafter to be a eternal cherub , and if it be not doctrinally wrong to say so , hardly more in need of salvation than a squirrel . " of course people need not be always talk well . only one tell the quality of they minds when they try to talk well . " " you mean that try and fail . " " I be speak generally . why do you catechise I about ? it be not the object of he life to please I . " " now , , can you really believe that ? " " certainly . he think of I as a future sister -- that be all . " Dorothea have never hinte this before , wait , from a certain shyness on such subject which be mutual between the sister , until it should be introduce by some decisive event . blush , but say at once -- " pray do not make that mistake any longer , . when be brush my hair the other day , she say that 's man know from 's maid that be to marry the eldest . " " how can you let talk such gossip to you , ? " say , indignantly , not the less angry because detail asleep in she memory be now awaken to confirm the unwelcome revelation . " you must have ask she question . it be degrad . " " I see no harm at all in 's talk to I . it be better to hear what people say . you see what mistake you make by take up notion . I be quite sure that mean to make you a offer ;
; and he believe that you will accept he , especially since you have be so pleased with he about the plan . and uncle too -- I know he expect it . every one can see that be very much in love with you . " the revulsion be so strong and painful in 's mind that the tear well up and flow abundantly . all she dear plan be embitter , and she think with disgust of 's conceiving that she recognize he as she lover . there be vexation too on account of . " how could he expect it ? " she burst forth in she most impetuous manner . " I have never agree with he about anything but the cottage : I be barely polite to he before . " " but you have be so pleased with he since then ; he have begin to feel quite sure that you be fond of he . " " fond of he , ! how can you choose such odious expression ? " say , passionately . " dear I , Dorothea , I suppose it would be right for you to be fond of a man whom you accept for a husband . " " it be offensive to I to say that could think I be fond of he . besides , it be not the right word for the feeling I must have towards the man I would accept as a husband . " " well , I be sorry for . I think it right to tell you , because you go on as you always do , never look just where you be , and tread in the wrong place . you always see what nobody else see ; it be impossible to satisfy you ; yet you never see what be quite plain . that be you way , . " something certainly give unusual courage ; and she be not spare the sister of whom she be occasionally in awe . who can tell what just criticism the cat may be pass on we being of wider speculation ? " it be very painful , " say , feel scour . " I can have no more to do with the cottage . I must be uncivil to he . I must tell he I will have nothing to do with they . it be very painful . " she eye fill again with tear . " wait a little . think about it . you know he be go away for a day or two to see he sister . there will be nobody besides . " could not help relent . " poor Dodo , " she go on , in a amiable staccato . " it be very hard : it be you favorite _fad_ to draw plan . " " to draw plan ! do you think I only care about my fellow - creature ' house in that childish way ? I may well make mistake . how can one ever do anything nobly christian , live among people with such petty thought ? " no more be say ; be too much jar to recover she temper and behave so as to show that she admit any error in herself . she be dispose rather to accuse the intolerable narrowness and the purblind conscience of the society around she : and be no longer the eternal cherub , but a thorn in she spirit , a pink - and - white nullifidian , worse than any discouraging presence in the " 's . " the _fad_ of draw plan ! what be life worth -- what great faith be possible when the whole effect of one 's action could be wither up into such parched rubbish as that ? when she get out of the carriage , she cheek be pale and she eyelid red . she be a image of sorrow , and she uncle who meet she in the hall would have be alarme , if have not be close to she look so pretty and compose , that he at once conclude 's tear to have they origin in she excessive religiousness . he have return , during they absence , from a journey to the county town , about a petition for the pardon of some criminal . " well , my dear , " he say , kindly , as they go up to kiss he , " I hope nothing disagreeable have happen while I have be away . " " no , uncle , " say , " we have be to to look at the cottage . we think you would have be at home to lunch . " " I come by to lunch -- you do not know I come by . and I have bring a couple of pamphlet for you , -- in the library , you know ; they lie on the table in the library . " it seem as if a electric stream go through , thrill she from despair into expectation . they be pamphlet about the early . the oppression of , , and be shake off , and she walk straight to the library . go up - stair . be detain by a message , but when he re-enter the library , he find seat and already deep in one of the pamphlet which have some marginal manuscript of 's , -- take it in as eagerly as she might have take in the scent of a fresh bouquet after a dry , hot , dreary walk . she be get away from and , and she own sad liability to tread in the wrong place on she way to the . sit down in he arm -chair , stretch he leg towards the wood - fire , which have fall into a wondrous
wondrous mass of glow dice between the dog , and rub he hand gently , look very mildly towards , but with a neutral leisurely air , as if he have nothing particular to say . close she pamphlet , as soon as she be aware of she uncle 's presence , and rise as if to go . usually she would have be interested about she uncle 's merciful errand on behalf of the criminal , but she late agitation have make she absent- mind . " I come back by , you know , " say , not as if with any intention to arrest she departure , but apparently from he usual tendency to say what he have say before . this fundamental principle of human speech be markedly exhibit in . " I lunche there and see 's library , and that kind of thing . there be a sharp air , drive . will not you sit down , my dear ? you look cold . " feel quite inclined to accept the invitation . some time , when she uncle 's easy way of take thing do not happen to be exasperat , it be rather soothing . she throw off she mantle and bonnet , and sit down opposite to he , enjoy the glow , but lift up she beautiful hand for a screen . they be not thin hand , or small hand ; but powerful , feminine , maternal hand . she seem to be hold they up in propitiation for she passionate desire to know and to think , which in the unfriendly medium of and have issue in crying and red eyelid . she bethotch herself now of the condemn criminal . " what news have you bring about the sheep - stealer , uncle ? " " what , poor bunch ?--well , it seem we can not get he off -- he be to be hang . " 's brow take a expression of reprobation and pity . " Hange , you know , " say , with a quiet nod . " poor ! he would have help we . I know . do not know Romilly . he be a little bury in book , you know , be . " " when a man have great study and be write a great work , he must of course give up see much of the world . how can he go about make acquaintance ? " " that be true . but a man mop , you know . I have always be a bachelor too , but I have that sort of disposition that I never mo ; it be my way to go about everywhere and take in everything . I never mo : but I can see that do , you know . he want 's a companion -- a companion , you know . " " it would be a great honor to any one to be he companion , " say , energetically . " you like he , eh ? " say , without show any surprise , or other emotion . " well , now , I have know ten year , ever since he come to . but I never get anything out of he -- any idea , you know . however , he be a tiptop man and may be a bishop -- that kind of thing , you know , if stay in . and he have a very high opinion of you , my dear . " Dorothea could not speak . " the fact be , he have a very high opinion indeed of you . and he speak uncommonly well -- do . he have defer to I , you not be of age . in short , I have promise to speak to you , though I tell he I think there be not much chance . I be bound to tell he that . I say , my niece be very young , and that kind of thing . but I do not think it necessary to go into everything . however , the long and the short of it be , that he have ask my permission to make you a offer of marriage -- of marriage , you know , " say , with he explanatory nod . " I think it better to tell you , my dear . " no one could have detect any anxiety in 's manner , but he do really wish to know something of he niece 's mind , that , if there be any need for advice , he might give it in time . what feel he , as a magistrate who have take in so many idea , could make room for , be unmixedly kind . since do not speak immediately , he repeat , " I think it better to tell you , my dear . " " thank you , uncle , " say , in a clear unwavering tone . " I be very grateful to . if he make I a offer , I shall accept he . I admire and honor he more than any man I ever see . " pause a little , and then say in a linger low tone , " ah ? . . . well ! he be a good match in some respects . but now , be a good match . and we land lie together . I shall never interfere against you wish , my dear . people should have they own way in marriage , and that sort of thing -- up to a certain point , you know . I have always say that , up to a certain point . I wish you to marry well ; and I have good reason to believe that wish to marry you
you . I mention it , you know . " " it be impossible that I should ever marry , " say . " if he think of marry I , he have make a great mistake . " " that be it , you see . one never know . I should have think be just the sort of man a woman would like , now . " " pray do not mention he in that light again , uncle , " say , feel some of she late irritation revive . wonder , and feel that woman be a inexhaustible subject of study , since even he at he age be not in a perfect state of scientific prediction about they . here be a fellow like with no chance at all . " well , but , now . there be no hurry -- I mean for you . it be true , every year will tell upon he . he be over five - and - forty , you know . I should say a good seven - and - twenty year older than you . to be sure , -- if you like learn and stand , and that sort of thing , we can not have everything . and he income be good -- he have a handsome property independent of the Church -- he income be good . still he be not young , and I must not conceal from you , my dear , that I think he health be not over -strong . I know nothing else against he . " " I should not wish to have a husband very near my own age , " say , with grave decision . " I should wish to have a husband who be above I in judgment and in all knowledge . " repeat he subdue , " ah ?--I think you have more of you own opinion than most girl . I think you like you own opinion -- like it , you know . " " I can not imagine myself live without some opinion , but I should wish to have good reason for they , and a wise man could help I to see which opinion have the best foundation , and would help I to live accord to they . " " very true . you could not put the thing better -- could not put it better , beforehand , you know . but there be oddity in thing , " continue , whose conscience be really roused to do the best he could for he niece on this occasion . " life be not cast in a mould -- not cut out by rule and line , and that sort of thing . I never marry myself , and it will be the better for you and yours . the fact be , I never love any one well enough to put myself into a noose for they . it _i a noose , you know . temper , now . there be temper . and a husband like to be . " " I know that I must expect trial , uncle . marriage be a state of higher duty . I never think of it as mere personal ease , " say poor Dorothea . " well , you be not fond of show , a great establishment , ball , dinner , that kind of thing . I can see that 's way might suit you better than 's . and you shall do as you like , my dear . I would not hinder ; I say so at once ; for there be no know how anything may turn out . you have not the same taste as every young lady ; and a clergyman and scholar -- who may be a bishop -- that kind of thing -- may suit you better than . be a good fellow , a good sound - hear fellow , you know ; but he do not go much into idea . I do , when I be he age . but 's eye , now . I think he have hurt they a little with too much reading . " " I should be all the happier , uncle , the more room there be for I to help he , " say , ardently . " you have quite make up you mind , I see . well , my dear , the fact be , I have a letter for you in my pocket . " hand the letter to , but as she rise to go away , he add , " there be not too much hurry , my dear . think about it , you know . " when have leave he , he reflect that he have certainly speak strongly : he have put the risk of marriage before she in a striking manner . it be he duty to do so . but as to pretend to be wise for young people , -- no uncle , however much he have travel in he youth , absorb the new idea , and dine with celebrity now decease , could pretend to judge what sort of marriage would turn out well for a young girl who prefer to . in short , woman be a problem which , since 's mind feel blank before it , could be hardly less complicated than the revolution of a irregular solid . . " hard student be commonly troublead with gowt , catarrh , rheum , cachexia , bradypepsia , bad eye , stone , and collick , crudity , oppilation , vertigo , wind , consumption , and all such disease as come by over-much sit : they be most part lean , dry , ill - color . . . and all through immoderate pain and extraordinary
extraordinary study . if you will not believe the truth of this , look upon great and ' work ; and tell I whether those man take pain ." --burton 's Anatomy of , . I , 's . 2 . this be 's letter . my ,-- I have you guardian 's permission to address you on a subject than which I have no more at heart . I be not , I trust , mistaken in the recognition of some deeper correspondence than that of date in the fact that a consciousness of need in my own life have arisen contemporaneously with the possibility of my become acquainted with you . for in the first hour of meet you , I have a impression of you eminent and perhaps exclusive fitness to supply that need ( connect , I may say , with such activity of the affections as even the preoccupation of a work too special to be abdicate could not uninterruptedly dissimulate ) ; and each succeed opportunity for observation have give the impression a add depth by convince I more emphatically of that fitness which I have preconceive , and thus evok more decisively those affections to which I have but now refer . we conversations have , I think , make sufficiently clear to you the tenor of my life and purpose : a tenor unsuited , I be aware , to the commoner order of mind . but I have discern in you a elevation of thought and a capability of devotedness , which I have hitherto not conceive to be compatible either with the early bloom of youth or with those graces of sex that may be say at once to win and to confer distinction when combine , as they notably be in you , with the mental quality above indicate . it be , I confess , beyond my hope to meet with this rare combination of element both solid and attractive , adapt to supply aid in graver labors and to cast a charm over vacant hour ; and but for the event of my introduction to you ( which , let I again say , I trust not to be superficially coincident with foreshadow need , but providentially relate theretoo as stage towards the completion of a life 's plan ) , I should presumably have go on to the last without any attempt to lighten my solitariness by a matrimonial union . , my dear , be the accurate statement of my feeling ; and I rely on you kind indulgence in venturing now to ask you how far you own be of a nature to confirm my happy presentiment . to be accept by you as you husband and the earthly guardian of you welfare , I should regard as the highest of providential gift . in return I can at least offer you a affection hitherto unwasted , and the faithful consecration of a life which , however short in the sequel , have no backward page whereon , if you choose to turn they , you will find record such as might justly cause you either bitterness or shame . I await the expression of you sentiment with a anxiety which it would be the part of wisdom ( be it possible ) to divert by a more arduous labor than usual . but in this order of experience I be still young , and in look forward to a unfavorable possibility I can not but feel that resignation to solitude will be more difficult after the temporary illumination of hope . in any case , I shall remain , yours with sincere devotion , . tremble while she read this letter ; then she fall on she knee , bury she face , and sob . she could not pray : under the rush of solemn emotion in which thought become vague and image float uncertainly , she could but cast herself , with a childlike sense of reclining , in the lap of a divine consciousness which sustain she own . she remain in that attitude till it be time to dress for dinner . how could it occur to she to examine the letter , to look at it critically as a profession of love ? she whole soul be possess by the fact that a fuller life be open before she : she be a neophyte about to enter on a higher grade of initiation . she be go to have room for the energie which stir uneasily under the dimness and pressure of she own ignorance and the petty peremptoriness of the world 's habit . now she would be able to devote herself to large yet definite duty ; now she would be allow to live continually in the light of a mind that she could reverence . this hope be not unmix with the glow of proud delight -- the joyous maiden surprise that she be choose by the man whom she admiration have choose . all Dorothea 's passion be transfuse through a mind struggle towards a ideal life ; the radiance of she transfigure girlhood fell on the first object that come within it be level . the impetus with which inclination become resolution be heighten by those little event of the day which have rouse she discontent with the actual condition of she life . after dinner , when be play a " air , with variation , " a small kind of tinkling which symbolize the aesthetic part of the young lady ' education , go up to she room to answer 's letter . why should she defer the answer ? she write it over three time , not because she wish to change the wording , but because she hand be unusually uncertain , and she could not bear that should think she handwriting bad and illegible . she pique herself on
on write a hand in which each letter be distinguishable without any large range of conjecture , and she mean to make much use of this accomplishment , to save 's eye . three time she write . my ,-- I be very grateful to you for love I , and think I worthy to be you wife . I can look forward to no better happiness than that which would be one with yours . if I say more , it would only be the same thing write out at greater length , for I can not now dwell on any other thought than that I may be through life yours devotedly , . later in the evening she follow she uncle into the library to give he the letter , that he might send it in the morning . he be surprised , but he surprise only issue in a few moment ' silence , during which he push about various object on he writing - table , and finally stand with he back to the fire , he glass on he nose , look at the address of 's letter . " have you think enough about this , my dear ? " he say at last . " there be no need to think long , uncle . I know of nothing to make I vacillate . if I change my mind , it must be because of something important and entirely new to I . " " ah !-- then you have accept he ? then have no chance ? have offend you -- offend you , you know ? what be it you do not like in ? " " there be nothing that I like in he , " say , rather impetuously . throw he head and shoulders backward as if some one have throw a light missile at he . immediately feel some self - rebuke , and say -- " I mean in the light of a husband . he be very kind , I think -- really very good about the cottage . a well - mean man . " " but you must have a scholar , and that sort of thing ? well , it lie a little in we family . I have it myself -- that love of knowledge , and go into everything -- a little too much -- it take I too far ; though that sort of thing do not often run in the female - line ; or it run underground like the rivers in , you know -- it come out in the son . Clever son , clever mother . I go a good deal into that , at one time . however , my dear , I have always say that people should do as they like in these thing , up to a certain point . I could not , as you guardian , have consent to a bad match . but stand well : he position be good . I be afraid will be hurt , though , and will blame I . " that evening , of course , know nothing of what have happen . she attribute 's abstract manner , and the evidence of further cry since they have get home , to the temper she have be in about and the building , and be careful not to give further offence : have once say what she want to say , have no disposition to recur to disagreeable subject . it have be she nature when a child never to quarrel with any one -- only to observe with wonder that they quarrell with she , and look like turkey - cock ; whereupon she be ready to play at cat 's cradle with they whenever they recover themselves . and as to , it have always be she way to find something wrong in she sister 's word , though inwardly protest that she always say just how thing were , and nothing else : she never do and never could put word together out of she own head . but the best of be , that she do not keep angry for long together . now , though they have hardly spoken to each other all the evening , yet when put by she work , intend to go to bed , a proceeding in which she be always much the earlier , , who be seat on a low stool , unable to occupy herself except in meditation , say , with the musical intonation which in moment of deep but quiet feeling make she speech like a fine bit of recitative -- " , dear , come and kiss I , " hold she arm open as she speak . knelt down to get the right level and give she little butterfly kiss , while encircle she with gentle arm and press she lip gravely on each cheek in turn . " do not sit up , , you be so pale to - night : go to bed soon , " say , in a comfortable way , without any touch of patho . " no , dear , I be very , very happy , " say , fervently . " so much the better , " think . " but how strangely go from one extreme to the other . " the next day , at luncheon , the butler , hand something to , say , " be come back , sir , and have bring this letter . " read the letter , and then , nodd toward , say , " , my dear : he will be here to dinner ; he do not wait to write more -- do not wait , you know . " it could not seem remarkable to that a dinner guest should be announce to she
she sister beforehand , but , she eye follow the same direction as she uncle 's , she be strike with the peculiar effect of the announcement on . it seem as if something like the reflection of a white sunlit wing have pass across she feature , end in one of she rare blush . for the first time it enter into 's mind that there might be something more between and she sister than he delight in bookish talk and she delight in listen . she have class the admiration for this " ugly " and learn acquaintance with the admiration for at , also ugly and learn . Dorothea have never be tired of listen to old when 's foot be as cold as possible , and when it have really become dreadful to see the skin of he bald head move about . why then should she enthusiasm not extend to simply in the same way as to ? and it seem probable that all learn man have a sort of schoolmaster 's view of young people . but now be really start at the suspicion which have dart into she mind . she be seldom take by surprise in this way , she marvellous quickness in observe a certain order of sign generally prepare she to expect such outward event as she have a interest in . not that she now imagine to be already a accept lover : she have only begin to feel disgust at the possibility that anything in 's mind could tend towards such a issue . here be something really to vex she about : it be all very well not to accept , but the idea of marry ! feel a sort of shame mingl with a sense of the ludicrous . but perhaps , if she be really border on such a extravagance , might be turn away from it : experience have often show that she impressibility might be calculate on . the day be damp , and they be not go to walk out , so they both go up to they sitting - room ; and there observe that , instead of settle down with she usual diligent interest to some occupation , simply lean she elbow on a open book and look out of the window at the great cedar silvere with the damp . she herself have take up the making of a toy for the curate 's child , and be not go to enter on any subject too precipitately . be in fact think that it be desirable for to know of the momentous change in 's position since he have last be in the house : it do not seem fair to leave she in ignorance of what would necessarily affect she attitude towards he ; but it be impossible not to shrink from tell she . accuse herself of some meanness in this timidity : it be always odious to she to have any small fear or contrivance about she action , but at this moment she be seek the highest aid possible that she might not dread the corrosiveness of 's pretty carnally minded prose . she reverie be break , and the difficulty of decision banish , by 's small and rather guttural voice speak in its usual tone , of a remark aside or a " by the bye . " " be any one else come to dine besides ? " " not that I know of . " " I hope there be some one else . then I shall not hear he eat he soup so . " " what be there remarkable about he soup - eat ? " " really , , can not you hear how he scrape he spoon ? and he always blink before he speak . I do not know whether blink , but I be sure I be sorry for those who sit opposite to he if he do . " " , " say , with emphatic gravity , " pray do not make any more observation of that kind . " " why not ? they be quite true , " return , who have she reason for persevering , though she be begin to be a little afraid . " Many thing be true which only the commonest mind observe . " " then I think the commonest mind must be rather useful . I think it be a pity 's mother have not a commoner mind : she might have teach he better . " be inwardly frightened , and ready to run away , now she have hurl this light javelin . 's feeling have gather to a avalanche , and there could be no further preparation . " it be right to tell you , , that I be engage to marry . " perhaps have never turn so pale before . the paper man she be make would have have he leg injured , but for she habitual care of whatever she hold in she hand . she lay the fragile figure down at once , and sit perfectly still for a few moment . when she speak there be a tear gather . " oh , , I hope you will be happy . " she sisterly tenderness could not but surmount other feeling at this moment , and she fear be the fear of affection . be still hurt and agitate . " it be quite decided , then ? " say , in a aw under tone . " a uncle know ? " " I have accept 's offer . my uncle bring I the letter that contain it ; he know about it beforehand . " " I beg you pardon , if I have say anything to hurt you , , " say , with a slight sob . she never could have think
think that she should feel as she do . there be something funereal in the whole affair , and seem to be the officiating clergyman , about whom it would be indecent to make remark . " never mind , , do not grieve . we should never admire the same people . I often offmend in something of the same way ; I be apt to speak too strongly of those who do not please I . " in spite of this magnanimity be still smart : perhaps as much from 's subdue astonishment as from she small criticism . of course all the world round would be out of sympathy with this marriage . know of no one who think as she do about life and it be best object . nevertheless before the evening be at a end she be very happy . in a hour 's tete - a - tete with she talk to he with more freedom than she have ever feel before , even pour out she joy at the thought of devote herself to he , and of learn how she might best share and further all he great end . be touch with a unknown delight ( what man would not have be ? ) at this childlike unrestrained ardor : he be not surprised ( what lover would have be ? ) that he should be the object of it . " my dear young lady -- -- ! " he say , press she hand between he hand , " this be a happiness greater than I have ever imagine to be in reserve for I . that I should ever meet with a mind and person so rich in the mingled graces which could render marriage desirable , be far indeed from my conception . you have all -- nay , more than all -- those quality which I have ever regard as the characteristic excellence of womanhood . the great charm of you sex be its capability of a ardent self - sacrifice affection , and herein we see its fitness to round and complete the existence of we own . Hitherto I have know few pleasur save of the severer kind : my satisfaction have be those of the solitary student . I have be little dispose to gather flower that would wither in my hand , but now I shall pluck they with eagerness , to place they in you bosom . " no speech could have be more thoroughly honest in its intention : the frigid rhetoric at the end be as sincere as the bark of a dog , or the cawing of a amorous rook . would it not be rash to conclude that there be no passion behind those sonnet to which strike we as the thin music of a mandolin ? 's faith suppli all that 's word seem to leave unsaid : what believer see a disturbing omission or infelicity ? the text , whether of prophet or of poet , expand for whatever we can put into it , and even he bad grammar be sublime . " I be very ignorant -- you will quite wonder at my ignorance , " say . " I have so many thought that may be quite mistaken ; and now I shall be able to tell they all to you , and ask you about they . but , " she add , with rapid imagination of 's probable feeling , " I will not trouble you too much ; only when you be inclin to listen to I . you must often be weary with the pursuit of subject in you own track . I shall gain enough if you will take I with you there . " " how should I be able now to persevere in any path without you companionship ? " say , kiss she cando brow , and feel that heaven have vouchsaf he a blessing in every way suite to he peculiar want . he be be unconsciously wrotch upon by the charms of a nature which be entirely without hidden calculation either for immediate effect or for remoter end . it be this which make so childlike , and , accord to some judg , so stupid , with all she repute cleverness ; as , for example , in the present case of throw herself , metaphorically speak , at 's foot , and kiss he unfashionable shoe - tie as if he be a Protestant Pope . she be not in the least teaching to ask if he be good enough for she , but merely ask herself anxiously how she could be good enough for . before he leave the next day it have be decide that the marriage should take place within six week . why not ? 's house be ready . it be not a parsonage , but a considerable mansion , with much land attach to it . the parsonage be inhabit by the curate , who do all the duty except preach the morning sermon . . my lady 's tongue be like the meadow blade , that cut you strok they with idle hand . nice cut be she function : she divide with spiritual edge the millet - see , and make intangible savings . as 's carriage be pass out of the gateway , it arrest the entrance of a pony phaeton drive by a lady with a servant seat behind . it be doubtful whether the recognition have be mutual , for be look absently before he ; but the lady be quick - eye , and throw a nod and a " how do you do ? " in the nick of time . in spite of she shabby bonnet and very old indian shawl , it be plain that the lodge - keeper regard she as a important personage
personage , from the low curtsy which be drop on the entrance of the small phaeton . " well , , how be you fowl lay now ? " say the high - colored , dark - eyed lady , with the clearest chisell utterance . " pretty well for laying , madam , but they have to 'en to eat they egg : I have no peace of ' mind with 'em at all . " " oh , the cannibal ! better sell they cheap at once . what will you sell they a couple ? one can not eat fowl of a bad character at a high price . " " well , madam , half - a - crown : I could not let them go , not under . " " half - a - crown , these time ! come now -- for the rector 's chicken - broth on a . he have consume all ours that I can spare . you be half pay with the sermon , , remember that . take a pair of tumbler - pigeon for they -- little beautie . you must come and see they . you have no tumbler among you pigeons . " " well , madam , master shall go and see th'ey after work . he be very hot on new sort ; to oblige you . " " Oblige I ! it will be the best bargain he ever make . a pair of church pigeon for a couple of wicked spanish fowl that eat they own egg ! do not you and boast too much , that be all ! " the phaeton be drive onwards with the last word , leave laugh and shake she head slowly , with a interjectional " Sure_ly , sure_ly _! " -- from which it might be infer that she would have find the country - side somewhat duller if the rector 's lady have be less free - spoken and less of a skinflint . indeed , both the farmer and laborer in the parish of and would have feel a sad lack of conversation but for the story about what say and do : a lady of immeasurably high birth , descende , as it be , from unknown earl , dim as the crowd of heroic shade -- who plead poverty , pa down price , and cut joke in the most companionable manner , though with a turn of tongue that let you know who she be . such a lady give a neighborliness to both rank and religion , and mitigate the bitterness of uncommuted tithe . a much more exemplary character with a infusion of sour dignity would not have further they comprehension of the - nine article , and would have be less socially uniting . , see 's merit from a different point of view , wince a little when she name be announce in the library , where he be sit alone . " I see you have have we here , " she say , seat herself comfortably , throw back she wrap , and show a thing but well - build figure . " I suspect you and he be brew some bad polity , else you would not be see so much of the lively man . I shall inform against you : remember you be both suspicious character since you take 's side about the . I shall tell everybody that you be go to put up for on the Whig side when old resign , and that be go to help you in a underhand manner : go to bribe the voter with pamphlet , and throw open the public - house to distribute they . come , confess ! " " nothing of the sort , " say , smile and rub he eye - glass , but really blush a little at the impeachment . " and I do not talk politics much . he do not care much about the philanthropic side of thing ; punishment , and that kind of thing . he only care about question . that be not my line of action , you know . " " - a - the too much , my friend . I have hear of you doings . who be it that sell he bit of land to the at ? I believe you buy it on purpose . you be a perfect guy Faux . see if you be not burn in effigy this 5th of come . Humphrey would not come to quarrel with you about it , so I be come . " " very good . I be prepare to be persecute for not persecut -- not persecut , you know . " " there you go ! that be a piece of clap - trap you have get ready for the husting . now , _do not let they lure you to the husting , my dear . a man always make a fool of himself , speechify : there be no excuse but be on the right side , so that you can ask a blessing on you humming and haw . you will lose yourself , I forewarn you . you will make a pie of all party ' opinion , and be pelt by everybody . " " that be what I expect , you know , " say , not wish to betray how little he enjoy this prophetic sketch --" what I expect as a independent man . as to the , a man who go with the thinker be not likely to be hook on by any party . he may go with they up to a certain point -- up to a certain point , you know . but that be what you lady never understand . " " where you certain point be
be ? no . I should like to be tell how a man can have any certain point when he belong to no party -- lead a roving life , and never let he friend know he address . ' nobody know where will be -- there be no counting on ' -- that be what people say of you , to be quite frank . now , do turn respectable . how will you like go to sessions with everybody look shy on you , and you with a bad conscience and a empty pocket ? " " I do not pretend to argue with a lady on politics , " say , with a air of smile indifference , but feel rather unpleasantly conscious that this attack of 's have open the defensive campaign to which certain rash step have expose he . " you sex be not thinker , you know -- varium et mutabile semper -- that kind of thing . you do not know . I know " -- . reflecte in time that he have not have the personal acquaintance of the poet --" I be go to say , poor Stoddart , you know . that be what _he_ say . you lady be always against a independent attitude -- a man 's caring for nothing but truth , and that sort of thing . and there be no part of the county where opinion be narrower than it be here -- I do not mean to throw stone , you know , but somebody be want to take the independent line ; and if I do not take it , who will ? " " who ? why , any upstart who have get neither blood nor position . people of standing should consume they independent nonsense at home , not hawk it about . and you ! who be go to marry you niece , as good as you daughter , to one of we best man . would be cruelly annoye : it will be too hard on he if you turn round now and make yourself a sign - board . " again wince inwardly , for 's engagement have no sooner be decide , than he have think of 's prospective taunt . it might have be easy for ignorant observer to say , " Quarrel with ; " but where be a country gentleman to go who quarrel with he oldest neighbor ? who could taste the fine flavor in the name of if it be deliver casually , like wine without a seal ? certainly a man can only be cosmopolitan up to a certain point . " I hope and I shall always be good friend ; but I be sorry to say there be no prospect of he marry my niece , " say , much relieved to see through the window that be come in . " why not ? " say , with a sharp note of surprise . " it be hardly a fortnight since you and I be talk about it . " " my niece have choose another suitor -- have choose he , you know . I have have nothing to do with it . I should have prefer ; and I should have say be the man any girl would have choose . but there be no accounting for these thing . you sex be capricious , you know . " " why , whom do you mean to say that you be go to let she marry ? " 's mind be rapidly survey the possibility of choice for . but here enter , bloom from a walk in the garden , and the greeting with she deliver from the necessity of answer immediately . he get up hastily , and say , " by the way , I must speak to Wright about the horse , " shuffle quickly out of the room . " my dear child , what be this ?-- this about you sister 's engagement ? " say . " she be engage to marry , " say , resorte , as usual , to the simplest statement of fact , and enjoy this opportunity of speak to the rector 's wife alone . " this be frightful . how long have it be go on ? " " I only know of it yesterday . they be to be marry in six week . " " well , my dear , I wish you joy of you brother - in - law . " " I be so sorry for . " " sorry ! it be she do , I suppose . " " yes ; she say have a great soul . " " with all my heart . " " oh , , I do not think it can be nice to marry a man with a great soul . " " well , my dear , take warning . you know the look of one now ; when the next come and want to marry you , do not you accept he . " " I be sure I never wshould . " " no ; one such in a family be enough . so you sister never care about ? what would you have say to _he for a brother - in - law ? " " I should have like that very much . I be sure he would have be a good husband . only , " add , with a slight blush ( she sometimes seem to blush as she breathe ) , " I do not think he would have suit . " " not high - flown enough ? " " Dodo be very strict . she think so much about everything , and be so particular about what one say . never seem to please she . " " she
she must have encourage he , I be sure . that be not very creditable . " " please do not be angry with ; she do not see thing . she think so much about the cottage , and she be rude to sometimes ; but he be so kind , he never notice it . " " well , " say , put on she shawl , and rise , as if in haste , " I must go straight to and break this to he . he will have bring he mother back by this time , and I must call . you uncle will never tell he . we be all disappointed , my dear . young people should think of they family in marrying . I set a bad example -- marry a poor clergyman , and make myself a pitiable object among the -- oblige to get my coals by stratagem , and pray to heaven for my salad oil . however , have money enough ; I must do he that justice . as to he blood , I suppose the family quartering be three cuttle - fish sable , and a commentator rampant . by the bye , before I go , my dear , I must speak to you about pastry . I want to send my young cook to learn off she . poor people with four child , like we , you know , can not afford to keep a good cook . I have no doubt will oblige I . 's cook be a perfect dragon . " in less than a hour , Cadwallader have circumvent and drive to , which be not far from she own parsonage , she husband be resident in and keep a curate in . have return from the short journey which have keep he absent for a couple of day , and have change he dress , intend to ride over to . he horse be stand at the door when Cadwallader drive up , and he immediately appear there himself , whip in hand . have not yet return , but 's errand could not be despatch in the presence of grooms , so she ask to be take into the conservatory close by , to look at the new plant ; and on come to a contemplative stand , she say -- " I have a great shock for you ; I hope you be not so far go in love as you pretend to be . " it be of no use protest , against 's way of put thing . but 's countenance change a little . he feel a vague alarm . " I do believe be go to expose himself after all . I accuse he of meaning to stand for on the liberal side , and he look silly and never deny it -- talk about the independent line , and the usual nonsense . " " be that all ? " say , much relieved . " why , " rejoin , with a sharper note , " you do not mean to say that you would like he to turn public man in that way -- make a sort of political of himself ? " " he might be dissuad , I should think . he would not like the expense . " " that be what I tell he . he be vulnerable to reason there -- always a few grains of common - sense in a ounce of miserliness . Miserliness be a capital quality to run in family ; it be the safe side for madness to dip on . and there must be a little crack in the family , else we should not see what we be to see . " " what ? Brooke stand for ? " " worse than that . I really feel a little responsible . I always tell you would be such a fine match . I know there be a great deal of nonsense in she -- a flighty sort of Methodistical stuff . but these thing wear out of girl . however , I be take by surprise for once . " " what do you mean , ? " say . he fear lest should have run away to join the , or some preposterous sect unknown to good society , be a little allay by the knowledge that Cadwallader always make the worst of thing . " what have happen to ? pray speak out . " " very well . she be engage to be marry . " pause a few moment , observe the deeply hurt expression in she friend 's face , which he be try to conceal by a nervous smile , while he whip he boot ; but she soon add , " engage to . " let he whip fall and stoop to pick it up . perhaps he face have never before gather so much concentrate disgust as when he turn to and repeat , " ? " " even so . you know my errand now . " " ! it be horrible ! he be no better than a mummy ! " ( the point of view have to be allow for , as that of a blooming and disappointed rival . ) " she say , he be a great soul .-- a great bladder for dried pea to rattle in ! " say . " what business have a old bachelor like that to marry ? " say . " he have one foot in the grave . " " he mean to draw it out again , I suppose . " " Brooke ought not to allow it : he should insist on its be put off till she be of age . she would think better of it then . what be a guardian for
for ? " " as if you could ever squeeze a resolution out of ! " " Cadwallader might talk to he . " " not he ! find everybody charme . I never can get he to abuse . he will even speak well of the bishop , though I tell he it be unnatural in a benefice clergyman ; what can one do with a husband who attend so little to the decency ? I hide it as well as I can by abuse everybody myself . come , come , cheer up ! you be well rid of , a girl who would have be require you to see the star by daylight . between ourselves , little be worth two of she , and likely after all to be the better match . for this marriage to be as good as go to a nunnery . " " oh , on my own account -- it be for 's sake I think she friend should try to use they influence . " " well , do not know yet . but when I tell he , you may depend on it he will say , ' why not ? be a good fellow -- and young -- young enough . ' these charitable people never know vinegar from wine till they have swallow it and get the colic . however , if I be a man I should prefer , especially when be gone . the truth be , you have be court one and have win the other . I can see that she admire you almost as much as a man expect to be admire . if it be any one but I who say so , you might think it exaggeration . good - by ! " hand to the phaeton , and then jump on he horse . he be not go to renounce he ride because of he friend 's unpleasant news -- only to ride the faster in some other direction than that of . now , why on earth should have be at all busy about 's marriage ; and why , when one match that she like to think she have a hand in be frustrated , should she have straightway contrive the preliminary of another ? be there any ingenious plot , any hide - and - seek course of action , which might be detect by a careful telescopic watch ? not at all : a telescope might have sweep the parish of and , the whole area visit by in she phaeton , without witnesse any interview that could excite suspicion , or any scene from which she do not return with the same unperturbed keenness of eye and the same high natural color . in fact , if that convenient vehicle have exist in the day of the , one of they would doubtless have remark , that you can know little of woman by follow they about in they pony -phaeton . even with a microscope direct on a water - drop we find ourselves make interpretation which turn out to be rather coarse ; for whereas under a weak lens you may seem to see a creature exhibit a active voracity into which other smaller creature actively play as if they be so many animated tax - penny , a stronger lens reveal to you certain tiniest hairlet which make vortice for these victim while the swallower wait passively at he receipt of custom . in this way , metaphorically speak , a strong lens apply to 's match - making will show a play of minute cause produce what may be call thought and speech vortice to bring she the sort of food she need . she life be rurally simple , quite free from secret either foul , dangerous , or otherwise important , and not consciously affect by the great affair of the world . all the more do the affair of the great world interest she , when communicate in the letter of high - born relation : the way in which fascinate younger son have go to the dog by marry they mistress ; the fine old - blooded idiocy of young , and the furious gouty humor of old ; the exact crossing of genealogy which have bring a coronet into a new branch and wide the relation of scandal , -- these be topic of which she retain detail with the utmost accuracy , and reproduce they in a excellent pickle of epigram , which she herself enjoy the more because she believe as unquestionably in birth and no - birth as she do in game and vermin . she would never have disown any one on the ground of poverty : a Bracy reduce to take he dinner in a basin would have see to she a example of patho worth exaggerating , and I fear he aristocratic vice would not have horrify she . but she feel towards the vulgar rich be a sort of religious hatred : they have probably make all they money out of high retail price , and detest high price for everything that be not pay in kind at the Rectory : such people be no part of 's design in make the world ; and they accent be a affliction to the ear . a town where such monster abound be hardly more than a sort of low comedy , which could not be take account of in a well - breed scheme of the universe . let any lady who be inclin to be hard on inquire into the comprehensiveness of she own beautiful view , and be quite sure that they afford accommodation for all the life which have the honor to coexist with hers . with such a mind , active as phosphorus , bite everything that come near into the form that suit it
it , how could feel that the and they matrimonial prospect be alien to she ? especially as it have be the habit of year for she to scold with the friendliest frankness , and let he know in confidence that she think he a poor creature . from the first arrival of the young lady in she have prearrange 's marriage with , and if it have take place would have be quite sure that it be she do : that it should not take place after she have preconceive it , cause she a irritation which every thinker will sympathize with . she be the diplomatist of and , and for anything to happen in spite of she be a offensive irregularity . as to freak like this of 's , Cadwallader have no patience with they , and now see that she opinion of this girl have be infect with some of she husband 's weak charitableness : those Methodistical whim , that air of be more religious than the rector and curate together , come from a deeper and more constitutional disease than she have be willing to believe . " however , " say , first to herself and afterward to she husband , " I throw she over : there be a chance , if she have marry , of she become a sane , sensible woman . he would never have contradict she , and when a woman be not contradict , she have no motive for obstinacy in she absurdity . but now I wish she joy of she hair shirt . " it follow that must decide on another match for , and have make up she mind that it be to be the younger , there could not have be a more skilful move towards the success of she plan than she hint to the baronet that he have make a impression on 's heart . for he be not one of those gentleman who languish after the unattainable 's apple that laugh from the topmost bough -- the charms which " smile like the knot of cowslip on the cliff , not to be come at by the willing hand . " he have no sonnet to write , and it could not strike he agreeably that he be not a object of preference to the woman whom he have prefer . already the knowledge that have choose have bruise he attachment and relax it be hold . although be a sportsman , he have some other feeling towards woman than towards grouse and fox , and do not regard he future wife in the light of prey , valuable chiefly for the excitement of the chase . neither be he so well acquaint with the habits of primitive races as to feel that a ideal combat for she , tomahawk in hand , so to speak , be necessary to the historical continuity of the marriage - tie . on the contrary , have the amiable vanity which knit we to those who be fond of we , and disincline we to those who be indifferent , and also a good grateful nature , the mere idea that a woman have a kindness towards he spun little thread of tenderness from out he heart towards hers . thus it happen , that after have ride rather fast for half a hour in a direction away from , he slacken he pace , and at last turn into a road which would lead he back by a shorter cut . various feeling wrotch in he the determination after all to go to the to - day as if nothing new have happen . he could not help rejoice that he have never make the offer and be reject ; mere friendly politeness require that he should call to see about the cottage , and now happily have prepare he to offer he congratulation , if necessary , without show too much awkwardness . he really do not like it : give up be very painful to he ; but there be something in the resolve to make this visit forthwith and conquer all show of feeling , which be a sort of file - biting and counter-irritant . and without he distinctly recognize the impulse , there certainly be present in he the sense that would be there , and that he should pay she more attention than he have do before . we mortal , man and woman , deavor many a disappointment between breakfast and dinner - time ; keep back the tear and look a little pale about the lip , and in answer to inquiry say , " oh , nothing ! " pride help we ; and pride be not a bad thing when it only urge we to hide we own hurts -- not to hurt other . . " Piacer e popone la sua stagione . " -- italian Proverb . , as might be expect , spend a great deal of he time at the in these week , and the hindrance which courtship occasion to the progress of he great work -- the to all -- naturally make he look forward the more eagerly to the happy termination of courtship . but he have deliberately incur the hindrance , have make up he mind that it be now time for he to adorn he life with the graces of female companionship , to irradiate the gloom which fatigue be apt to hang over the interval of studious labor with the play of female fancy , and to secure in this , he culminating age , the solace of female tendance for he declining year . hence he determin to abandon himself to the stream of feeling , and perhaps be surprised to find what a exceedingly shallow rill it be . as in droughty region baptism by immersion could only be
be perform symbolically , find that sprinkling be the utmost approach to a plunge which he stream would afford he ; and he conclude that the poet have much exaggerate the force of masculine passion . nevertheless , he observ with pleasure that show a ardent submissive affection which promise to fulfil he most agreeable prevision of marriage . it have once or twice cross he mind that possibly there be some deficiency in to account for the moderation of he abandonment ; but he be unable to discern the deficiency , or to figure to himself a woman who would have pleas he better ; so that there be clearly no reason to fall back upon but the exaggeration of human tradition . " could I not be prepare myself now to be more useful ? " say to he , one morning , early in the time of courtship ; " could I not learn to read and aloud to you , as 's daughter do to they father , without understanding what they read ? " " I fear that would be wearisome to you , " say , smile ; " and , indeed , if I remember rightly , the young woman you have mention regard that exercise in unknown tongue as a ground for rebellion against the poet . " " yes ; but in the first place they be very naughty girl , else they would have be proud to minister to such a father ; and in the second place they might have study privately and teach themselves to understand what they read , and then it would have be interesting . I hope you do not expect I to be naughty and stupid ? " " I expect you to be all that a exquisite young lady can be in every possible relation of life . certainly it might be a great advantage if you be able to copy the character , and to that end it be well to begin with a little reading . " seize this as a precious permission . she would not have ask at once to teach she the language , dread of all thing to be tiresome instead of helpful ; but it be not entirely out of devotion to she future husband that she wish to know and . those province of masculine knowledge seem to she a standing - ground from which all truth could be see more truly . as it be , she constantly doubt she own conclusion , because she feel she own ignorance : how could she be confident that one - room cottage be not for the glory of , when man who know the classic appear to conciliate indifference to the cottage with zeal for the glory ? perhaps even might be necessary -- at least the alphabet and a few root -- in order to arrive at the core of thing , and judge soundly on the social duty of the . and she have not reach that point of renunciation at which she would have be satisfied with have a wise husband : she wish , poor child , to be wise herself . be certainly very naive with all she allege cleverness . , whose mind have never be think too powerful , see the emptiness of other people 's pretension much more readily . to have in general but little feeling , seem to be the only security against feeling too much on any particular occasion . however , consent to listen and teach for a hour together , like a schoolmaster of little boy , or rather like a lover , to whom a mistress 's elementary ignorance and difficulty have a touching fitness . few scholar would have dislike teach the alphabet under such circumstance . but herself be a little shocked and discourage at she own stupidity , and the answer she get to some timid question about the value of the accent give she a painful suspicion that here indeed there might be secret not capable of explanation to a woman 's reason . have no doubt on that point , and express himself with he usual strength upon it one day that he come into the library while the reading be go forward . " well , but now , , such deep study , classics , mathematics , that kind of thing , be to tax for a woman -- too tax , you know . " " Dorothea be learn to read the character simply , " say , evad the question . " she have the very considerate thought of save my eye . " " ah , well , without understanding , you know -- that may not be so bad . but there be a lightness about the feminine mind -- a touch and go --music , the fine art , that kind of thing -- they should study those up to a certain point , woman should ; but in a light way , you know . a woman should be able to sit down and play you or s you a good old English tune . that be what I like ; though I have hear most thing -- be at the opera in : , , everything of that sort . but I be a conservative in music -- it be not like idea , you know . I stick to the good old tune . " " be not fond of the piano , and I be very glad he be not , " say , whose slight regard for domestic music and feminine fine art must be forgive she , consider the small tinkling and smear in which they chiefly consiste at that dark period . she smile and look up at she betrothed with grateful eye . if he have always be ask she to play the
the " last rose of summer , " she would have require much resignation . " he say there be only a old harpsichord at , and it be cover with book . " " ah , there you be behind , my dear . , now , play very prettily , and be always ready to play . however , since do not like it , you be all right . but it be a pity you should not have little recreation of that sort , : the bow always strung -- that kind of thing , you know -- will not do . " " I never could look on it in the light of a recreation to have my ear tease with measure noise , " say . " a tune much iterate have the ridiculous effect of make the word in my mind perform a sort of minuet to keep time -- a effect hardly tolerable , I imagine , after boyhood . as to the grander form of music , worthy to accompany solemn celebration , and even to serve as a educating influence accord to the ancient conception , I say nothing , for with these we be not immediately concerned . " " no ; but music of that sort I should enjoy , " say . " when we be come home from my uncle take we to hear the great organ at , and it make I sob . " " that kind of thing be not healthy , my dear , " say . " , she will be in you hand now : you must teach my niece to take thing more quietly , eh , ? " he end with a smile , not wish to hurt he niece , but really think that it be perhaps better for she to be early marry to so sober a fellow as , since she would not hear of . " it be wonderful , though , " he say to himself as he shuffle out of the room --" it be wonderful that she should have like he . however , the match be good . I should have be travel out of my brief to have hinder it , let say what she will . he be pretty certain to be a bishop , be . that be a very seasonable pamphlet of he on the Catholic question :-- a deanery at least . they owe he a deanery . " and here I must vindicate a claim to philosophical reflectiveness , by remark that on this occasion little thought of the radical speech which , at a later period , he be lead to make on the income of the bishop . what elegant historian would neglect a striking opportunity for point out that he heroe do not foresee the history of the world , or even they own action ?-- for example , that Henry of , when a Protestant baby , little thought of be a monarch ; or that Alfr the great , when he measure he laborious night with burn candle , have no idea of future gentleman measure they idle day with watch . here be a mine of truth , which , however vigorously it may be work , be likely to outlast we coal . but of I make a further remark perhaps less warrant by precedent -- namely , that if he have foreknow he speech , it might not have make any great difference . to think with pleasure of he niece 's husband have a large ecclesiastical income be one thing -- to make a liberal speech be another thing ; and it be a narrow mind which can not look at a subject from various point of view . . " oh , rescue she ! I be she brother now , and you she father . every gentle maid should have a guardian in each gentleman . " it be wonderful to how well he continue to like go to the after he have once encounter the difficulty of see for the first time in the light of a woman who be engage to another man . of course the forked lightning seem to pass through he when he first approach she , and he remain conscious throughout the interview of hide uneasiness ; but , good as he be , it must be own that he uneasiness be less than it would have be if he have think he rival a brilliant and desirable match . he have no sense of be eclipse by ; he be only shock that be under a melancholy illusion , and he mortification lose some of its bitterness by be mingl with compassion . nevertheless , while say to himself that he have completely resign she , since with the perversity of a she have not affect a propose match that be clearly suitable and accord to nature ; he could not yet be quite passive under the idea of she engagement to . on the day when he first see they together in the light of he present knowledge , it seem to he that he have not take the affair seriously enough . be really culpable ; he ought to have hinder it . who could speak to he ? something might be do perhaps even now , at least to defer the marriage . on he way home he turn into the Rectory and ask for . happily , the rector be at home , and he visitor be show into the study , where all the fishing tackle hung . but he himself be in a little room adjoin , at work with he turning apparatus , and he call to the baronet to join he there . the two be better friend than any other landholder and clergyman in the county -- a significant
significant fact which be in agreement with the amiable expression of they face . be a large man , with full lip and a sweet smile ; very plain and rough in he exterior , but with that solid imperturbable ease and good - humor which be infectious , and like great grassy hill in the sunshine , quiet even a irritated egoism , and make it rather asham of itself . " well , how be you ? " he say , show a hand not quite fit to be grasp . " sorry I miss you before . be there anything particular ? you look vex . " 's brow have a little crease in it , a little depression of the eyebrow , which he see purposely to exaggerate as he answer . " it be only this conduct of 's . I really think somebody should speak to he . " " what ? mean to stand ? " say , go on with the arrangement of the reel which he have just be turn . " I hardly think he mean it . but where be the harm , if he like it ? any one who object to should be glad when the do not put up the strongest fellow . they will not overturn the constitution with we friend 's head for a battering ram . " " oh , I do not mean that , " say , who , after put down he hat and throw himself into a chair , have begin to nurse he leg and examine the sole of he boot with much bitterness . " I mean this marriage . I mean he letting that bloom young girl . " " what be the matter with ? I see no harm in he -- if the girl like he . " " she be too young to know what she like . she guardian ought to interfere . he ought not to allow the thing to be do in this headlong manner . I wonder a man like you , Cadwallader -- a man with daughter , can look at the affair with indifference : and with such a heart as yours ! do think seriously about it . " " I be not joke ; I be as serious as possible , " say the rector , with a provoke little inward laugh . " you be as bad as . she have be want I to go and lecture ; and I have remind she that she friend have a very poor opinion of the match she make when she marry I . " " but look at , " say , indignantly . " he must be fifty , and I do not believe he could ever have be much more than the shadow of a man . look at he leg ! " " Confound you handsome young fellow ! you think of have it all you own way in the world . you do not under stand woman . they do not admire you half so much as you admire yourselves . use to tell she sister that she marry I for my ugliness -- it be so various and amuse that it have quite conquer she prudence . " " you ! it be easy enough for a woman to love you . but this be no question of beauty . I do not _like_ . " this be 's strongest way of imply that he think ill of a man 's character . " why ? what do you know against he ? " say the rector lay down he reel , and put he thumb into he armhole with a air of attention . pause . he do not usually find it easy to give he reason : it seem to he strange that people should not know they without be tell , since he only feel what be reasonable . at last he say -- " now , , have he get any heart ? " " well , yes . I do not mean of the melte sort , but a sound kernel , _that you may be sure of . he be very good to he poor relation : pension several of the woman , and be educate a young fellow at a good deal of expense . act up to he sense of justice . he mother 's sister make a bad match -- a Pole , I think -- lose herself -- at any rate be disown by she family . if it have not be for that , would not have have so much money by half . I believe he go himself to find out he cousin , and see what he could do for they . every man would not ring so well as that , if you try he metal . You_ would , ; but not every man . " " I do not know , " say , coloring . " I be not so sure of myself . " he pause a moment , and then add , " that be a right thing for to do . but a man may wish to do what be right , and yet be a sort of parchment code . a woman may not be happy with he . and I think when a girl be so young as be , she friend ought to interfere a little to hinder she from do anything foolish . you laugh , because you fancy I have some feeling on my own account . but upon my honor , it be not that . I should feel just the same if I be 's brother or uncle . " " well , but what should you do ? " " I should say that the marriage must not be decide on until she
she be of age . and depend upon it , in that case , it would never come off . I wish you see it as I do -- I wish you would talk to Brooke about it . " rise as he be finish he sentence , for he see enter from the study . she hold by the hand she youngest girl , about five year old , who immediately run to papa , and be make comfortable on he knee . " I hear what you be talk about , " say the wife . " but you will make no impression on . as long as the fish rise to he bait , everybody be what he ought to be . bless you , have get a trout - stream , and do not care about fishing in it himself : could there be a better fellow ? " " well , there be something in that , " say the rector , with he quiet , inward laugh . " it be a very good quality in a man to have a trout - stream . " " but seriously , " say , whose vexation have not yet spend itself , " do not you think the rector might do some good by speaking ? " " oh , I tell you beforehand what he would say , " answer , lift up she eyebrow . " I have do what I could : I wash my hand of the marriage . " " in the first place , " say the rector , look rather grave , " it would be nonsensical to expect that I could convince , and make he act accordingly . be a very good fellow , but pulpy ; he will run into any mould , but he will not keep shape . " " he might keep shape long enough to defer the marriage , " say . " but , my dear , why should I use my influence to 's disadvantage , unless I be much surer than I be that I should be act for the advantage of ? I know no harm of . I do not care about he Xisuthrus and fee -fo- fum and the rest ; but then he do not care about my fishing - tackle . as to the line he take on the question , that be unexpected ; but he have always be civil to I , and I do not see why I should spoil he sport . for anything I can tell , may be happier with he than she would be with any other man . " " Humphrey ! I have no patience with you . you know you would rather dine under the hedge than with alone . you have nothing to say to each other . " " what have that to do with 's marry he ? she do not do it for my amusement . " " he have get no good red blood in he body , " say . " no . somebody put a drop under a magnifying - glass and it be all semicolon and parentheses , " say . " why do he not bring out he book , instead of marrying , " say , with a disgust which he hold warrant by the sound fee of a english layman . " oh , he dream footnote , and they run away with all he brain . they say , when he be a little boy , he make a abstract of ' hop of ' my ,' and he have be make abstract ever since . ugh ! and that be the man go on say that a woman may be happy with . " " well , he be what like , " say the rector . " I do not profess to understand every young lady 's taste . " " but if she be you own daughter ? " say . " that would be a different affair . she be _not my daughter , and I do not feel call upon to interfere . be as good as most of we . he be a scholarly clergyman , and creditable to the cloth . some radical fellow speechifying at say be the learn straw - chopping incumbent , and be the brick - and - mortar incumbent , and I be the angling incumbent . and upon my word , I do not see that one be worse or better than the other . " the rector end with he silent laugh . he always see the joke of any satire against himself . he conscience be large and easy , like the rest of he : it do only what it could do without any trouble . clearly , there would be no interference with 's marriage through ; and feel with some sadness that she be to have perfect liberty of misjudgment . it be a sign of he good disposition that he do not slacke at all in he intention of carry out 's design of the cottage . Doubtless this persistence be the best course for he own dignity : but pride only help we to be generous ; it never make we so , any more than vanity make we witty . she be now enough aware of 's position with regard to she , to appreciate the rectitude of he perseverance in a landlord 's duty , to which he have at first be urge by a lover 's complaisance , and she pleasure in it be great enough to count for something even in she present happiness . perhaps she give to 's cottage all the interest she could spare from , or rather from the symphony of hopeful dream , admir trust , and passionate self devotion which that learn
learn gentleman have set play in she soul . hence it happen that in the good baronet 's succeed visit , while he be begin to pay small attention to , he find himself talk with more and more pleasure to . she be perfectly unconstrained and without irritation towards he now , and he be gradually discover the delight there be in frank kindness and companionship between a man and a woman who have no passion to hide or confess . . 1st Gent . a ancient land in ancient oracle be call " law - thirsty " : all the struggle there be after order and a perfect rule . pray , where lie such lands now ? . . . 2d . why , where they lay of old -- in human soul . 's behavior about settlement be highly satisfactory to , and the preliminary of marriage roll smoothly along , shorten the week of courtship . the betrothed bride must see she future home , and dictate any change that she would like to have make there . a woman dictate before marriage in order that she may have a appetite for submission afterwards . and certainly , the mistake that we male and female mortal make when we have we own way might fairly raise some wonder that we be so fond of it . on a gray but dry morning drive to Lowick in company with she uncle and . 's home be the manor - house . close by , visible from some part of the garden , be the little church , with the old parsonage opposite . in the beginning of he career , have only hold the living , but the death of he brother have put he in possession of the manor also . it have a small park , with a fine old oak here and there , and a avenue of lime towards the southwest front , with a sunk fence between park and pleasure - ground , so that from the drawing - room window the glance sweep uninterruptedly along a slope of greensward till the lime end in a level of corn and pasture , which often seem to melt into a lake under the setting sun . this be the happy side of the house , for the south and east look rather melancholy even under the brightest morning . the grounds here be more confined , the flower - bed show no very careful tendance , and large clumps of tree , chiefly of sombre yew , have risen high , not ten yard from the window . the building , of greenish stone , be in the old style , not ugly , but small - window and melancholy - look : the sort of house that must have child , many flower , open window , and little vista of bright thing , to make it seem a joyous home . in this latter end of autumn , with a sparse remnant of yellow leave fall slowly athwart the dark evergreens in a stillness without sunshine , the house too have a air of autumnal decline , and , when he present himself , have no bloom that could be throw into relief by that background . " oh dear ! " say to herself , " I be sure would have be pleasanter than this . " she think of the white freestone , the pillared portico , and the terrace full of flower , smile above they like a prince issue from he enchantment in a rose - bush , with a handkerchief swiftly metamorphose from the most delicately odorous petal -- , who talk so agreeably , always about thing which have common - sense in they , and not about learn ! have those light young feminine tastes which grave and weatherwear gentleman sometimes prefer in a wife ; but happily 's bia have be different , for he would have have no chance with . Dorothea , on the contrary , find the house and grounds all that she could wish : the dark book - shelf in the long library , the carpet and curtain with color subdue by time , the curiious old map and bird 's - eye view on the wall of the corridor , with here and there a old vase below , have no oppression for she , and see more cheerful than the easts and picture at the , which she uncle have long ago bring home from he travels -- they be probably among the idea he have take in at one time . to poor these severe classical nudity and smirk - Correggiosity be painfully inexplicable , star into the midst of she Puritanic conception : she have never be teach how she could bring they into any sort of relevance with she life . but the owner of apparently have not be traveller , and 's study of the past be not carry on by means of such aid . walk about the house with delightful emotion . everything seem hallow to she : this be to be the home of she wifehood , and she look up with eye full of confidence to when he draw she attention specially to some actual arrangement and ask she if she would like a alteration . all appeal to she taste she meet gratefully , but see nothing to alter . he effort at exact courtesy and formal tenderness have no defect for she . she fill up all blank with unmanifested perfection , interpret he as she interpret the work of Providence , and accounting for see discord by she own deafness to the higher harmoney . and there be many blank leave in the week of courtship which a loving faith fill with happy assurance . " now , my dear Dorothea , I wish you
you to favor I by point out which room you would like to have as you boudoir , " say , show that he view of the womanly nature be sufficiently large to include that requirement . " it be very kind of you to think of that , " say , " but I assure you I would rather have all those matter decide for I . I shall be much happier to take everything as it be -- just as you have be use to have it , or as you will yourself choose it to be . I have no motive for wishing anything else . " " oh , , " say , " will you not have the bow- window room up - stair ? " lead the way thither . the bow - window look down the avenue of lime ; the furniture be all of a faded blue , and there be miniature of lady and gentleman with powdered hair hang in a group . a piece of tapestry over a door also show a blue - green world with a pale stag in it . the chair and table be thin - legged and easy to upset . it be a room where one might fancy the ghost of a tight - laced lady revisit the scene of she embroidery . a light bookcase contain duodecimo volume of polite literature in calf , complete the furniture . " yes , " say , " this would be a pretty room with some new hanging , sofa , and that sort of thing . a little bear now . " " no , uncle , " say , eagerly . " pray do not speak of alte anything . there be so many other thing in the world that want altering -- I like to take these thing as they be . and you like they as they be , do not you ? " she add , look at . " perhaps this be you mother 's room when she be young . " " it be , " he say , with he slow bend of the head . " this be you mother , " say , who have turn to examine the group of miniature . " it be like the tiny one you bring I ; only , I should think , a better portrait . and this one opposite , who be this ? " " she elder sister . they be , like you and you sister , the only two child of they parent , who hang above they , you see . " " the sister be pretty , " say , imply that she think less favorably of 's mother . it be a new opening to 's imagination , that he come of a family who have all be young in they time -- the lady wear necklace . " it be a peculiar face , " say , look closely . " those deep gray eye rather near together -- and the delicate irregular nose with a sort of ripple in it -- and all the powder curl hang backward . altogether it seem to I peculiar rather than pretty . there be not even a family likeness between she and you mother . " " no . and they be not alike in they lot . " " you do not mention she to I , " say . " my aunt make a unfortunate marriage . I never see she . " wonder a little , but feel that it would be indelicate just then to ask for any information which do not proffer , and she turn to the window to admire the view . the sun have lately pierce the gray , and the avenue of lime cast shadows . " shall we not walk in the garden now ? " say . " and you would like to see the church , you know , " say . " it be a droll little church . and the village . it all lie in a nut -shell . by the way , it will suit you , ; for the cottage be like a row of alm - house -- little garden , gilly - flower , that sort of thing . " " yes , please , " say , look at , " I should like to see all that . " she have get nothing from he more graphic about the cottage than that they be " not bad . " they be soon on a gravel walk which lead chiefly between grassy border and clumps of tree , this be the nearest way to the church , say . at the little gate lead into the churchyard there be a pause while go to the parsonage close by to fetch a key . , who have be hang a little in the rear , come up presently , when she see that be go away , and say in she easy staccato , which always seem to contradict the suspicion of any malicious intent -- " do you know , , I see some one quite young come up one of the walk . " " be that astonish , ? " " there may be a young gardener , you know -- why not ? " say . " I tell he should change he gardener . " " no , not a gardener , " say ; " a gentleman with a sketch - book . he have light - brown curl . I only see he back . but he be quite young . " " the curate 's son , perhaps , " say . " ah , there be again , and with he . he be go to introduce . you do not know yet . "
" be the middle - aged curate , one of the " inferior clergy , " who be usually not wante in son . but after the introduction , the conversation do not lead to any question about he family , and the start apparition of youthfulness be forget by every one but . she inwardly decline to believe that the light - brown curl and slim figure could have any relationship to , who be just as old and musty - look as she would have expect 's curate to be ; doubtless a excellent man who would go to heaven ( for wish not to be unprincipled ) , but the corner of he mouth be so unpleasant . think with some dismalness of the time she should have to spend as bridesmay at , while the curate have probably no pretty little child whom she could like , irrespective of principle . be invaluable in they walk ; and perhaps have not be without foresight on this head , the curate be able to answer all 's question about the villager and the other parishioners . everybody , he assure she , be well off in : not a cottager in those double cottage at a low rent but keep a pig , and the strips of garden at the back be well ten . the small boy wore excellent corduroy , the girl go out as tidy servants , or do a little straw - plaiting at home : no loom here , no dissent ; and though the public disposition be rather towards laying by money than towards spirituality , there be not much vice . the speckled fowl be so numerous that observ , " you farmer leave some barley for the woman to glean , I see . the poor folk here might have a fowl in they pot , as the good french king use to wish for all he people . the eat a good many fowl -- skinny fowl , you know . " " I think it be a very cheap wish of he , " say , indignantly . " be king such monster that a wish like that must be reckon a royal virtue ? " " and if he wish they a skinny fowl , " say , " that would not be nice . but perhaps he wish they to have fat fowl . " " yes , but the word have drop out of the text , or perhaps be subauditum ; that be , present in the king 's mind , but not utter , " say , smile and bend he head towards , who immediately drop backward a little , because she could not bear to blink at she . sank into silence on the way back to the house . she feel some disappointment , of which she be yet ashamed , that there be nothing for she to do in ; and in the next few minute she mind have glance over the possibility , which she would have prefer , of find that she home would be in a parish which have a larger share of the world 's misery , so that she might have have more active duty in it . then , recurr to the future actually before she , she make a picture of more complete devotion to 's aim in which she would await new duty . many such might reveal themselves to the higher knowledge gain by she in that companionship . soon leave they , have some clerical work which would not allow he to lunch at the hall ; and as they be re-enter the garden through the little gate , say -- " you seem a little sad , . I trust you be pleased with what you have see . " " I be feel something which be perhaps foolish and wrong , " answer , with she usual openness -- " almost wish that the people want more to be do for they here . I have know so few way of make my life good for anything . of course , my notions of usefulness must be narrow . I must learn new way of help people . " " doubtless , " say . " each position have its corresponding duty . yours , I trust , as the mistress of , will not leave any yearning unfulfill . " " indeed , I believe that , " say , earnestly . " do not suppose that I be sad . " " that be well . but , if you be not tired , we will take another way to the house than that by which we come . " be not at all tired , and a little circuit be make towards a fine yew - tree , the chief hereditary glory of the grounds on this side of the house . as they approach it , a figure , conspicuous on a dark background of evergreens , be seat on a bench , sketch the old tree . , who be walk in front with , turn he head , and say -- " who be that youngster , ? " they have come very near when answer -- " that be a young relative of mine , a second cousin : the grandson , in fact , " he add , look at , " of the lady whose portrait you have be notice , my aunt . " the young man have lay down he sketch - book and risen . he bushy light - brown curl , as well as he youthfulness , identify he at once with 's apparition . " Dorothea , let I introduce to you my cousin , . will , this be . " the cousin be so close now , that , when he
he lift he hat , could see a pair of gray ef rather near together , a delicate irregular nose with a little ripple in it , and hair fall backward ; but there be a mouth and ching of a more prominent , threaten aspect than belong to the type of the grandmother 's miniature . young do not feel it necessary to smile , as if he be charme with this introduction to he future second cousin and she relative ; but wear rather a pout air of discontent . " you be a artist , I see , " say , take up the sketch - book and turn it over in he unceremonious fashion . " no , I only sketch a little . there be nothing fit to be see there , " say young Ladislaw , coloring , perhaps with temper rather than modesty . " oh , come , this be a nice bit , now . I do a little in this way myself at one time , you know . look here , now ; this be what I call a nice thing , do with what we use to call _brio_. " hold out towards the two girl a large colored sketch of stony ground and tree , with a pool . " I be no judge of these thing , " say , not coldly , but with a eager deprecation of the appeal to she . " you know , uncle , I never see the beauty of those picture which you say be so much praise . they be a language I do not understand . I suppose there be some relation between picture and nature which I be too ignorant to feel -- just as you see what a sentence stand for which mean nothing to I . " look up at , who bow he head towards she , while say , smile nonchalantly -- " I , now , how different people be ! but you have a bad style of teaching , you know -- else this be just the thing for girl -- sketch , fine art and so on . but you take to draw plan ; you do not understand morbidezza , and that kind of thing . you will come to my house , I hope , and I will show you what I do in this way , " he continue , turn to young , who have to be recall from he preoccupation in observing . Ladislaw have make up he mind that she must be a unpleasant girl , since she be go to marry , and what she say of she stupidity about picture would have confirm that opinion even if he have believe she . as it be , he take she word for a covert judgment , and be certain that she think he sketch detestable . there be too much cleverness in she apology : she be laugh both at she uncle and himself . but what a voice ! it be like the voice of a soul that have once live in a AEolian harp . this must be one of 's inconsistency . there could be no sort of passion in a girl who would marry . but he turn from she , and bow he thanks for 's invitation . " we will turn over my italian engraving together , " continue that good - natured man . " I have no end of those thing , that I have lay by for year . one get rusty in this part of the country , you know . not you , ; you stick to you study ; but my best idea get undermost -- out of use , you know . you clever young man must guard against indolence . I be too indolent , you know : else I might have be anywhere at one time . " " that be a seasonable admonition , " say ; " but now we will pass on to the house , lest the young lady should be tired of stand . " when they back be turn , young sit down to go on with he sketching , and as he do so he face break into a expression of amusement which increase as he go on drawing , till at last he throw back he head and laugh aloud . partly it be the reception of he own artistic production that tick he ; partly the notion of he grave cousin as the lover of that girl ; and partly 's definition of the place he might have hold but for the impediment of indolence . 's sense of the ludicrous lit up he feature very agreeably : it be the pure enjoyment of comicality , and have no mixture of sneering and self - exaltation . " what be you nephew go to do with himself , ? " say , as they go on . " my cousin , you mean -- not my nephew . " " yes , yes , cousin . but in the way of a career , you know . " " the answer to that question be painfully doubtful . on leave he decline to go to a english university , where I would gladly have place he , and choose what I must consider the anomalous course of study at . and now he want to go abroad again , without any special object , save the vague purpose of what he call culture , preparation for he know not what . he decline to choose a profession . " " he have no means but what you furnish , I suppose . " " I have always give he and he friend reason to understand that I would furnish in moderation what be necessary for provide he with a
a scholarly education , and launch he respectably . I be - therefore bound to fulfil the expectation so raise , " say , put he conduct in the light of mere rectitude : a trait of delicacy which notice with admiration . " he have a thirst for travelling ; perhaps he may turn out a or a , " say . " I have a notion of that myself at one time . " " no , he have no bent towards exploration , or the enlargement of we geognosis : that would be a special purpose which I could recognize with some approbation , though without felicitat he on a career which so often end in premature and violent death . but so far be he from have any desire for a more accurate knowledge of the earth 's surface , that he say he should prefer not to know the source of the , and that there should be some unknown region preserve as hunt grounds for the poetic imagination . " " well , there be something in that , you know , " say , who have certainly a impartial mind . " it be , I fear , nothing more than a part of he general inaccuracy and indisposition to thoroughness of all kind , which would be a bad augury for he in any profession , civil or sacred , even be he so far submissive to ordinary rule as to choose one . " " perhaps he have conscientious scruple founde on he own unfitness , " say , who be interesting herself in find a favorable explanation . " because the law and medicine should be very serious profession to undertake , should they not ? people 's life and fortune depend on they . " " doubtless ; but I fear that my young relative Will be chiefly determined in he aversion to these callings by a dislike to steady application , and to that kind of acquirement which be needful instrumentally , but be not charme or immediately invite to self - indulgent taste . I have insist to he on what have state with admirable brevity , that for the achievement of any work regard as a end there must be a prior exercise of many energie or acquire facility of a secondary order , demand patience . I have point to my own manuscript volume , which represent the toil of year preparatory to a work not yet accomplish . but in vain . to careful reasoning of this kind he reply by call himself , and every form of prescribed work ' harness . ' " laugh . she be surprised to find that could say something quite amuse . " well , you know , he may turn out a , a , a -- that sort of thing -- there be no telling , " say . " shall you let he go to , or wherever else he want to go ? " " yes ; I have agree to furnish he with moderate supplies for a year or so ; he ask no more . I shall let he be try by the test of freedom . " " that be very kind of you , " say , look up at with delight . " it be noble . after all , people may really have in they some vocation which be not quite plain to themselves , may they not ? they may seem idle and weak because they be grow . we should be very patient with each other , I think . " " I suppose it be be engage to be marry that have make you think patience good , " say , as soon as she and be alone together , take off they wrapping . " you mean that I be very impatient , . " " yes ; when people do not do and say just what you like . " have become less afraid of " say thing " to since this engagement : cleverness seem to she more pitiable than ever . . " he have catch a great cold , have he have no other clothes to wear than the skin of a bear not yet kill . " -- . young do not pay that visit to which have invite he , and only six day afterwards mention that he young relative have start for the continent , see by this cold vagueness to waive inquiry . indeed , have decline to fix on any more precise destination than the entire area of . , he hold , be necessarily intolerant of fetter : on the one hand it must have the utmost play for its spontaneity ; on the other , it may confidently await those message from the universe which summon it to its peculiar work , only place itself in a attitude of receptivity towards all sublime chance . the attitude of receptivity be various , and will have sincerely try many of they . he be not excessively fond of wine , but he have several time take too much , simply as a experiment in that form of ecstasy ; he have fast till he be faint , and then sup on lobster ; he have make himself ill with dos of opium . nothing greatly original have result from these measure ; and the effect of the opium have convince he that there be a entire dissimilarity between he constitution and 's . the superad circumstance which would evolve the genius have not yet come ; the universe have not yet beckon . even 's fortune at one time be , but a grand presentiment . we know what a masquerade all development be , and what effective shape may be disguise in helpless embryo .-- in fact , the world be full of
of hopeful analogy and handsome dubious egg call possibility . will see clearly enough the pitiable instance of long incubation produce no chick , and but for gratitude would have laugh at , whose plodd application , row of note - book , and small taper of learn theory explore the toss ruin of the world , seem to enforce a moral entirely encourage to 's generous reliance on the intention of the universe with regard to himself . he hold that reliance to be a mark of genius ; and certainly it be no mark to the contrary ; genius consist neither in self - conceit nor in humility , but in a power to make or do , not anything in general , but something in particular . let he start for the continent , then , without we pronouncing on he future . among all form of mistake , prophecy be the most gratuitous . but at present this caution against a too hasty judgment interest I more in relation to than to he young cousin . if to have be the mere occasion which have set alight the fine inflammable material of she youthful illusion , do it follow that he be fairly represent in the mind of those less impassioned personage who have hithertoo deliver they judgment concern he ? I protest against any absolute conclusion , any prejudice derive from 's contempt for a neighbor clergyman 's alleged greatness of soul , or 's poor opinion of he rival 's leg , -- from 's failure to elicit a companion 's idea , or from 's criticism of a middle - aged scholar 's personal appearance . I be not sure that the greatest man of he age , if ever that solitary superlative exist , could escape these unfavorable reflection of himself in various small mirror ; and even , look for he portrait in a spoon , must submit to have the facial angle of a bumpkin . moreover , if , speak for himself , have rather a chilling rhetoric , it be not therefore certain that there be no good work or fine feeling in he . do not a immortal physicist and interpreter of hieroglyph write detestable verse ? have the theory of the solar system be advanc by graceful manners and conversational tact ? suppose we turn from outside estimate of a man , to wonder , with keener interest , what be the report of he own consciousness about he doings or capacity : with what hindrance he be carry on he daily labors ; what fading of hope , or what deeper fixity of self - delusion the year be mark off within he ; and with what spirit he wrestle against universal pressure , which will one day be too heavy for he , and bring he heart to its final pause . Doubtless he lot be important in he own eye ; and the chief reason that we think he ask too large a place in we consideration must be we want of room for he , since we refer he to the divine regard with perfect confidence ; nay , it be even hold sublime for we neighbor to expect the utmost there , however little he may have get from we . , too , be the centre of he own world ; if he be liable to think that other be providentially make for he , and especially to consider they in the light of they fitness for the author of a " key to all Mythologies , " this trait be not quite alien to we , and , like the other mendicant hope of mortal , claim some of we pity . certainly this affair of he marriage with touch he more nearly than it do any one of the persons who have hithertoo show they disapproval of it , and in the present stage of thing I feel more tenderly towards he experience of success than towards the disappointment of the amiable . for in truth , as the day fix for he marriage come nearer , do not find he spirits rise ; nor do the contemplation of that matrimonial garden scene , where , as all experience show , the path be to be border with flower , prove persistently more enchant to he than the accustom vault where he walk taper in hand . he do not confess to himself , still less could he have breathe to another , he surprise that though he have win a lovely and noble - hear girl he have not win delight , -- which he have also regard as a object to be find by search . it be true that he know all the classical passage imply the contrary ; but know classical passage , we find , be a mode of motion , which explain why they leave so little extra force for they personal application . poor have imagine that he long studious bachelorhood have store up for he a compound interest of enjoyment , and that large draft on he affections would not fail to be honor ; for we all of we , grave or light , get we thought entangle in metaphor , and act fatally on the strength of they . and now he be in danger of be sadden by the very conviction that he circumstance be unusually happy : there be nothing external by which he could account for a certain blankness of sensibility which come over he just when he expectant gladness should have be most lively , just when he exchange the accustom dulness of he library for he visit to the . here be a weary experience in which he be as utterly condemn to loneliness as in the despair which sometimes threaten he while toil in the morass of authorship without see nearer to the
the goal . and he be that worst loneliness which would shrink from sympathy . he could not but wish that should think he not less happy than the world would expect she successful suitor to be ; and in relation to he authorship he lean on she young trust and veneration , he like to draw forth she fresh interest in listen , as a means of encouragement to himself : in talk to she he present all he performance and intention with the reflecte confidence of the pedagogue , and ry himself for the time of that chill ideal audience which crowd he laborious uncreative hour with the vaporous pressure of Tartarean shade . for to , after that toy - box history of the world adapt to young lady which have make the chief part of she education , 's talk about he great book be full of new vista ; and this sense of revelation , this surprise of a nearer introduction to and , as people who have idea not totally unlike she own , keep in abeyance for the time she usual eagerness for a binding theory which could bring she own life and doctrine into strict connection with that amazing past , and give the remotest source of knowledge some bearing on she action . that more complete teaching would come -- would tell she all that : she be look forward to higher initiation in idea , as she be look forward to marriage , and blend she dim conception of both . it would be a great mistake to suppose that would have care about any share in 's learn as mere accomplishment ; for though opinion in the neighborhood of and have pronounce she clever , that epithet would not have describe she to circle in whose more precise vocabulary cleverness imply mere aptitude for know and do , apart from character . all she eagerness for acquirement lay within that full current of sympathetic motive in which she idea and impulse be habitually sweep along . she do not want to deck herself with knowledge -- to wear it loose from the nerve and blood that feed she action ; and if she have write a book she must have do it as do , under the command of a authority that constrain she conscience . but something she year for by which she life might be fill with action at once rational and ardent ; and since the time be go by for guiding visions and spiritual directors , since prayer heighten yearning but not instruction , what lamp be there but knowledge ? surely learn man keep the only oil ; and who more learn than ? thus in these brief week 's joyous grateful expectation be unbroken , and however she lover might occasionally be conscious of flatness , he could never refer it to any slackening of she affectionate interest . the season be mild enough to encourage the project of extend the wedding journey as far as , and be anxious for this because he wish to inspect some manuscript in the . " I still regret that you sister be not to accompany we , " he say one morning , some time after it have be ascertain that object to go , and that do not wish for she companionship . " you will have many lonely hour , Dorothea , for I shall be constrained to make the utmost use of my time during we stay in , and I should feel more at liberty if you have a companion . " the word " I should feel more at liberty " grate on . for the first time in speak to she colore from annoyance . " you must have misunderstand I very much , " she say , " if you think I should not enter into the value of you time -- if you think that I should not willingly give up whatever interfered with you use it to the best purpose . " " that be very amiable in you , my dear Dorothea , " say , not in the least noticing that she be hurt ; " but if you have a lady as you companion , I could put you both under the care of a cicerone , and we could thus achieve two purpose in the same space of time . " " I beg you will not refer to this again , " say , rather haughtily . but immediately she fear that she be wrong , and turn towards he she lay she hand on he , add in a different tone , " pray do not be anxious about I . I shall have so much to think of when I be alone . and will be a sufficient companion , just to take care of I . I could not bear to have : she would be miserable . " it be time to dress . there be to be a dinner - party that day , the last of the party which be hold at the as proper preliminary to the wedding , and be glad of a reason for move away at once on the sound of the bell , as if she need more than she usual amount of preparation . she be ashamed of be irritate from some cause she could not define even to herself ; for though she have no intention to be untruthful , she reply have not touch the real hurt within she . 's word have be quite reasonable , yet they have bring a vague instantaneous sense of aloofness on he part . " surely I be in a strangely selfish weak state of mind , " she say to herself . " how can I have a husband who be so much above I without know that he need
need I less than I need he ? " have convince herself that be altogether right , she recover she equanimity , and be a agreeable image of serene dignity when she come into the drawing - room in she silver - gray dress -- the simple line of she dark - brown hair part over she brow and coil massively behind , in keep with the entire absence from she manner and expression of all search after mere effect . sometimes when be in company , there seem to be as complete a air of repose about she as if she have be a picture of look out from she tower into the clear air ; but these interval of quietude make the energy of she speech and emotion the more remark when some outward appeal have touch she . she be naturally the subject of many observation this evening , for the dinner - party be large and rather more miscellaneous as to the male portion than any which have be hold at the since 's niece have reside with he , so that the talking be done in duo and trio more or less inharmonious . there be the newly elect mayor of , who happen to be a manufacturer ; the philanthropic banker he brother - in - law , who predominate so much in the town that some call he a Methodist , other a hypocrite , accord to the resource of they vocabulary ; and there be various professional man . in fact , say that be begin to treat the Middlemarcher , and that she preferre the farmers at the tithe - dinner , who drank she health unpretentiously , and be not asham of they grandfather 's furniture . for in that part of the country , before reform have do it be notable part in develop the political consciousness , there be a clearer distinction of rank and a dimmer distinction of party ; so that 's miscellaneous invitation seem to belong to that general laxity which come from he inordinate travel and habit of take too much in the form of idea . already , as pass out of the dining - room , opportunity be find for some interjectional " aside . " " a fine woman , ! a uncommonly fine woman , by ! " say , the old lawyer , who have be so long concerned with the landed gentry that he have become landed himself , and use that oath in a deep - mouthed manner as a sort of armorial bearing , stamp the speech of a man who hold a good position . , the banker , seem to be address , but that gentleman dislike coarseness and profanity , and merely bow . the remark be take up by , a middle - aged bachelor and course celebrity , who have a complexion something like a egg , a few hair carefully arrange , and a carriage imply the consciousness of a distinguished appearance . " yes , but not my style of woman : I like a woman who lay herself out a little more to please we . there should be a little filigree about a woman -- something of the coquette . a man like a sort of challenge . the more of a dead set she make at you the better . " " there be some truth in that , " say , dispose to be genial . " and , by , it be usually the way with they . I suppose it answer some wise end : Providence make they so , eh , ? " " I should be dispose to refer coquetry to another source , " say . " I should rather refer it to the devil . " " ay , to be sure , there should be a little devil in a woman , " say , whose study of the fair sex seem to have be detrimental to he theology . " and I like they blond , with a certain gait , and a swan neck . between ourselves , the mayor 's daughter be more to my taste than or either . if I be a marry man I should choose before either of they . " " well , make up , make up , " say Standish , jocosely ; " you see the middle - aged fellow early the day . " shook he head with much meaning : he be not go to incur the certainty of be accept by the woman he would choose . the who have the honor of be 's ideal be of course not present ; for , always object to go too far , would not have choose that he niece should meet the daughter of a manufacturer , unless it be on a public occasion . the feminine part of the company include none whom or could object to ; for , the colonel 's widow , be not only unexceptionable in point of breeding , but also interes on the ground of she complaint , which puzzl the doctor , and see clearly a case wherein the fulness of professional knowledge might need the supplement of quackery . , who attribute she own remarkable health to home - make bitter united with constant medical attendance , enter with much exercise of the imagination into 's account of symptom , and into the amazing futility in she case of all , strengthen medicine . " where can all the strength of those medicine go , my dear ? " say the mild but stately dowager , turn to reflectively , when 's attention be call away . " it strengthen the disease , " say the rector 's wife , much too well - bear not to be a amateur in medicine . " everything depend on
on the constitution : some people make fat , some blood , and some bile -- that be my view of the matter ; and whatever they take be a sort of grist to the mill . " " then she ought to take medicine that would reduce -- reduce the disease , you know , if you be right , my dear . and I think what you say be reasonable . " " certainly it be reasonable . you have two sorts of potatoe , feed on the same soil . one of they grow more and more watery -- " " ah ! like this poor -- that be what I think . Dropsy ! there be no swelling yet -- it be inward . I should say she ought to take drying medicine , should not you ?-- or a dry hot - air bath . many thing might be try , of a drying nature . " " let she try a certain person 's pamphlet , " say in a undertone , see the gentleman enter . " he do not want drying . " " who , my dear ? " say , a charming woman , not so quick as to nullify the pleasure of explanation . " the bridegroom -- . he have certainly be dry up faster since the engagement : the flame of passion , I suppose . " " I should think he be far from have a good constitution , " say , with a still deeper undertone . " and then he study -- so very dry , as you say . " " really , by the side of , he look like a death 's head skinn over for the occasion . Mark my word : in a year from this time that girl will hate he . she look up to he as a oracle now , and by - and - by she will be at the other extreme . all flightiness ! " " how very shocking ! I fear she be headstrong . but tell I -- you know all about he -- be there anything very bad ? what be the truth ? " " the truth ? he be as bad as the wrong physic -- nasty to take , and sure to disagree . " " there could not be anything worse than that , " say , with so vivid a conception of the physic that she seem to have learn something exact about 's disadvantage . " however , will hear nothing against . he say she be the mirror of woman still . " " that be a generous make - believe of he . Depend upon it , he like little Celia better , and she appreciate he . I hope you like my little ? " " certainly ; she be fonder of geranium , and seem more docile , though not so fine a figure . but we be talk of physic . tell I about this new young surgeon , . I be tell he be wonderfully clever : he certainly look it -- a fine brow indeed . " " he be a gentleman . I hear he talk to . he talk well . " " yes . say he be one of the Lydgates of , really well connect . one do not expect it in a practitioner of that kind . for my own part , I like a medical man more on a footing with the servants ; they be often all the cleverer . I assure you I find poor Hicks 's judgment unfailing ; I never know he wrong . he be coarse and butcher - like , but he know my constitution . it be a loss to I he go off so suddenly . dear I , what a very animated conversation seem to be have with this Lydgate ! " " she be talk cottage and hospital with he , " say , whose ear and power of interpretation be quick . " I believe he be a sort of philanthropist , so Brooke be sure to take he up . " " , " say when she son come near , " bring and introduce he to I . I want to test he . " the affable dowager declare herself delighte with this opportunity of make 's acquaintance , have heard of he success in treat fever on a new plan . have the medical accomplishment of look perfectly grave whatever nonsense be talk to he , and he dark steady eye give he impressiveness as a listener . he be as little as possible like the lamented Hick , especially in a certain careless refinement about he toilet and utterance . yet gather much confidence in he . he confirm she view of she own constitution as be peculiar , by admit that all constitution might be call peculiar , and he do not deny that hers might be more peculiar than other . he do not approve of a too lowering system , include reckless cupping , nor , on the other hand , of incessant port wine and bark . he say " I think so " with a air of so much deference accompany the insight of agreement , that she form the most cordial opinion of he talents . " I be quite pleased with you protege , " she say to before go away . " my protege ?--dear I !-- who be that ? " say . " this young , the new doctor . - he seem to I to understand he profession admirably . " " oh , ! he be not my protege , you know ; only I know a uncle of he who send I a letter about he . however , I think he be likely
likely to be first - rate -- have study in , kknow Broussais ; have idea , you know -- want to raise the profession . " " Lydgate have lot of idea , quite new , about ventilation and diet , that sort of thing , " resume , after he have hand out , and have return to be civil to a group of Middlemarchers . " hang it , do you think that be quite sound ?--upsett the old treatment , which have make what they be ? " say . " Medical knowledge be at a low ebb among we , " say , who speak in a subdued tone , and have rather a sickly air . " I , for my part , hail the advent of . I hope to find good reason for confid the new hospital to he management . " " that be all very fine , " reply , who be not fond of ; " if you like he to try experiment on you hospital patient , and kill a few people for charity I have no objection . but I be not go to hand money out of my purse to have experiment try on I . I like treatment that have be test a little . " " well , you know , Standish , every dose you take be a experiment - a experiment , you know , " say , nodd towards the lawyer . " oh , if you talk in that sense ! " say , with as much disgust at such non -legal quibbling as a man can well betray towards a valuable client . " I should be glad of any treatment that would cure I without reduce I to a skeleton , like poor , " say , the mayor , a florid man , who would have serve for a study of flesh in striking contrast with the Franciscan tint of . " it be a uncommonly dangerous thing to be leave without any padding against the shaft of disease , as somebody say , -- and I think it a very good expression myself . " , of course , be out of hearing . he have quit the party early , and would have think it altogether tedious but for the novelty of certain introduction , especially the introduction to , whose youthful bloom , with she approach marriage to that fad scholar , and she interest in matter socially useful , give she the piquancy of a unusual combination . " she be a good creature -- that fine girl -- but a little too earnest , " he think . " it be troublesome to talk to such woman . they be always want reason , yet they be too ignorant to understand the merit of any question , and usually fall hack on they moral sense to settle thing after they own taste . " evidently be not 's style of woman any more than 's . consider , indeed , in relation to the latter , whose my be mature , she be altogether a mistake , and calculate to shock he trust in final cause , include the adaptation of fine young woman to purpleface bachelor . but be less ripe , and might possibly have experience before he which would modify he opinion as to the most excellent thing in woman . , however , be not again see by either of these gentleman under she maiden name . not long after that dinner - party she have become , and be on she way to . . " but deed and language such as man do use , and person such as comedy would choose , when she would show a image of the time , and sport with human folly , not with crime . " -- . Lydgate , in fact , be already conscious of be fascinate by a woman strikingly different from : he do not in the least suppose that he have lose he balance and fall in love , but he have say of that particular woman , " she be grase itself ; she be perfectly lovely and accomplished . that be what a woman ought to be : she ought to produce the effect of exquisite music . " plain woman he regard as he do the other severe fact of life , to be face with philosophy and investigate by science . but seem to have the true melodic charm ; and when a man have see the woman whom he would have choose if he have intend to marry speedily , he remain a bachelor will usually depend on she resolution rather than on he . believe that he should not marry for several year : not marry until he have trode out a good clear path for himself away from the broad road which be quite ready make . he have see above he horizon almost as long as it have take to become engage and marry : but this learn be possess of a fortune ; he have assemble he voluminous note , and have make that sort of reputation which precede performance , -- often the larger part of a man 's fame . he take a wife , as we have see , to adorn the remain quadrant of he course , and be a little moon that would cause hardly a calculable perturbation . but be young , poor , ambitious . he have he half - century before he instead of behind he , and he have come to bend on do many thing that be not directly fit to make he fortune or even secure he a good income . to a man under such circumstance , take a wife be something more than a question of adornment , however highly he may
may rate this ; and be dispose to give it the first place among wifely function . to he taste , guide by a single conversation , here be the point on which would be find want , notwithstand she undeniable beauty . she do not look at thing from the proper feminine angle . the society of such woman be about as relaxing as go from you work to teach the second form , instead of recline in a paradise with sweet laugh for bird - note , and blue eye for a heaven . certainly nothing at present could seem much less important to Lydgate than the turn of 's mind , or to than the qualitie of the woman who have attract this young surgeon . but any one watch keenly the stealthy convergence of human lot , see a slow preparation of effect from one life on another , which tell like a calculate irony on the indifference or the frozen stare with which we look at we unintroduced neighbor . stand by sarcastic with we dramatis persona fold in she hand . old provincial society have its share of this subtle movement : have not only its striking downfall , its brilliant young professional dandy who end by live up a entry with a drab and six child for they establishment , but also those less mark vicissitude which be constantly shift the boundary of social intercourse , and begett new consciousness of interdependence . some slip a little downward , some get higher footing : people deny aspirate , gain wealth , and fastidious gentleman stood for borough ; some be catch in political current , some in ecclesiastical , and perhaps find themselves surprisingly group in consequence ; while a few personage or family that stand with rocky firmness amid all this fluctuation , be slowly present new aspect in spite of solidity , and alte with the double change of self and beholder . municipal town and rural parish gradually make fresh thread of connection -- gradually , as the old stocking give way to the savings - bank , and the worship of the solar guinea become extinct ; while squire and baronet , and even lords who have once liv blamelessly afar from the civic mind , gather the faultiness of closer acquaintanceship . Settler , too , come from distant county , some with a alarming novelty of skill , other with a offensive advantage in cunning . in fact , much the same sort of movement and mixture go on in old as we find in older Herodotus , who also , in tell what have be , think it well to take a woman 's lot for he starting - point ; though Io , as a maiden apparently beguil by attractive merchandise , be the reverse of , and in this respect perhaps bear more resemblance to , who have excellent taste in costume , with that nymph - like figure and pure blindness which give the largest range to choice in the flow and color of drapery . but these thing make only part of she charm . she be admit to be the flower of 's school , the chief school in the county , where the teaching include all that be demand in the accomplished female -- even to extra , such as the get in and out of a carriage . herself have always hold up as a example : no pupil , she say , exceed that young lady for mental acquisition and propriety of speech , while she musical execution be quite exceptional . we can not help the way in which people speak of we , and probably if have undertaken to describe or , these heroine would not have seem poetical . the first vision of would have be enough with most judge to dispel any prejudice excit by 's praise . Lydgate could not be long in without have that agreeable vision , or even without make the acquaintance of the family ; for though , whose practice he have pay something to enter on , have not be they doctor ( . not like the lowering system adopt by he ) , he have many patient among they connection and acquaintance . for who of any consequence in be not connect or at least acquaint with the ? they be old manufacturer , and have keep a good house for three generation , in which there have naturally be much intermarry with neighbor more or less decidedly genteel . 's sister have make a wealthy match in accept , who , however , as a man not bear in the town , and altogether of dimly know origin , be consider to have do well in uniting himself with a real family ; on the other hand , have descende a little , have take a innkeeper 's daughter . but on this side too there be a cheer sense of money ; for . 's sister have be second wife to rich old , and have die childless year ago , so that she nephew and niece might be suppose to touch the affections of the widower . and it happen that and Featherstone , two of 's most important patient , have , from different cause , give a especially good reception to he successor , who have raise some partisanship as well as discussion . , medical attendent to the family , very early have grounds for think lightly of 's professional discretion , and there be no report about he which be not retail at the ' , where visitor be frequent . be more inclined to general good - fellowship than to take side , but there be no need for he to be hasty in make any new man acquaintance . silently wish that she father would invite . she be
be tired of the face and figure she have always be use to -- the various irregular profile and gait and turn of phrase distinguish those young man whom she have know as boy . she have be at school with girl of higher position , whose brother , she feel sure , it would have be possible for she to be more interested in , than in these inevitable companion . but she would not have choose to mention she wish to she father ; and he , for he part , be in no hurry on the subject . a alderman about to be mayor must by - and - by enlarge he dinner - party , but at present there be plenty of guest at he well - spread table . that table often remain cover with the relic of the family breakfast long after have go with he second son to the warehouse , and when be already far on in morning lesson with the younger girl in the schoolroom . it await the family laggard , who find any sort of inconvenience ( to other ) less disagreeable than get up when he be call . this be the case one morning of the in which we have lately see visit the ; and though the room be a little overheate with the fire , which have send the spaniel pan to a remote corner , , for some reason , continue to sit at she embroidery longer than usual , now and then give herself a little shake , and lay she work on she knee to contemplate it with a air of hesitat weariness . she mamma , who have return from a excursion to the kitchen , sit on the other side of the small work - table with a air of more entire placidity , until , the clock again give notice that it be go to strike , she look up from the lace - mending which be occupy she plump finger and ring the bell . " knock at 's door again , , and tell he it have struck half - past ten . " this be say without any change in the radiant good - humor of . 's face , in which forty - five year have delve neither angles nor parallel ; and push back she pink capstring , she let she work rest on she lap , while she look admiringly at she daughter . " , " say , " when Fred come down I wish you would not let he have red herring . I can not bear the smell of they all over the house at this hour of the morning . " " oh , my dear , you be so hard on you brother ! it be the only fault I have to find with you . you be the sweetest temper in the world , but you be so tetchy with you brother . " " not tetchy , mamma : you never hear I speak in a unladylike way . " " well , but you want to deny they thing . " " brother be so unpleasant . " " oh , my dear , you must allow for young man . be thankful if they have good heart . a woman must learn to put up with little thing . you will be marry some day . " " not to any one who be like . " " do not decry you own brother , my dear . few young man have less against they , although he could not take he degree -- I be sure I can not understand why , for he seem to I most clever . and you know yourself he be think equal to the best society at college . so particular as you be , my dear , I wonder you be not glad to have such a gentlemanly young man for a brother . you be always find fault with because he be not Fred . " " oh no , mamma , only because he be . " " well , my dear , you will not find any young man who have not something against he . " " but " -- here 's face break into a smile which suddenly reveal two dimple . she herself think unfavorably of these dimple and smile little in general society . " but I shall not marry any young man . " " so it seem , my love , for you have as good as refuse the pick of they ; and if there be better to be have , I be sure there be no girl better deserve it . " " excuse I , mamma -- I wish you would not say , ' the pick of they . ' " " why , what else be they ? " " I mean , mamma , it be rather a vulgar expression . " " very likely , my dear ; I never be a good speaker . what should I say ? " " the best of they . " " why , that seem just as plain and common . if I have have time to think , I should have say , ' the most superior young man . ' but with you education you must know . " " what must know , mother ? " say , who have slid in unobserved through the half - open door while the lady be bend over they work , and now go up to the fire stand with he back towards it , warm the soles of he slipper . " whether it be right to say ' superior young man , ' " say . Vincy , ring the bell . " oh , there be so many superior tea
tea and sugar now . be get to be shopkeeper ' slang . " " be you begin to dislike slang , then ? " say , with mild gravity . " only the wrong sort . all choice of word be slang . it mark a class . " " there be correct : that be not slang . " " I beg you pardon : correct be the slang of prig who write history and essay . and the strongest slang of all be the slang of poets . " " you will say anything , , to gain you point . " " well , tell I whether it be slang or poetry to call a ox a leg - plaiter . " " of course you can call it poetry if you like . " " , , you do not know Homer from slang . I shall invent a new game ; I shall write bit of slang and poetry on slips , and give they to you to separate . " " dear I , how amuse it be to hear young people talk ! " say , with cheerful admiration . " have you get nothing else for my breakfast , ? " say , to the servant who bring in coffee and butter toast ; while he walk round the table survey the ham , pott beef , and other cold remnant , with a air of silent rejection , and polite forbearance from sign of disgust . " should you like egg , sir ? " " egg , no ! bring I a grill bone . " " really , , " say , when the servant have leave the room , " if you must have hot thing for breakfast , I wish you would come down earlier . you can get up at six o'clock to go out hunting ; I can not understand why you find it so difficult to get up on other morning . " " that be you want of understanding , . I can get up to go hunt because I like it . " " what would you think of I if I come down two hour after every one else and order grilled bone ? " " I should think you be a uncommonly fast young lady , " say , eat he toast with the utmost composure . " I can not see why brothers be to make themselves disagreeable , any more than sister . " " I do not make myself disagreeable ; it be you who find I so . be a word that describe you feeling and not my action . " " I think it describe the smell of grilled bone . " " not at all . it describe a sensation in you little nose associate with certain finicking notion which be the classic of 's school . look at my mother you do not see she object to everything except what she do herself . she be my notion of a pleasant woman . " " bless you both , my dear , and do not quarrel , " say , with motherly cordiality . " come , , tell we all about the new doctor . how be you uncle please with he ? " " pretty well , I think . he ask Lydgate all sort of question and then screw up he face while he hear the answer , as if they be pinch he toe . that be he way . ah , here come my grilled bone . " " but how come you to stay out so late , my dear ? you only say you be go to you uncle 's . " " oh , I dine at 's . we have whist . be there too . " " and what do you think of he ? he be very gentlemanly , I suppose . they say he be of excellent family -- he relation quite couny people . " " yes , " say . " there be a Lydgate at 's who spend no end of money . I find this man be a second cousin of he . but rich man may have very poor devils for second cousins . " " it always make a difference , though , to be of good family , " say , with a tone of decision which show that she have think on this subject . feel that she might have be happier if she have not be the daughter of a manufacturer . she dislike anything which remind she that she mother 's father have be a innkeeper . certainly any one remembere the fact might think that . have the air of a very handsome good - humored landlady , accustom to the most capricious order of gentleman . " I think it be odd he name be , " say the bright - face matron , " but of course it be a name in the family . but now , tell we exactly what sort of man he be . " " oh , tallish , dark , clever -- talk well -- rather a prig , I think . " " I never can make out what you mean by a prig , " say . " a fellow who want to show that he have opinion . " " why , my dear , doctor must have opinion , " say . " what be they there for else ? " " yes , mother , the opinion they be pay for . but a prig be a fellow who be always make you a present of he opinion . " " I suppose admire , " say , not without a touch of innuendo . " really , I can not say . " say , rather
rather glumly , as he leave the table , and take up a novel which he have bring down with he , throw himself into a arm -chair . " if you be jealous of she , go oftener to yourself and eclipse she . " " I wish you would not be so vulgar , . if you have finish , pray ring the bell . " " it be true , though -- what you brother say , , " Mrs . Vincy began , when the servant have clear the table . " it be a thousand pity you have not patience to go and see you uncle more , so proud of you as he be , and want you to live with he . there be no knowing what he might have do for you as well as for . know , I be fond of have you at home with I , but I can part with my child for they good . and now it stand to reason that you uncle Featherstone will do something for . " " can bear be at , because she like that better than be a governess , " say , fold up she work . " I would rather not have anything left to I if I must earn it by enduring much of my uncle 's cough and he ugly relation . " " he can not be long for this world , my dear ; I would not hasten he end , but what with asthma and that inward complaint , let we hope there be something better for he in another . and I have no ill - will 's , but there be justice to be think of . and 's first wife bring he no money , as my sister do . she niece and nephew can not have so much claim as my sister 's . and I must say I think a dreadful plain girl -- more fit for a governess . " " every one would not agree with you there , mother , " say , who seem to be able to read and listen too . " well , my dear , " say . Vincy , wheel skilfully , " if she _have some fortune leave she , -- a man marry he wife 's relation , and the Garth be so poor , and live in such a small way . but I shall leave you to you study , my dear ; for I must go and do some shopping . " " 's study be not very deep , " say , rise with she mamma , " he be only read a novel . " " well , well , by - and - by he will go to he latin and thing , " say . Vincy , soothingly , strok she son 's head . " there be a fire in the smoking - room on purpose . it be you father 's wish , you know -- , my dear -- and I always tell he you will be good , and go to college again to take you degree . " draw he mother 's hand down to he lip , but say nothing . " I suppose you be not go out ride to - day ? " say , linger a little after she mamma be gone . " no ; why ? " " say I may have the chestnut to ride now . " " you can go with I to - morrow , if you like . only I be go to , . " " I want to ride so much , it be indifferent to I where we go . " really wish to go to , of all other place . " oh , I say , , " say , as she be pass out of the room , " if you be go to the piano , let I come and play some air with you . " " pray do not ask I this morning . " " why not this morning ? " " really , , I wish you would leave off play the flute . a man look very silly play the flute . and you play so out of tune . " " when next any one make love to you , , I will tell he how oblige you be . " " why should you expect I to oblige you by hear you play the flute , any more than I should expect you to oblige I by not play it ? " " and why should you expect I to take you out ride ? " this question lead to a adjustment , for have set she mind on that particular ride . so be gratify with nearly a hour 's practice of " ar hy y no , " " ye bank and brae , " and other favorite air from he " instructor on the Flute ; " a wheezy performance , into which he throw much ambition and a irrepressible hopefulness . . " he have more tow on he distaffe kknow . " -- . the ride to , which and take the next morning , lay through a pretty bit of midland landscape , almost all meadow and pasture , with hedgerow still allow to grow in bushy beauty and to spread out coral fruit for the bird . little detail give each field a particular physiognomy , dear to the eyes that have look on they from childhood : the pool in the corner where the grass be dank and tree lean whisperingly ; the great oak shadow a bare place in mid-pasture ; the high bank where the ash - tree grow ; the sudden slope of the old marl - pit make
make a red background for the burdock ; the huddled roof and rick of the homestead without a traceable way of approach ; the gray gate and fence against the depth of the bordering wood ; and the stray hovel , it be old , old thatch full of mossy hill and valley with wondrous modulation of light and shadow such as we travel far to see in later life , and see larger , but not more beautiful . these be the thing that make the gamut of joy in landscape to midland - breed soul -- the thing they toddle among , or perhaps learn by heart stand between they father 's knee while he drive leisurely . but the road , even the byroad , be excellent ; for , as we have see , be not a parish of muddy lane and poor tenant ; and it be into Lowick parish that and enter after a couple of mile 's riding . another mile would bring they to , and at the end of the first half , the house be already visible , look as if it have be arrest in its growth toward a stone mansion by a unexpected budding of farm - building on its left flank , which have hinder it from become anything more than the substantial dwelling of a gentleman farmer . it be not the less agreeable a object in the distance for the cluster of pinnacle corn-rick which balance the fine row of walnuts on the right . presently it be possible to discern something that might be a gig on the circular drive before the front door . " dear I , " say , " I hope none of my uncle 's horrible relation be there . " " they be , though . that be . 's gig -- the last yellow gig leave , I should think . when I see . Waule in it , I understand how yellow can have be wear for mourning . that gig seem to I more funereal than a hearse . but then . always have black crape on . how do she manage it , ? she friend can not always be die . " " I do not know at all . and she be not in the least evangelical , " say , reflectively , as if that religious point of view would have fully account for perpetual crape . " and , not poor , " she add , after a moment 's pause . " no , by ! they be as rich as , those Waules and Featherstones ; I mean , for people like they , who do not want to spend anything . and yet they hang about my uncle like vulture , and be afraid of a farthing go away from they side of the family . but I believe he hate they all . " the who be so far from be admirable in the eyes of these distant connection , have happen to say this very morning ( not at all with a defiant air , but in a low , muff , neutral tone , as of a voice hear through cotton wool ) that she do not wish " to enjoy they good opinion . " she be seat , as she observe , on she own brother 's hearth , and have be five - and - twenty year before she have be , which entitle she to speak when she own brother 's name have be make free with by those who have no right to it . " what be you drive at there ? " say , hold he stick between he knee and settle he wig , while he give she a momentary sharp glance , which seem to react on he like a dratch of cold air and set he coughing . have to defer she answer till he be quiet again , till have supply he with fresh syrup , and he have begin to rub the gold knob of he stick , look bitterly at the fire . it be a bright fire , but it make no difference to the chill - look purplish tint of . 's face , which be as neutral as she voice ; have mere chink for eye , and lip that hardly move in speaking . " the doctor can not master that cough , brother . it be just like what I have ; for I be you own sister , constitution and everything . but , as I be say , it be a pity Mr . 's family can not be better conduct . " " Tchah ! you say nothing of ' the sort . you say somebody have make free with my name . " " and no more than can be prove , if what everybody say be true . my brother tell I it be the talk up and down in how unsteady young Vincy be , and have be forever gambl at billiards since home he come . " " Nonsense ! what be a game at billiards ? it be a good gentlemanly game ; and young be not a clodhopper . if you son take to billiards , now , he would make a fool of himself . " " you nephew never take to billiards or any other game , brother , and be far from lose hundred of pound , which , if what everybody say be true , must be find somewhere else than out of the father 's pocket . for they say he be be lose money for year , though nobody would think so , to see he go course and keep open house as they do . and I have hear say condemn . Vincy beyond anything for she flightiness , and spoile
spoile she child so . " ! " what be to I ? I do not bank with he . " " well , be 's own sister , and they do say that mostly trade on the money ; and you may see yourself , brother , when a woman past forty have pink string always fly , and that light way of laugh at everything , it be very unbecoming . but indulge you child be one thing , and find money to pay they debt be another . and it be openly say that young have raise money on he expectation . I do not say what expectation . hear I , and be welcome to tell again . I know young people hang together . " " no , thank you , , " say . " I dislike hear scandal too much to wish to repeat it . " rub the knob of he stick and make a brief convulsive show of laughter , which have much the same genuineness as a old whist - player 's chuckle over a bad hand . still look at the fire , he say -- " and who pretend to say have not get expectation ? such a fine , spirited fellow be like enough to have th'ey . " there be a slight pause before Mrs . reply , and when she do so , she voice seem to be slightly moisten with tear , though she face be still dry . " whether or no , brother , it be naturally painful to I and my brother to hear you name make free with , and you complaint be such as may carry you off sudden , and people who be no more Featherstones than the - at the fair , openly reckon on you property come to _them . and I you own sister , and you own brother ! and if that be to be it , what have it pleas the Almighty to make family for ? " here 's tear fall , but with moderation . " come , out with it , ! " say , look at she . " you mean to say , have be get somebody to advance he money on what he say he know about my will , eh ? " " I never say so , brother " ( . 's voice have again become dry and unshaken ) . " it be tell I by my brother Solomon last night when he call come from market to give I advice about the old wheat , I be a widow , and my son only three - and - twenty , though steady beyond anything . and he have it from most undeniable authority , and not one , but many . " " stuff and nonsense ! I do not believe a word of it . it be all a get - up story . go to the window , missy ; I think I hear a horse . see if the doctor 's come . " " not get up by I , brother , nor yet by , who , whatever else he may be -- and I do not deny he have oddity -- have make he will and part he property equal between such kin as he be friend with ; though , for my part , I think there be time when some should be consider more than other . but make it no secret what he mean to do . " " the more fool he ! " say , with some difficulty ; break into a severe fit of coughing that require to stand near he , so that she do not find out whose horse they be which presently pause stamping on the gravel before the door . before 's cough be quiet , enter , bear up she riding - habit with much grace . she bow ceremoniously to , who say stifinitely , " how do you do , miss ? " smile and nod silently to , and remain stand till the coughing should cease , and allow she uncle to notice she . " heyday , miss ! " he say at last , " you have a fine color . where be ? " " see about the horse . he will be in presently . " " sit down , sit down . , you would better go . " even those neighbor who have call a old fox , have never accuse he of be insincerely polite , and he sister be quite used to the peculiar absence of ceremony with which he mark he sense of blood - relationship . indeed , she herself be accustom to think that entire freedom from the necessity of behaving agreeably be include in the Almighty 's intention about family . she rise slowly without any sign of resentment , and say in she usual muff monotone , " brother , I hope the new doctor will be able to do something for you . say there be great talk of he cleverness . I be sure it be my wish you should be spare . and there be none more ready to nurse you than you own sister and you own niece , if you would only say the word . there be , and , and , you know . " " ay , ay , I remember -- you will see I have remember th'ey all -- all dark and ugly . they would need have some money , eh ? there never be any beauty in the woman of we family ; but the Featherstone have always have some money , and the Waule too . have money too . a warm man be . ay , ay ; money be a good egg ; and if you
you have get money to leave behind you , lay it in a warm nest . good - by , . " here pull at both side of he wig as if he want to deafen himself , and he sister go away ruminat on this oracular speech of he . Notwithstand she jealousy of the and of , there remain as the nethermost sediment in she mental shallow a persuasion that she brother Featherstone could never leave he chief property away from he blood - relation :-- else , why have the carry off he two wife both childless , after he have gain so much by manganese and thing , turn up when nobody expect it ?-- and why be there a parish church , and the Waule and Powderell all sit ting in the same pew for generation , and the next to they , if , the after she brother 's death , everybody be to know that the property be go out of the family ? the human mind have at no period accept a moral chaos ; and so preposterous a result be not strictly conceivable . but we be frightene at much that be not strictly conceivable . when come in the old man eye he with a peculiar twinkle , which the younger have often have reason to interpret as pride in the satisfactory detail of he appearance . " you two missis go away , " say . " I want to speak to . " " come into my room , , you will not mind the cold for a little while , " say . the two girl have not only know each other in childhood , but have be at the same provincial school together ( as a article pupil ) , so that they have many memory in common , and like very well to talk in private . indeed , this tete - a - tete be one of 's object in come to . Featherstone would not begin the dialogue till the door have be close . he continue to look at with the same twinkle and with one of he habitual grimace , alternately screw and wide he mouth ; and when he speak , it be in a low tone , which might be take for that of a informer ready to be buy off , rather than for the tone of a offended senior . he be not a man to feel any strong moral indignation even on account of trespass against himself . it be natural that other should want to get a advantage over he , but then , he be a little too cunning for they . " so , sir , you have be pay ten per cent for money which you have promise to pay off by mortgage my land when I be dead and gone , eh ? you put my life at a twelvemonth , say . but I can alter my will yet . " blush . he have not borrow money in that way , for excellent reason . but he be conscious of have speak with some confidence ( perhaps with more than he exactly remember ) about he prospect of get 's land as a future means of pay present debt . " I do not know what you refer to , sir . I have certainly never borrow any money on such a insecurity . please to explain . " " no , sir , it be you must explain . I can alter my will yet , let I tell you . I be of sound mind --can reckon compound interest in my head , and remember every fool 's name as well as I could twenty year ago . what the deuce ? I be under eighty . I say , you must contradict this story . " " I have contradict it , sir , " answer , with a touch of impatience , not remember that he uncle do not verbally discriminate contradict from disproving , though no one be further from confound the two idea than old , who often wonder that so many fools take he own assertion for proof . " but I contradict it again . the story be a silly lie . " " Nonsense ! you must bring dockiment . it come from authority . " " name the authority , and make he name the man of whom I borrowed the money , and then I can disprove the story . " " it be pretty good authority , I think -- a man who know most of what go on in . it be that fine , religious , charitable uncle of ' yours . come now ! " here have he peculiar inward shake which signify merriment . " ? " " who else , eh ? " " then the story have grow into this lie out of some sermonize word he may have let fall about I . do they pretend that he name the man who lent I the money ? " " if there be such a man , depend upon it know he . but , suppose you only try to get the money lent , and do not get it -- 'uld know that too . you bring I a writing from to say he do not believe you have ever promise to pay you debt out of ' my land . come now ! " 's face require it be whole scale of grimace as a muscular outlet to he silent triumph in the soundness of he faculty . feel himself to be in a disgusting dilemma . " you must be joke , sir . , like other man , believe score of thing that be not true , and he have a prejudice against I . I could easily
easily get he to write that he know no fact in proof of the report you speak of , though it might lead to unpleasantness . but I could hardly ask he to write down what he believe or do not believe about I . " pause a instant , and then add , in polintic appeal to he uncle 's vanity , " that be hardly a thing for a gentleman to ask . " but he be disappointed in the result . " ay , I know what you mean . you would sooner offmend I than . and what be he ?-- he have get no land hereabout that ever I hear tell of . a speckilat fellow ! he may come down any day , when the devil leave off back he . and that be what he religion mean : he want to come in . that be nonsense ! there be one thing I make out pretty clear when I use to go to church -- and it be this : stick to the land . he promise land , and he give land , and he make chap rich with corn and cattle . but you take the other side . you like Bulstrode and speckilation better than Featherstone and land . " " I beg you pardon , sir , " say , rise , stand with he back to the fire and beat he boot with he whip . " I like neither Bulstrode nor speculation . " he speak rather sulkily , feel himself stalemate . " well , well , you can do without I , that be pretty clear , " say old , secretly dislik the possibility that would show himself at all independent . " you neither want a bit of land to make a squire of you instead of a starve parson , nor a lift of a hundred pound by the way . it be all one to I . I can make five codicil if I like , and I shall keep my bank - note for a nest - egg . it be all one to I . " colore again . Featherstone have rarely give he present of money , and at this moment it see almost harder to part with the immediate prospect of bank - note than with the more distant prospect of the land . " I be not ungrateful , sir . I never mean to show disregard for any kind intention you might have towards I . on the contrary . " " very good . then prove it . you bring I a letter from say he do not believe you have be crack and promise to pay you debt out of ' my land , and then , if there be any scrape you have get into , we will see if I can not back you a bit . come now ! that be a bargain . here , give I you arm . I will try and walk round the room . " , in spite of he irritation , have kindness enough in he to be a little sorry for the unloved , unvenerated old man , who with he dropsical leg look more than usually pitiable in walking . while give he arm , he think that he should not himself like to be a old fellow with he constitution break up ; and he wait good - temperedly , first before the window to hear the wonted remark about the guinea - fowl and the weather - cock , and then before the scanty book - shelf , of which the chief glory in dark calf be , , 's " , " and several volume of the " 's . " " read I the name of ' the book . come now ! you be a college man . " give he the title . " what do missy want with more book ? what must you be bring she more book for ? " " they amuse she , sir . she be very fond of reading . " " a little too fond , " say , captiously . " she be for read when she sit with I . but I put a stop to that . she be get the newspaper to read out loud . that be enough for one day , I should think . I can not abide to see she read to herself . you mind and not bring she any more book , do you hear ? " " yes , sir , I hear . " have receive this order before , and have secretly disobey it . he intend to disobey it again . " ring the bell , " say ; " I want missy to come down . " and have be talk faster than they male friend . they do not think of sit down , but stand at the toilet - table near the window while take off she hat , adjust she veil , and apply little touch of she finger - tip to she hair -- hair of infantine fairness , neither flaxen nor yellow . seem all the plainer stand at a angle between the two nymph -- the one in the glass , and the one out of it , who look at each other with eye of heavenly blue , deep enough to hold the most exquisite meaning a ingenious beholder could put into they , and deep enough to hide the meaning of the owner if these should happen to be less exquisite . only a few child in look blond by the side of , and the slim figure display by she riding - habit have delicate undulation . in fact , most man in , except she brother , hold that be the best girl
girl in the world , and some call she a angel . , on the contrary , have the aspect of a ordinary sinner : she be brown ; she curly dark hair be rough and stubborn ; she stature be low ; and it would not be true to declare , in satisfactory antithesis , that she have all the virtue . Plainness have its peculiar temptation and vice quite as much as beauty ; it be apt either to feign amiability , or , not feign it , to show all the repulsiveness of discontent : at any rate , to be call a ugly thing in contrast with that lovely creature you companion , be apt to produce some effect beyond a sense of fine veracity and fitness in the phrase . at the age of two - and - twenty have certainly not attain that perfect good sense and good principle which be usually recommend to the less fortunate girl , as if they be to be obtain in quantity ready mix , with a flavor of resignation as require . she shrewdness have a streak of satiric bitterness continually renew and never carry utterly out of sight , except by a strong current of gratitude towards those who , instead of tell she that she ought to be contente , do something to make she so . Advancing womanhood have temper she plainness , which be of a good human sort , such as the mother of we race have very commonly worn in all latitudes under a more or less become headgear . Rembrandt would have paint she with pleasure , and would have make she broad feature look out of the canva with intelligent honesty . for honesty , truth - tell fairness , be 's reign virtue : she neither try to create illusion , nor indulge in they for she own behoof , and when she be in a good mood she have humor enough in she to laugh at herself . when she and happen both to be reflecte in the glass , she say , laughingly -- " what a brown patch I be by the side of you , ! you be the most unbecoming companion . " " oh no ! no one think of you appearance , you be so sensible and useful , . be of very little consequence in reality , " say , turn she head towards , but with eye swerve towards the new view of she neck in the glass . " you mean my beauty , " say , rather sardonically . think , " poor Mary , she take the kindest thing ill . " Alould she say , " what have you be do lately ? " "I ? oh , mind the house -- pour out syrup -- pretend to be amiable and content -- learn to have a bad opinion of everybody . " " it be a wretched life for you . " " no , " say , curtly , with a little toss of she head . " I think my life be pleasanter than you 's . " " yes ; but be so uninteresting , and not young . " " she be interesting to herself , I suppose ; and I be not at all sure that everything get easier as one get older . " " no , " say , reflectively ; " one wonder what such people do , without any prospect . to be sure , there be religion as a support . but , " she add , dimpl , " it be very different with you . you may have a offer . " " have any one tell you he mean to make I one ? " " of course not . I mean , there be a gentleman who may fall in love with you , see you almost every day . " a certain change in 's face be chiefly determine by the resolve not to show any change . " do that always make people fall in love ? " she answer , carelessly ; " it seem to I quite as often a reason for detest each other . " " not when they be interesting and agreeable . I hear that be both . " " oh , Lydgate ! " say , with a unmistakable lapse into indifference . " you want to know something about he , " she add , not choose to indulge 's indirectness . " merely , how you like he . " " there be no question of like at present . my like always want some little kindness to kindle it . I be not magnanimous enough to like people who speak to I without seem to see I . " " be he so haughty ? " say , with heighten satisfaction . " you know that he be of good family ? " " no ; he do not give that as a reason . " " ! you be the oddest girl . but what sort of look man be he ? describe he to I . " " how can one describe a man ? I can give you a inventory : heavy eyebrow , dark eye , a straight nose , thick dark hair , large solid white hand -- and -- let I see -- oh , a exquisite cambric pocket - handkerchief . but you will see he . you know this be about the time of he visit . " blush a little , but say , meditatively , " I rather like a haughty manner . I can not endure a rattling young man . " " I do not tell you that be haughty ; but il y e a pour tous les gout , as little Mamselle use to say
say , and if any girl can choose the particular sort of conceit she would like , I should think it be you , . " " Haughtiness be not conceit ; I call conceit . " " I wish no one say any worse of he . he should be more careful . have be tell uncle that be very unsteady . " speak from a girlish impulse which get the better of she judgment . there be a vague uneasiness associate with the word " unsteady " which she hope might say something to dissipate . but she purposely abstain from mention 's more special insinuation . " oh , be horrid ! " say . she would not have allow herself so unsuitable a word to any one but . " what do you mean by horrid ? " " he be so idle , and make papa so angry , and say he will not take order . " " I think be quite right . " " how can you say he be quite right , ? I think you have more sense of religion . " " he be not fit to be a clergyman . " " but he ought to be fit . " -- " well , then , he be not what he ought to be . I know some other people who be in the same case . " " but no one approve of they . I should not like to marry a clergyman ; but there must be clergymen . " " it do not follow that must be one . " " but when papa have be at the expense of educate he for it ! and only suppose , if he should have no fortune leave he ? " " I can suppose that very well , " say , dryly . " then I wonder you can defend , " say , inclin to push this point . " I do not defend he , " say , laugh ; " I would defend any parish from have he for a clergyman . " " but of course if he be a clergyman , he must be different . " " yes , he would be a great hypocrite ; and he be not that yet . " " it be of no use say anything to you , . you always take 's part . " " why should I not take he part ? " say , light up . " he would take mine . he be the only person who take the least trouble to oblige I . " " you make I feel very uncomfortable , , " say , with she gravest mildness ; " I would not tell mamma for the world . " " what would you not tell she ? " say , angrily . " pray do not go into a rage , , " say , mildly as ever . " if you mamma be afraid that will make I a offer , tell she that I would not marry he if he ask I . but he be not go to do so , that I be aware . he certainly never have ask I . " " Mary , you be always so violent . " " and you be always so exasperat . " "I ? what can you blame I for ? " " oh , blameless people be always the most exasperating . there be the bell -- I think we must go down . " " I do not mean to quarrel , " say , put on she hat . " ? Nonsense ; we have not quarrell . if one be not to get into a rage sometimes , what be the good of be friend ? " " be I to repeat what you have say ? " " just as you please . I never say what I be afraid of have repeat . but let we go down . " be rather late this morning , but the visitor stay long enough to see he ; for ask to s to he , and she herself be so kind as to propose a second favorite song of he -- " flow on , thou shine river " -- after she have sung " Home , sweet home " ( which she detest ) . this hard - head old approve of the sentimental song , as the suitable garnish for girl , and also as fundamentally fine , sentiment be the right thing for a song . be still applaud the last performance , and assure missy that she voice be as clear as a blackbird 's , when 's horse pass the window . he dull expectation of the usual disagreeable routine with a aged patient -- who can hardly believe that medicine would not " set he up " if the doctor be only clever enough -- add to he general disbelief in charms , make a doubly effective background to this vision of , whom old Featherstone make haste ostentatiously to introduce as he niece , though he have never think it worth while to speak of in that light . nothing escape in 's graceful behavior : how delicately she waive the notice which the old man 's want of taste have thrust upon she by a quiet gravity , not show she dimple on the wrong occasion , but show they afterwards in speak to , to whom she address herself with so much good - natured interest , that Lydgate , after quickly examine more fully than he have do before , see a adorable kindness in 's eye . but from some cause look rather out of temper . " have be singe I a song -- you have nothing to say against that , eh
eh , doctor ? " say . " I like it better than you physic . " " that have make I forget how the time be go , " say , rise to reach she hat , which she have laid aside before singing , so that she flower - like head on its white stem be see in perfection above - she riding - habit . " , we must really go . " " very good , " say , who have he own reason for not be in the best spirit , and want to get away . " be a musician ? " say , follow she with he eye . ( every nerve and muscle in be adjust to the consciousness that she be be look at . she be by nature a actress of part that enter into she physique : she even act she own character , and so well , that she do not know it to be precisely she own . ) " the best in , I will be bound , " say , " let the next be who she will . , ? speak up for you sister . " " I be afraid I be out of court , sir . my evidence would be good for nothing . " " have not a very high standard , uncle , " say , with a pretty lightness , go towards she whip , which lay at a distance . be quick in anticipate she . he reach the whip before she do , and turn to present it to she . she bow and look at he : he of course be look at she , and they eye meet with that peculiar meeting which be never arrive at by effort , but seem like a sudden divine clearance of haze . I think turn a little paler than usual , but blush deeply and feel a certain astonishment . after that , she be really anxious to go , and do not know what sort of stupidity she uncle be talk of when she go to shake hand with he . yet this result , which she take to be a mutual impression , call fall in love , be just what have contemplate beforehand . ever since that important new arrival in she have woven a little future , of which something like this scene be the necessary beginning . Stranger , whether wrecke and cling to a raft , or duly escort and accompany by portmanteaus , have always have a circumstantial fascination for the virgin mind , against which native merit have urge itself in vain . and a stranger be absolutely necessary to 's social romance , which have always turn on a lover and bridegroom who be not a , and who have no connection at all like she own : of late , indeed , the construction seem to demand that he should somehow be related to a baronet . now that she and the stranger have meet , reality prove much more move than anticipation , and could not doubt that this be the great epoch of she life . she judge of she own symptom as those of awakening love , and she hold it still more natural that should have fall in love at first sight of she . these thing happen so often at ball , and why not by the morning light , when the complexion show all the better for it ? , though no older than , be rather use to be fall in love with ; but she , for she part , have remain indifferent and fastidiously critical towards both fresh sprig and fad bachelor . and here be suddenly correspond to she ideal , be altogether foreign to Middlemarch , carry a certain air of distinction congruous with good family , and possesse connection which offer vista of that middle - class heaven , rank ; a man of talent , also , whom it would be especially delightful to enslave : in fact , a man who have touch she nature quite newly , and bring a vivid interest into she life which be better than any fancied " might - be " such as she be in the habit of opposing to the actual . thus , in riding home , both the brother and the sister be preoccupy and inclin to be silent . , whose basis for she structure have the usual airy slightness , be of remarkably detailed and realistic imagination when the foundation have be once presuppose ; and before they have ride a mile she be far on in the costume and introduction of she wedded life , have determine on she house in - march , and foresee the visit she would pay to she husband 's high - breed relative at a distance , whose finish manners she could appropriate as thoroughly as she have do she school accomplishment , prepare herself thus for vaguer elevation which might ultimately come . there be nothing financial , still less sordid , in she prevision : she care about what be consider refinement , and not about the money that be to pay for they . 's mind , on the other hand , be busy with a anxiety which even he ready hopefulness could not immediately quell . he see no way of elud 's stupid demand without incurr consequence which he like less even than the task of fulfil it . he father be already out of humor with he , and would be still more so if he be the occasion of any additional coolness between he own family and the Bulstrode . then , he himself hate have to go and speak to he uncle , and perhaps after drink wine he have say many foolish thing about 's
's property , and these have be magnify by report . feel that he make a wretched figure as a fellow who brag about expectation from a queer old miser like , and go to beg for certificate at he bidding . but --those expectation ! he really have they , and he see no agreeable alternative if he give they up ; beside , he have lately make a debt which gall he extremely , and old have almost bargained to pay it off . the whole affair be miserably small : he debt be small , even he expectation be not anything so very magnificent . have know man to whom he would have be asham of confess the smallness of he scrap . such rumination naturally produce a streak of misanthropic bitterness . to be bear the son of a manufacturer , and inevitable heir to nothing in particular , while such man as Mainwaring and -- certainly life be a poor business , when a spirited young fellow , with a good appetite for the best of everything , have so poor a outlook . it have not occur to that the introduction of 's name in the matter be a fiction of old 's ; nor could this have make any difference to he position . he see plainly enough that the old man want to exercise he power by torment he a little , and also probably to get some satisfaction out of see he on unpleasant term with . fancie that he see to the bottom of he uncle 's soul , though in reality half what he see there be no more than the reflex of he own inclination . the difficult task of know another soul be not for young gentleman whose consciousness be chiefly make up of they own wish . 's main point of debate with himself be , whether he should tell he father , or try to get through the affair without he father 's knowledge . it be probably Mrs . Waule who have be talk about he ; and if have repeat 's report to , it would be sure to reach he father , who would as surely question he about it . he say to , as they slacken they pace -- " , do tell you that . have say anything about I ? " " yes , indeed , she do . " " what ? " " that you be very unsteady . " " be that all ? " " I should think that be enough , . " " you be sure she say no more ? " " mention nothing else . but really , , I think you ought to be asham . " " oh , fudge ! do not lecture I . what do say about it ? " " I be not oblige to tell you . you care so very much what Mary say , and you be too rude to allow I to speak . " " of course I care what say . she be the best girl I know . " " I should never have think she be a girl to fall in love with . " " how do you know what man would fall in love with ? girls never know . " " at least , , let I advise _you not to fall in love with she , for she say she would not marry you if you ask she . " " she might have wait till I do ask she . " " I know it would nettle you , . " " not at all . she would not have say so if you have not provoke she . " before reach home , conclude that he would tell the whole affair as simply as possible to he father , who might perhaps take on himself the unpleasant business of speak to . . old and young . chapter XIII . 1st Gent . how class you man ?-- as better than the most , or , seem better , worse beneath that cloak ? as saint or knave , pilgrim or hypocrite ? 2d . Nay , tell I how you class you wealth of book the drift relic of all time . as well sort they at once by size and livery : , tall copy , and the common calf will hardly cover more diversity than all you label cunningly devise to class you unread authors . in consequence of what he have hear from , determine to speak with in he private room at the at half - past one , when he be usually free from other caller . but a visitor have come in at one o'clock , and have so much to say to he , that there be little chance of the interview be over in half a hour . the banker 's speech be fluent , but it be also copious , and he use up a appreciable amount of time in brief meditative pause . do not imagine he sickly aspect to have be of the yellow , black - haire sort : he have a pale blond skin , thin gray - besprinkled brown hair , light - gray eye , and a large forehead . loud man call he subdue tone a undertone , and sometimes imply that it be inconsistent with openness ; though there seem to be no reason why a loud man should not be give to concealment of anything except he own voice , unless it can be show that have place the seat of candor in the lung . have also a deferential bending attitude in listening , and a apparently fix attentiveness in he eye which make those person who think themselves worth hearing infer that he be seek the utmost improvement from they
they discourse . other , who expect to make no great figure , dislike this kind of moral lantern turn on they . if you be not proud of you cellar , there be no thrill of satisfaction in see you guest hold up he wine - glass to the light and look judicial . such joy be reserve for conscious merit . hence 's close attention be not agreeable to the publican and sinner in ; it be attribute by some to he be a Pharisee , and by other to he be Evangelical . less superficial reasoner among they wish to know who he father and grandfather be , observe that five - and - twenty year ago nobody have ever hear of a in . to he present visitor , , the scrutinizing look be a matter of indifference : he simply form a unfavorable opinion of the banker 's constitution , and conclude that he have a eager inward life with little enjoyment of tangible thing . " I shall be exceedingly oblige if you will look in on I here occasionally , , " the banker observe , after a brief pause . " if , as I dare to hope , I have the privilege of find you a valuable coadjutor in the interesting matter of hospital management , there will be many question which we shall need to discuss in private . as to the new hospital , which be nearly finish , I shall consider what you have say about the advantages of the special destination for fevers . the decision will rest with I , for though have give the land and timber for the building , he be not dispose to give he personal attention to the object . " " there be few thing better worth the pain in a provincial town like this , " say . " a fine fever hospital in addition to the old infirmary might be the nucleus of a medical school here , when once we get we medical reform ; and what would do more for medical education than the spread of such school over the country ? a bear provincial man who have a grain of public spirit as well as a few idea , should do what he can to resist the rush of everything that be a little better than common towards . any valid professional aim may often find a freer , if not a richer field , in the province . " one of 's gifts be a voice habitually deep and sonorous , yet capable of become very low and gentle at the right moment . about he ordinary bear there be a certain fling , a fearless expectation of success , a confidence in he own power and integrity much fortify by contempt for petty obstacle or seduction of which he have have no experience . but this proud openness be make lovable by a expression of unaffected good - will . perhaps like he the better for the difference between they in pitch and manners ; he certainly like he the better , as do , for be a stranger in . one can begin so many thing with a new person !--even begin to be a better man . " I shall rejoice to furnish you zeal with fuller opportunity , " answer ; " I mean , by confid to you the superintendence of my new hospital , should a maturer knowledge favor that issue , for I be determined that so great a object shall not be shackle by we two physician . indeed , I be encourage to consider you advent to this town as a gracious indication that a more manifest blessing be now to be award to my effort , which have hithertoo be much with stood . with regard to the old infirmary , we have gain the initial point -- I mean you election . and now I hope you will not shrink from incurr a certain amount of jealousy and dislike from you professional breth by present yourself as a reformer . " " I will not profess bravery , " say , smile , " but I acknowledge a good deal of pleasure in fighting , and I should not care for my profession , if I do not believe that better method be to be find and enforce there as well as everywhere else . " " the standard of that profession be low in , my dear sir , " say the banker . " I mean in knowledge and skill ; not in social status , for we medical man be most of they connect with respectable townspeople here . my own imperfect health have induce I to give some attention to those palliative resource which the divine mercy have place within we reach . I have consult eminent man in the metropolis , and I be painfully aware of the backwardness under which medical treatment labors in we provincial district . " " yes ; -- with we present medical rule and education , one must be satisfied now and then to meet with a fair practitioner . as to all the higher question which determine the starting - point of a diagnosis -- as to the philosophy of medial evidence -- any glimmering of these can only come from a scientific culture of which country practitioner have usually no more notion than the man in the moon . " , bend and look intently , find the form which have give to he agreement not quite suit to he comprehension . under such circumstance a judicious man change the topic and enter on ground where he own gift may be more useful . " I be aware , " he say , " that the peculiar bia of medical ability be towards material means . nevertheless , , I hope
hope we shall not vary in sentiment as to a measure in which you be not likely to be actively concerned , but in which you sympathetic concurrence may be a aid to I . you recognize , I hope ; the existence of spiritual interests in you patient ? " " certainly I do . but those word be apt to cover different meaning to different mind . " " precisely . and on such subject wrong teaching be as fatal as no teaching . now a point which I have much at heart to secure be a new regulation as to clerical attendance at the old infirmary . the building stand in 's parish . you know ? " " I have see he . he give I he vote . I must call to thank he . he seem a very bright pleasant little fellow . and I understand he be a naturalist . " " , my dear sir , be a man deeply painful to contemplate . I suppose there be not a clergyman in this country who have greater talents . " pause and look meditative . " I have not yet be pain by find any excessive talent in , " say , bluntly . " what I desire , " continue , look still more serious , " be that 's attendance at the hospital should be supersed by the appointment of a chaplain -- of , in fact -- and that no other spiritual aid should be call in . " " as a medial man I could have no opinion on such a point unless I know , and even then I should require to know the case in which he be apply . " Lydgate smile , but he be bend on be circumspect . " of course you can not enter fully into the merit of this measure at present . but " -- here begin to speak with a more chiselled emphasis -- " the subject be likely to be refer to the medical board of the infirmary , and what I trust I may ask of you be , that in virtue of the cooperation between we which I now look forward to , you will not , so far as you be concerned , be influence by my opponent in this matter . " " I hope I shall have nothing to do with clerical dispute , " say . " the path I have choose be to work well in my own profession . " " my responsibility , , be of a broader kind . with I , indeed , this question be one of sacred accountableness ; whereas with my opponent , I have good reason to say that it be a occasion for gratify a spirit of worldly opposition . but I shall not therefore drop one iota of my conviction , or cease to identify myself with that truth which a evil generation hate . I have devote myself to this object of hospital - improvement , but I will boldly confess to you , , that I should have no interest in hospitals if I believe that nothing more be concerned therein than the cure of mortal disease . I have another ground of action , and in the face of persecution I will not conceal it . " 's voice have become a loud and agitate whisper as he say the last word . " there we certainly differ , " say . but he be not sorry that the door be now open , and be announce . that florid sociable personage be become more interesting to he since he have see . not that , like she , he have be weave any future in which they lot be united ; but a man naturally remember a charming girl with pleasure , and be willing to dine where he may see she again . before he take leave , have give that invitation which he have be " in no hurry about , " for at breakfast have mention that she think she uncle have take the new doctor into great favor . , alone with he brother - in - law , pour himself out a glass of water , and open a sandwich - box . " I can not persuade you to adopt my regimen , ? " " no , no ; I have no opinion of that system . life want padding , " say , unable to omit he portable theory . " however , " he go on , accente the word , as if to dismiss all irrelevance , " what I come here to talk about be a little affair of my young scapegrace , 's . " " that be a subject on which you and I be likely to take quite as different view as on diet , . " " I hope not this time . " ( be resolve to be good - humored . ) " the fact be , it be about a whim of old 's . somebody have be cook up a story out of spite , and tell it to the old man , to try to set he against . he be very fond of , and be likely to do something handsome for he ; indeed he have as good as tell that he mean to leave he he land , and that make other people jealous . " " Vincy , I must repeat , that you will not get any concurrence from I as to the course you have pursue with you eldest son . it be entirely from worldly vanity that you destin he for the Church : with a family of three son and four daughter , you be not warrant in devoting money to a expensive education which have succeed in nothing
nothing but in give he extravagant idle habit . you be now reap the consequence . " to point out other people 's error be a duty that rarely shrank from , but be not equally prepare to be patient . when a man have the immediate prospect of be mayor , and be ready , in the interest of commerce , to take up a firm attitude on politics generally , he have naturally a sense of he importance to the framework of thing which seem to throw question of private conduct into the background . and this particular reproof irritate he more than any other . it be eminently superfluous to he to be tell that he be reap the consequence . but he feel he neck under 's yoke ; and though he usually enjoy kicking , he be anxious to refrain from that relief . " as to that , , it be no use go back . I be not one of you pattern man , and I do not pretend to be . I could not foresee everything in the trade ; there be not a finer business in than ours , and the lad be clever . my poor brother be in the , and would have do well -- have get preferment already , but that stomach fever take he off : else he might have be a dean by this time . I think I be justified in what I try to do for . if you come to religion , it seem to I a man should not want to carve out he meat to a ounce beforehand :-- one must trust a little to Providence and be generous . it be a good british feeling to try and raise you family a little : in my opinion , it be a father 's duty to give he son a fine chance . " " I do not wish to act otherwise than as you best friend , , when I say that what you have be utter just now be one mass of worldliness and inconsistent folly . " " very well , " say , kick in spite of resolution , " I never profess to be anything but worldly ; and , what be more , I do not see anybody else who be not worldly . I suppose you do not conduct business on what you call unworldly principle . the only difference I see be that one worldliness be a little bit honester than another . " " this kind of discussion be unfruitful , , " say , who , finish he sandwich , have throw himself back in he chair , and shade he eye as if weary . " you have some more particular business . " " yes , yes . the long and short of it be , somebody have tell old Featherstone , give you as the authority , that have be borrowe or try to borrow money on the prospect of he land . of course you never say any such nonsense . but the old fellow will insist on it that should bring he a denial in you handwriting ; that be , just a bit of a note say you do not believe a word of such stuff , either of he have borrowed or try to borrow in such a fool 's way . I suppose you can have no objection to do that . " " pardon I . I have a objection . I be by no means sure that you son , in he recklessness and ignorance -- I will use no severer word -- have not try to raise money by hold out he future prospects , or even that some one may not have be foolish enough to supply he on so vague a presumption : there be plenty of such lax money - lend as of other folly in the world . " " but give I he honor that he have never borrowed money on the pretence of any understanding about he uncle 's land . he be not a liar . I do not want to make he better than he be . I have blow he up well -- nobody can say I wink at what he do . but he be not a liar . and I should have think -- but I may be wrong -- that there be no religion to hinder a man from believe the best of a young fellow , when you do not know worse . it seem to I it would be a poor sort of religion to put a spoke in he wheel by refuse to say you do not believe such harm of he as you have get no good reason to believe . " " I be not at all sure that I should be befriend you son by smooth he way to the future possession of 's property . I can not regard wealth as a blessing to those who use it simply as a harvest for this world . you do not like to hear these thing , , but on this occasion I feel call upon to tell you that I have no motive for furthering such a disposition of property as that which you refer to . I do not shrink from say that it will not tend to you son 's eternal welfare or to the glory of . why then should you expect I to pen this kind of affidavit , which have no object but to keep up a foolish partiality and secure a foolish bequest ? " " if you mean to hinder everybody from have money but saint and evangelist , you must give up some profitable partnership , that be all I can say , " burst out very bluntly . " it may be for
for the glory of , but it be not for the glory of the trade , that 's house use those blue and green dyes it get from the manufactory ; they rot the silk , that be all I know about it . perhaps if other people know so much of the profit go to the glory of , they might like it better . but I do not mind so much about that -- I could get up a pretty row , if I choose . " pause a little before he answer . " you pain I very much by speak in this way , . I do not expect you to understand my grounds of action -- it be not a easy thing even to thread a path for principle in the intricacy of the world -- still less to make the thread clear for the careless and the scoffing . you must remember , if you please , that I stretch my tolerance towards you as my wife 's brother , and that it little become you to complain of I as withholding material help towards the worldly position of you family . I must remind you that it be not you own prudence or judgment that have enable you to keep you place in the trade . " " very likely not ; but you have be no loser by my trade yet , " say , thoroughly nettle ( a result which be seldom much retarde by previous resolution ) . " and when you marry , I do not see how you could expect that we family should not hang by the same nail . if you have change you mind , and want my family to come down in the world , you would better say so . I have never change ; I be a plain now , just as I use to be before doctrine come up . I take the world as I find it , in trade and everything else . I be contente to be no worse than my neighbor . but if you want we to come down in the world , say so . I shall know better what to do then . " " you talk unreasonably . shall you come down in the world for want of this letter about you son ? " " well , whether or not , I consider it very unhandsome of you to refuse it . such doings may be line with religion , but outside they have a nasty , dog - in - the - manger look . you might as well slander : it come pretty near to it when you refuse to say you do not set a slander go . it be this sort of thing -- this tyrannical spirit , want to play bishop and banker everywhere -- it be this sort of thing make a man 's name stink . " " Vincy , if you insist on quarrelling with I , it will be exceedingly painful to as well as myself , " say , with a trifle more eagerness and paleness than usual . " I do not want to quarrel . it be for my interest -- and perhaps for yours too -- that we should be friend . I bear you no grudge ; I think no worse of you than I do of other people . a man who half starve himself , and go the length in family prayer , and so on , that you do , believe in he religion whatever it may be : you could turn over you capital just as fast with cursing and swear :-- plenty of fellow do . you like to be master , there be no denying that ; you must be first chop in heaven , else you will not like it much . but you be my sister 's husband , and we ought to stick together ; and if I know , she will consider it you fault if we quarrel because you strain at a gnat in this way , and refuse to do a good turn . and I do not mean to say I shall bear it well . I consider it unhandsome . " rise , begin to button he great - coat , and look steadily at he brother - in - law , mean to imply a demand for a decisive answer . this be not the first time that have begin by admonish , and have end by see a very unsatisfactory reflection of himself in the coarse unflattering mirror which that manufacturer 's mind present to the subtler light and shadows of he fellow - man ; and perhaps he experience ought to have warn he how the scene would end . but a full - fed fountain will be generous with its water even in the rain , when they be worse than useless ; and a fine fount of admonition be apt to be equally irrepressible . it be not in 's nature to comply directly in consequence of uncomfortable suggestion . before change he course , he always need to shape he motives and bring they into accordance with he habitual standard . he say , at last -- " I will reflect a little , . I will mention the subject to . I shall probably send you a letter . " " very well . as soon as you can , please . I hope it will all be settled before I see you to - morrow . " . " follow here the strict receipt for that sauce to dainty meat , named Idleness , which many eat by preference , and call it sweet : first watch for morsel , like a hound mix well with buffet , stir they round with good thick oil of flattery
flattery , and froth with mean self - laud lie . serve warm : the vessel you must choose to keep it in be dead man 's shoe . " 's consultation of seem to have have the effect desire by , for early the next morning a letter come which could carry to as the require testimony . the old gentleman be stay in bed on account of the cold weather , and as be not to be see in the sitting - room , go up - stair immediately and present the letter to he uncle , who , prop up comfortably on a bed - rest , be not less able than usual to enjoy he consciousness of wisdom in distrusting and frustrating mankind . he put on he spectacle to read the letter , purse up he lip and draw down they corner . " under the circumstance I will not decline to state my conviction -- tchah ! what fine word the fellow puts ! he be as fine as a auctioneer -- that you son have not obtain any advance of money on bequest promise by -- promise ? who say I have ever promise ? I promise nothing -- I shall make codicil as long as I like -- and that consider the nature of such a proceeding , it be unreasonable to presume that a young man of sense and character would attempt it -- ah , but the gentleman do not say you be a young man of sense and character , mark you that , sir !-- as to my own concern with any report of such a nature , I distinctly affirm that I never make any statement to the effect that you son have borrowed money on any property that might accrue to he on 's demise -- bless my heart ! ' property '--accrue --demise ! be nothing to he . he could not speak finer if he want to borrow . well , " here look over he spectacle at , while he hand back the letter to he with a contemptuous gesture , " you do not suppose I believe a thing because write it out fine , eh ? " colore . " you wish to have the letter , sir . I should think it very likely that 's denial be as good as the authority which tell you what he deny . " " every bit . I never say I believe either one or the other . and now what d ' you expect ? " say , curtly , keep on he spectacle , but withdraw he hand under he wrap . " I expect nothing , sir . " F with difficulty restrain himself from vent he irritation . " I come to bring you the letter . if you like I will bid you good morning . " " not yet , not yet . ring the bell ; I want missy to come . " it be a servant who come in answer to the bell . " tell missy to come ! " say , impatiently . " what business have she to go away ? " he speak in the same tone when come . " why could not you sit still here till I tell you to go ? want my waistcoat now . I tell you always to put it on the bed . " 's eye look rather red , as if she have be cry . it be clear that be in one of he most snappish humors this morning , and though have now the prospect of receive the much - need present of money , he would have prefer be free to turn round on the old tyrant and tell he that be too good to be at he beck . though have risen as she enter the room , she have barely notice he , and look as if she nerve be quiver with the expectation that something would be throw at she . but she never have anything worse than word to dread . when she go to reach the waistcoat from a peg , go up to she and say , " allow I . " " let it alone ! you bring it , missy , and lay it down here , " say . " now you go away again till I call you , " he add , when the waistcoat be lay down by he . it be usual with he to season he pleasure in show favor to one person by be especially disagreeable to another , and be always at hand to furnish the condiment . when he own relatives come she be treat better . slowly he take out a bunch of key from the waistcoat pocket , and slowly he draw forth a tin box which be under the bed - clothes . " you expect I be go to give you a little fortune , eh ? " he say , look above he spectacle and pausing in the act of open the lid . " not at all , sir . you be good enough to speak of make I a present the other day , else , of course , I should not have think of the matter . " but be of a hopeful disposition , and a vision have present itself of a sum just large enough to deliver he from a certain anxiety . when get into debt , it always see to he highly probable that something or other -- he do not necessarily conceive what -- would come to pass enable he to pay in due time . and now that the providential occurrence be apparently close at hand , it would have be sheer absurdity to think that the supply would be short of the need : as absurd as
as a faith that believe in half a miracle for want of strength to believe in a whole one . the deep - vein hand finger many bank - note - one after the other , lay they down flat again , while lean back in he chair , scorn to look eager . he hold himself to be a gentleman at heart , and do not like court a old fellow for he money . at last , ey he again over he spectacle and present he with a little sheaf of note : could see distinctly that there be but five , as the less significant edge gap towards he . but then , each might mean fifty pound . he take they , say -- " I be very much obliged to you , sir , " and be go to roll they up without seem to think of they value . but this do not suit , who be eye he intently . " come , do not you think it worth you while to count th'ey ? you take money like a lord ; I suppose you lose it like one . " " I think I be not to look a gift - horse in the mouth , sir . but I shall be very happy to count they . " be not so happy , however , after he have count they . for they actually present the absurdity of be less than he hopefulness have decide that they must be . what can the fitness of thing mean , if not they fitness to a man 's expectation ? fail this , absurdity and atheism gape behind he . the collapse for be severe when he find that he hold no more than five twenty , and he share in the higher education of this country do not seem to help he . nevertheless he say , with rapid change in he fair complexion -- " it be very handsome of you , sir . " " I should think it be , " say , lock he box and replace it , then take off he spectacle deliberately , and at length , as if he inward meditation have more deeply convince he , repeat , " I should think it handsome . " " I assure you , sir , I be very grateful , " say , who have have time to recover he cheerful air . " so you ought to be . you want to cut a figure in the world , and I reckon be the only one you have get to trust to . " here the old man 's eye gleam with a curiously mingled satisfaction in the consciousness that this smart young fellow rely upon he , and that the smart young fellow be rather a fool for do so . " yes , indeed : I be not bear to very splendid chance . few man have be more cramped than I have be , " say , with some sense of surprise at he own virtue , consider how hardly he be deal with . " it really seem a little too bad to have to ride a break - win hunter , and see man , who , be not half such good judge as yourself , able to throw away any amount of money on buy bad bargain . " " well , you can buy yourself a fine hunter now . eighty pound be enough for that , I reckon -- and you will have twenty pound over to get yourself out of any little scrape , " say , chuckl slightly . " you be very good , sir , " say , with a fine sense of contrast between the word and he feeling . " ay , rather a better uncle than you fine uncle Bulstrode . you will not get much out of he spekilation , I think . he be get a pretty strong string round you father 's leg , by what I hear , eh ? " " my father never tell I anything about he affair , sir . " " well , he show some sense there . but other people find th'ey out without he telling . _o 'll_ never have much to leave you : he will most - like die without a will -- he be the sort of man to do it -- let them make he mayor of as much as they like . but you will not get much by he dying without a will , though you _are_ the eldest son . " think that have never be so disagreeable before . true , he have never before give he quite so much money at once . " shall I destroy this letter of 's , sir ? " say , rise with the letter as if he would put it in the fire . " ay , ay , I do not want it . it be worth no money to I . " carry the letter to the fire , and thrust the poker through it with much zest . he longe to get out of the room , but he be a little asham before he inner self , as well as before he uncle , to run away immediately after pocket the money . presently , the farm - bailiff come up to give he master a report , and , to he unspeakable relief , be dismiss with the injunction to come again soon . he have long not only to be set free from he uncle , but also to find . she be now in she usual place by the fire , with sew in she hand and a book open on the little table by she side . she eyelid have lose some of they
they redness now , and she have she usual air of self - command . " be I want up - stair ? " she say , half rise as enter . " no ; I be only dismiss , because Simmons be go up . " sit down again , and resume she work . she be certainly treat he with more indifference than usual : she do not know how affectionately indignant he have feel on she behalf up - stair . " may I stay here a little , , or shall I bear you ? " " pray sit down , " say ; " you will not be so heavy a bore as , who be here yesterday , and he sit down without ask my leave . " " poor fellow ! I think he be in love with you . " " I be not aware of it . and to I it be one of the most odious thing in a girl 's life , that there must always be some supposition of fall in love come between she and any man who be kind to she , and to whom she be grateful . I should have think that I , at least , might have be safe from all that . I have no ground for the nonsensical vanity of fancying everybody who come near I be in love with I . " do not mean to betray any feeling , but in spite of herself she end in a tremulous tone of vexation . " ! I do not mean to make you angry . I do not know you have any reason for be grateful to I . I forget what a great service you think it if any one snuff a candle for you . also have he pride , and be not go to show that he know what have call forth this outburst of 's . " oh , I be not angry , except with the way of the world . I do like to be speak to as if I have common - sense . I really often feel as if I could understand a little more than I ever hear even from young gentleman who have be to college . " have recover , and she speak with a suppress rippling under - current of laughter pleasant to hear . " I do not care how merry you be at my expense this morning , " say , " I think you look so sad when you come up - stair . it be a shame you should stay here to be bully in that way . " " oh , I have a easy life -- by comparison . I have try be a teacher , and I be not fit for that : my mind be too fond of wander on its own way . I think any hardship be better than pretend to do what one be pay for , and never really do it . everything here I can do as well as any one else could ; perhaps better than some -- , for example . though she be just the sort of beautiful creature that be imprison with ogre in fairy tale . " " _Rosy !_ " cry , in a tone of profound brotherly scepticism . " come , ! " say , emphatically ; " you have no right to be so critical . " " do you mean anything particular -- just now ? " " no , I mean something general -- always . " " oh , that I be idle and extravagant . well , I be not fit to be a poor man . I should not have make a bad fellow if I have be rich . " " you would have do you duty in that state of life to which it have not pleas to call you , " say , laugh . " well , I could not do my duty as a clergyman , any more than you could do yours as a governess . you ought to have a little fellow - feel there , . " " I never say you ought to be a clergyman . there be other sort of work . it seem to I very miserable not to resolve on some course and act accordingly . " " so I could , if -- " break off , and stand up , lean against the mantel - piece . " if you be sure you should not have a fortune ? " " I do not say that . you want to quarrel with I . it be too bad of you to be guide by what other people say about I . " " how can I want to quarrel with you ? I should be quarrell with all my new book , " say , lift the volume on the table . " however naughty you may be to other people , you be good to I . " " because I like you better than any one else . but I know you despise I . " " yes , I do -- a little , " say , nodd , with a smile . " you would admire a stupendous fellow , who would have wise opinion about everything . " " yes , I should . " be sew swiftly , and see provokingly mistress of the situation . when a conversation have take a wrong turn for we , we only get farther and farther into the swamp of awkwardness . this be what feel . " I suppose a woman be never in love with any one she have always know -- ever since she can remember ; as a man often be . it be always some new fellow who
who strike a girl . " " let I see , " say , the corner of she mouth curl archly ; " I must go back on my experience . there be -- she seem a example of what you say . but then have probably know a long while ; and -- she have know ever since they be child ; but then he seem to have be a estimable young man ; and be still more deeply in love with , who be a stranger . be new to ; but then she do not fall in love with he . and there be and , and -- they may be say to have fall in love with new man . altogether , my experience be rather mix . " look up with some roguishness at , and that look of hers be very dear to he , though the eye be nothing more than clear window where observation sit laughingly . he be certainly a affectionate fellow , and as he have grow from boy to man , he have grow in love with he old playmate , notwithstand that share in the higher education of the country which have exalt he view of rank and income . " when a man be not love , it be no use for he to say that he could be a better fellow -- could do anything -- I mean , if he be sure of be love in return . " " not of the least use in the world for he to say he _could be better . might , could , would -- they be contemptible auxiliary . " " I do not see how a man be to be good for much unless he have some one woman to love he dearly . " " I think the goodness should come before he expect that . " " you know better , . women do not love man for they goodness . " " perhaps not . but if they love they , they never think they bad . " " it be hardly fair to say I be bad . " " I say nothing at all about you . " " I never shall be good for anything , , if you will not say that you love I -- if you will not promise to marry I -- I mean , when I be able to marry . " " if I do love you , I would not marry you : I would certainly not promise ever to marry you . " " I think that be quite wicked , . if you love I , you ought to promise to marry I . " " on the contrary , I think it would be wick in I to marry you even if I do love you . " " you mean , just as I be , without any means of maintain a wife . of course : I be but three - and - twenty . " " in that last point you will alter . but I be not so sure of any other alteration . my father say a idle man ought not to exist , much less , be marry . " " then I be to blow my brain out ? " " no ; on the whole I should think you would do better to pass you examination . I have hear say it be disgracefully easy . " " that be all very fine . anything be easy to he . not that cleverness have anything to do with it . I be ten time cleverer than many man who pass . " " dear I ! " say , unable to repress she sarcasm ; " that account for the curate like . Divide you cleverness by ten , and the quotient -- dear I !-- be able to take a degree . but that only show you be ten time more idle than the other . " " well , if I do pass , you would not want I to go into the Church ? " " that be not the question -- what I want you to do . you have a conscience of you own , I suppose . there ! there be . I must go and tell my uncle . " " , " say , seize she hand as she rise ; " if you will not give I some encouragement , I shall get worse instead of better . " " I will not give you any encouragement , " say , redden . " you friend would dislike it , and so would mine . my father would think it a disgrace to I if I accept a man who get into debt , and would not work ! " be sting , and release she hand . she walk to the door , but there she turn and say : " , you have always be so good , so generous to I . I be not ungrateful . but never speak to I in that way again . " " very well , " say , sulkily , take up he hat and whip . he complexion show patch of pale pink and dead white . like many a pluck idle young gentleman , he be thoroughly in love , and with a plain girl , who have no money ! but have 's land in the background , and a persuasion that , let say what she would , she really do care for he , be not utterly in despair . when he get home , he give four of the twenty to he mother , ask she to keep they for he . " I do not want to spend that money , mother . I want it
it to pay a debt with . so keep it safe away from my finger . " " bless you , my dear , " say . she do on she eldest son and she youngest girl ( a child of six ) , whom other think she two naughtiest child . the mother 's eyes be not always deceive in they partiality : she at least can best judge who be the tender , filial - hear child . and be certainly very fond of he mother . perhaps it be he fondness for another person also that make he particularly anxious to take some security against he own liability to spend the hundred pound . for the creditor to whom he owe a hundred and sixty hold a firmer security in the shape of a bill sign by 's father . . " black eye you have leave , you say , eye fail to draw you ; yet you seem more rapt to - day , Than of old we see you . " oh , I track the fairest fair through new haunt of pleasure ; Footprint here and echoe there guide I to my treasure : " lo ! she turn -- immortal youth wrought to mortal stature , as starlight 's aged truth -- many - name ! " a great historian , as he insist on call himself , who have the happiness to be dead a hundred and twenty year ago , and so to take he place among the colossi whose huge leg we live pettiness be observe to walk under , glory in he copious remark and digression as the least imitable part of he work , and especially in those initial chapter to the successive book of he history , where he seem to bring he armchair to the proscenium and chat with we in all the lusty ease of he fine . but liv when the day be longer ( for time , like money , be measure by we need ) , when summer afternoons be spacious , and the clock tick slowly in the winter evening . we belate historian must not linger after he example ; and if we do so , it be probable that we chat would be thin and eager , as if deliver from a campstool in a parrot - house . I at least have so much to do in unraveling certain human lot , and see how they be woven and interwoven , that all the light I can command must be concentrate on this particular web , and not disperse over that temp range of relevancy call the universe . at present I have to make the new settler Lydgate better know to any one interested in he than he could possibly be even to those who have see the most of he since he arrival in . for surely all must admit that a man may be puffe and belaude , envie , ridicule , count upon as a tool and fall in love with , or at least selecte as a future husband , and yet remain virtually unknown -- know merely as a cluster of sign for he neighbor ' false supposition . there be a general impression , however , that be not altogether a common country doctor , and in at that time such a impression be significant of great thing be expect from he . for everybody 's family doctor be remarkably clever , and be understand to have immeasurable skill in the management and training of the most skittish or vicious disease . the evidence of he cleverness be of the higher intuitive order , lie in he lady - patient ' immovable conviction , and be unassailable by any objection except that they intuition be oppos by other equally strong ; each lady who see medical truth in and " the strengthening treatment " regard and " the lowering system " as medical perdition . for the heroic time of copious bleeding and blistering have not yet depart , still less the time of thorough - go theory , when disease in general be call by some bad name , and treat accordingly without shilly - shally -- as if , for example , it be to be call insurrection , which must not be fire on with blank - cartridge , but have its blood draw at once . the strengthener and the lowerer be all " clever " man in somebody 's opinion , which be really as much as can be say for any living talents . be imagination have go so far as to conjecture that could know as much as and , the two physician , who alone could offer any hope when danger be extreme , and when the smallest hope be worth a guinea . still , I repeat , there be a general impression that be something rather more uncommon than any general practitioner in . and this be true . he be but seven - and - twenty , a age at which many man be not quite common -- at which they be hopeful of achievement , resolute in avoidance , think that shall never put a bit in they mouth and get astride they back , but rather that Mammon , if they have anything to do with he , shall draw they chariot . he have be leave a orphan when he be fresh from a public school . he father , a military man , have make but little provision for three child , and when the boy ask to have a medical education , it seem easier to he guardian to grant he request by apprentice he to a country practitioner than to make any objection on the score of family dignity . he be one of the rarer lad who early get a decided bent and
and make up they minds that there be something particular in life which they would like to do for its own sake , and not because they fathers do it . most of we who turn to any subject with love remember some morning or evening hour when we get on a high stool to reach down a untried volume , or sit with parted lip listen to a new talker , or for very lack of book begin to listen to the voice withing , as the first traceable beginning of we love . something of that sort happen to Lydgate . he be a quick fellow , and when hot from play , would toss himself in a corner , and in five minute be deep in any sort of book that he could lay he hand on : if it be or , so much the better , but 's would do , or the with the Apocrypha in it . something he must read , when he be not ride the pony , or run and hunt , or listen to the talk of man . all this be true of he at ten year of age ; he have then read through " , or the Adventure of a guinea , " which be neither milk for babe , nor any chalky mixture mean to pass for milk , and it have already occur to he that book be stuff , and that life be stupid . he school study have not much modify that opinion , for though he " do " he classic and mathematics , he be not pre-eminent in they . it be say of he , that could do anything he like , but he have certainly not yet like to do anything remarkable . he be a vigorous animal with a ready understanding , but no spark have yet kind in he a intellectual passion ; knowledge seem to he a very superficial affair , easily mastere : judge from the conversation of he elder , he have apparently get already more than be necessary for mature life . probably this be not a exceptional result of expensive teaching at that period of short - waist coat , and other fashions which have not yet recur . but , one vacation , a wet day send he to the small home library to hunt once more for a book which might have some freshness for he : in vain ! unless , indeed , he take down a dusty row of volume with gray - paper back and dingy label -- the volume of a old Cyclopaedia which he have never disturb . it would at least be a novelty to disturb they . they be on the highest shelf , and he stand on a chair to get they down . but he open the volume which he first take from the shelf : somehow , one be apt to read in a makeshift attitude , just where it might seem inconvenient to do so . the page he open on be under the head of , and the first passage that draw he eye be on the valve of the heart . he be not much acquaint with valve of any sort , but he know that valva be fold - door , and through this crevice come a sudden light start he with he first vivid notion of finely adjust mechanism in the human frame . a liberal education have of course leave he free to read the indecent passage in the school classic , but beyond a general sense of secrecy and obscenity in connection with he internal structure , have leave he imagination quite unbiassed , so that for anything he know he brain lay in small bag at he temple , and he have no more thought of representing to himself how he blood circulate than how paper serve instead of gold . but the moment of vocation have come , and before he get down from he chair , the world be make new to he by a presentiment of endless process fill the vast spaces plank out of he sight by that wordy ignorance which he have suppose to be knowledge . from that hour feel the growth of a intellectual passion . we be not afraid of tell over and over again how a man come to fall in love with a woman and be wed to she , or else be fatally part from she . be it due to excess of poetry or of stupidity that we be never weary of describe what call a woman 's " makdom and she fairnesse , " never weary of listen to the twanging of the old Troubadour string , and be comparatively uninterested in that other kind of " makdom and fairnesse " which must be woo with industrious thought and patient renunciation of small desire ? in the story of this passion , too , the development varies : sometimes it be the glorious marriage , sometimes frustration and final parting . and not seldom the catastrophe be bound up with the other passion , sung by the Troubadour . for in the multitude of middle - aged man who go about they vocation in a daily course determine for they much in the same way as the tie of they cravat , there be always a good number who once mean to shape they own deed and alter the world a little . the story of they come to be shape after the average and fit to be pack by the gross , be hardly ever tell even in they consciousness ; for perhaps they ardor in generous unpaid toil cool as imperceptibly as the ardor of other youthful love , till one day they earlier self walk like a ghost in its old home and make the new
new furniture ghastly . nothing in the world more subtle than the process of they gradual change ! in the beginning they inhal it unknowingly : you and I may have send some of we breath towards infect they , when we utter we conform falsity or draw we silly conclusion : or perhaps it come with the vibration from a woman 's glance . do not mean to be one of those failure , and there be the better hope of he because he scientific interest soon take the form of a professional enthusiasm : he have a youthful belief in he bread -winning work , not to be stifle by that initiation in makeshift call he ' prentice day ; and he carry to he study in , , and , the conviction that the medical profession as it might be be the finest in the world ; present the most perfect interchange between science and art ; offer the most direct alliance between intellectual conquest and the social good . 's nature demand this combination : he be a emotional creature , with a flesh - and - blood sense of fellowship which withstand all the abstraction of special study . he care not only for " case , " but for and , especially . there be another attraction in he profession : it want reform , and give a man a opportunity for some indignant resolve to reject its venal decoration and other humbug , and to be the possessor of genuine though undemand qualifications . he go to study in with the determination that when he provincial home again he would settle in some provincial town as a general practitioner , and resist the irrational severance between medical and surgical knowledge in the interest of he own scientific pursuit , as well as of the general advance : he would keep away from the range of intrigue , jealousy , and social truckling , and win celebrity , however slowly , as have do , by the independent value of he work . for it must be remember that this be a dark period ; and in spite of venerable college which use great effort to secure purity of knowledge by make it scarce , and to exclude error by a rigid exclusiveness in relation to fee and appointment , it happen that very ignorant young gentleman be promote in town , and many more get a legal right to practise over large area in the country . also , the high standard hold up to the public mind by the College of which which give its peculiar sanction to the expensive and highly rarefied medical instruction obtain by graduate of and , do not hinder quackery from have a excellent time of it ; for since professional practice chiefly consist in give a great many drug , the public infer that it might be better off with more drug still , if they could only be get cheaply , and hence swallow large cubic measure of physic prescribe by unscrupulous ignorance which have take no degree . consider that statistic have not yet embrace a calculation as to the number of ignorant or canting doctor which absolutely must exist in the tooth of all change , it seem to Lydgate that a change in the unit be the most direct mode of change the number . he mean to be a unit who would make a certain amount of difference toward that spread change which would one day tell appreciably upon the average , and in the mean time have the pleasure of make a advantageous difference to the viscera of he own patient . but he do not simply aim at a more genuine kind of practice than be common . he be ambitious of a wider effect : he be fire with the possibility that he might work out the proof of a anatomical conception and make a link in the chain of discovery . do it seem incongruous to you that a surgeon should dream of himself as a discoverer ? most of we , indeed , know little of the great originator until they have be lift up among the constellation and already rule we fate . but that Herschel , for example , who " break the barrier of the heaven " -- do he not once play a provincial church - organ , and give music - lesson to stumbl pianist ? each of those one have to walk on the earth among neighbor who perhaps think much more of he gait and he garment than of anything which be to give he a title to everlast fame : each of they have he little local personal history sprinkle with small temptation and sordo care , which make the retarde friction of he course towards final companionship with the immortal . be not blind to the danger of such friction , but he have plenty of confidence in he resolution to avoid it as far as possible : be seven - and - twenty , he feel himself experience . and he be not go to have he vanity provoke by contact with the showy worldly success of the capital , but to live among people who could hold no rivalry with that pursuit of a great idea which be to be a twin object with the assiduous practice of he profession . there be fascination in the hope that the two purpose would illuminate each other : the careful observation and inference which be he daily work , the use of the lens to further he judgment in special case , would further he think as a instrument of larger inquiry . be not this the typical pre-eminence of he profession ? he would be a good doctor , and by that very mean keep himself in the track of far - reache investigation . on one
one point he may fairly claim approval at this particular stage of he career : he do not mean to imitate those philanthropic model who make a profit out of poisonous pickle to support themselves while they be expose adulteration , or hold share in a gambling - hell that they may have leisure to represent the cause of public morality . he intend to begin in he own case some particular reform which be quite certainly within he reach , and much less of a problem than the demonstrating of a anatomical conception . one of these reform be to act stoutly on the strength of a recent legal decision , and simply prescribe , without dispense drug or take percentage from druggist . this be a innovation for one who have choose to adopt the style of general practitioner in a country town , and would be feel as offensive criticism by he professional breth . but mean to innovate in he treatment also , and he be wise enough to see that the best security for he practising honestly accord to he belief be to get rid of systematic temptation to the contrary . perhaps that be a more cheerful time for observer and theorizer than the present ; we be apt to think it the finest era of the world when be begin to be discover , when a bold sailor , even if he be wreck , might alight on a new kingdom ; and about 1829 the dark territory of Pathology be a fine for a spirited young adventurer . be ambitious above all to contribute towards enlarge the scientific , rational basis of he profession . the more he become interested in special question of disease , such as the nature of fever or fevers , the more keenly he feel the need for that fundamental knowledge of structure which just at the beginning of the century have be illuminate by the brief and glorious career of bichat , who die when he be only one - and - thirty , but , like another , leave a realm large enough for many heir . that great first carry out the conception that live body , fundamentally consider , be not associations of organ which can be understand by study they first apart , and then as it be federally ; but must be regard as consisting of certain primary web or tissue , out of which the various organ -- brain , heart , lung , and so on -- be compact , as the various accommodation of a house be build up in various proportion of wood , iron , stone , brick , zinc , and the rest , each material have its peculiar composition and proportion . no man , one see , can understand and estimate the entire structure or its part -- what be its frailty and what its repair , without know the nature of the material . and the conception wrotch out by Bichat , with he detailed study of the different tissue , act necessarily on medical question as the turning of gas - light would act on a dim , oil - lit street , show new connection and hithertoo hide fact of structure which must be take into account in consider the symptom of malady and the action of medicament . but result which depend on human conscience and intelligence work slowly , and now at the end of 1829 , most medical practice be still strutt or shambl along the old path , and there be still scientific work to be do which might have seem to be a direct sequence of Bichat 's . this great seer do not go beyond the consideration of the tissue as ultimate fact in the living organism , mark the limit of anatomical analysis ; but it be open to another mind to say , have not these structure some common basis from which they have all start , as you sarsnet , gauze , net , satin , and velvet from the raw cocoon ? here would be another light , as of oxy - hydrogen , show the very grain of thing , and revise all former explanation . of this sequence to Bichat be work , already vibrat along many current of the mind , be enamoure ; he longe to demonstrate the more intimate relation of live structure , and help to define man 's think more accurately after the true order . the work have not yet be do , but only prepare for those who know how to use the preparation . what be the primitive tissue ? in that way Lydgate put the question -- not quite in the way require by the await answer ; but such missing of the right word befall many seeker . and he count on quiet interval to be watchfully seize , for take up the thread of investigation -- on many hint to be win from diligent application , not only of the scalpel , but of the microscope , which research have begin to use again with new enthusiasm of reliance . be 's plan of he future : to do good small work for , and great work for the world . he be certainly a happy fellow at this time : to be seven - and - twenty , without any fix vex , with a generous resolution that he action should be beneficent , and with idea in he brain that make life interest quite apart from the cultus of horseflesh and other mystic rite of costly observance , which the eight hundred pound leave he after buy he practice would certainly not have go far in pay for . he be at a starting - point which make many a man 's career a fine subject for betting , if there be any gentleman give to
to that amusement who could appreciate the complicated probabilitie of a arduous purpose , with all the possible thwarting and furthering of circumstance , all the nicety of inward balance , by which a man swim and make he point or else be carry headlong . the risk would remain even with close knowledge of 's character ; for character too be a process and a unfolding . the man be still in the making , as much as the doctor and immortal discoverer , and there be both virtue and fault capable of shrink or expand . the fault will not , I hope , be a reason for the withdrawal of you interest in he . among we valued friend be there not some one or other who be a little too self - confident and disdainful ; whose distinguished mind be a little spot with commonness ; who be a little pinched here and protuberant there with native prejudice ; or whose better energie be liable to lapse down the wrong channel under the influence of transient solicitation ? all these thing might be allege against , but then , they be the periphrase of a polite preacher , who talk of , and would not like to mention anything painful to the pew-renter . the particular fault from which these delicate generality be distilled have distinguishable physiognomy , diction , accent , and grimace ; fill up part in very various drama . we vanity differ as we nos do : all conceit be not the same conceit , but varies in correspondence with the minutia of mental make in which one of we differ from another . 's conceit be of the arrogant sort , never simper , never impertinent , but massive in its claim and benevolently contemptuous . he would do a great deal for noodle , be sorry for they , and feel quite sure that they could have no power over he : he have think of join the when he be in , in order to turn they against some of they own doctrine . all he fault be mark by kindred trait , and be those of a man who have a fine baritone , whose clothes hang well upon he , and who even in he ordinary gesture have a air of inbred distinction . where then lay the spot of commonness ? say a young lady enamoure of that careless grace . how could there be any commonness in a man so well - breed , so ambitious of social distinction , so generous and unusual in he view of social duty ? as easily as there may be stupidity in a man of genius if you take he unawar on the wrong subject , or as many a man who have the best will to advance the social millennium might be ill - inspire in imagine its lighter pleasur ; unable to go beyond 's music , or the brilliant punning in the last burlesque . 's spot of commonness lay in the complexion of he prejudice , which , in spite of noble intention and sympathy , be half of they such as be find in ordinary man of the world : that distinction of mind which belong to he intellectual ardor , do not penetrate he feeling and judgment about furniture , or woman , or the desirability of its be know ( without he telling ) that he be better bear than other country surgeon . he do not mean to think of furniture at present ; but whenever he do so it be to be fear that neither biology nor scheme of reform would lift he above the vulgarity of feeling that there would be a incompatibility in he furniture not be of the best . as to woman , he have once already be draw headlong by impetuous folly , which he mean to be final , since marriage at some distant period would of course not be impetuous . for those who want to be acquaint with it will be good to know what be that case of impetuous folly , for it may stand as a example of the fitful swerving of passion to which he be prone , together with the chivalrous kindness which help to make he morally lovable . the story can be tell without many word . it happen when he be study in , and just at the time when , over and above he other work , he be occupy with some galvanic experiment . one evening , tire with he experimenting , and not be able to elicit the fact he need , he leave he frog and rabbit to some repose under they try and mysterious dispensation of unexplained shocks , and go to finish he evening at the theatre of the , where there be a melodrama which he have already see several time ; attract , not by the ingenious work of the collaborating author , but by a actress whose part it be to stab she lover , mistake he for the evil - design duke of the piece . be in love with this actress , as a man be in love with a woman whom he never expect to speak to . she be a Provencale , with dark eye , a profile , and reound majestic form , have that sort of beauty which carry a sweet matronliness even in , and she voice be a soft cooing . she have but lately come to , and bear a virtuous reputation , she husband act with she as the unfortunate lover . it be she act which be " no better than it should be , " but the public be satisfied . be only relaxation now be to go and look at this woman , just as he might have throw himself under the breath
breath of the sweet south on a bank of violet for a while , without prejudice to he galvanism , to which he would presently return . but this even the old drama have a new catastrophe . at the moment when the heroine be to act the stabbing of she lover , and he be to fall gracefully , the wife veritably stab she husband , who fall as death will . a wild shriek pierce the house , and the Provencale fell swoon : a shriek and a swoon be demand by the play , but the swooning too be real this time . leape and climb , he hardly know how , on to the stage , and be active in help , make the acquaintance of he heroine by find a contusion on she head and lifte she gently in he arm . ring with the story of this death :-- be it a murder ? some of the actress 's warmest admirer be inclin to believe in she guilt , and like she the better for it ( such be the taste of those time ) ; but be not one of these . he vehemently contend for she innocence , and the remote impersonal passion for she beauty which he have felt before , have pass now into personal devotion , and tender think of she lot . the notion of murder be absurd : no motive be discoverable , the young couple be understand to dote on each other ; and it be not unprecedented that a accidental slip of the foot should have bring these grave consequence . the legal investigation end in 's release . Lydgate by this time have have many interview with she , and find she more and more adorable . she talk little ; but that be a additional charm . she be melancholy , and seem grateful ; she presence be enough , like that of the evening light . be madly anxious about she affection , and jealous lest any other man than himself should win it and ask she to marry he . but instead of reopen she engagement at the , where she would have be all the more popular for the fatal episode , she leave without warning , forsak she little court of admirer . perhaps no one carry inquiry far except , who feel that all science have come to a stand - still while he imagine the unhappy Laure , stricken by ever - wander sorrow , herself wander , and find no faithful comforter . hidden actress , however , be not so difficult to find as some other hidden fact , and it be not long before Lydgate gather indication that have take the route to Lyons . he find she at last acting with great success at under the same name , look more majestic than ever as a forsaken wife carry she child in she arm . he speak to she after the play , be receive with the usual quietude which seem to he beautiful as clear depth of water , and obtain leave to visit she the next day ; when he be bend on tell she that he adore she , and on ask she to marry he . he know that this be like the sudden impulse of a madman -- incongruous even with he habitual foible . no matter ! it be the one thing which he be resolve to do . he have two self within he apparently , and they must learn to accommodate each other and bear reciprocal impediment . , that some of we , with quick alternate vision , see beyond we infatuation , and even while we rave on the height , behold the wide plain where we persistent self pause and await we . to have approach Laure with any suit that be not reverentially tender would have be simply a contradiction of he whole feeling towards she . " you have come all the way from to find I ? " she say to he the next day , sit before he will fold arm , and look at he with eye that seem to wonder as a untamed ruminat animal wonder . " be all like that ? " " I come because I could not live without try to see you . you be lonely ; I love you ; I want you to consent to be my wife ; I will wait , but I want you to promise that you will marry I -- no one else . " look at he in silence with a melancholy radiance from under she grand eyelid , until he be full of rapturous certainty , and knelt close to she knee . " I will tell you something , " she say , in she cooing way , keep she arm fold . " my foot really slip . " " I know , I know , " say , deprecatingly . " it be a fatal accident -- a dreadful stroke of calamity that bound I to you the more . " again pause a little and then say , slowly , " _I mean to do it ._ " Lydgate , strong man as he be , turn pale and tremble : moment seem to pass before he rise and stand at a distance from she . " there be a secret , then , " he say at last , even vehemently . " he be brutal to you : you hate he . " " no ! he weary I ; he be too fond : he would live in , and not in my country ; that be not agreeable to I . " " Great ! " say , in a groan of horror . " and you plan to murder he ? " " I
I do not plan : it come to I in the play -- _I mean to do it ._ " Lydgate stood mute , and unconsciously press he hat on while he look at she . he see this woman -- the first to whom he have give he young adoration --amid the throng of stupid criminal . " you be a good young man , " she say . " but I do not like husband . I will never have another . " three day afterwards be at he galvanism again in he chamber , believe that illusion be at a end for he . he be save from hardening effect by the abundant kindness of he heart and he belief that human life might be make better . but he have more reason than ever for trust he judgment , now that it be so experienced ; and henceforth he would take a strictly scientific view of woman , entertain no expectation but such as be justifi beforehand . no one in be likely to have such a notion of 's past as have here be faintly shadowed , and indeed the respectable townsfolk there be not more give than mortal generally to any eager attempt at exactness in the representation to themselves of what do not come under they own sense . not only young virgin of that town , but gray - bearded man also , be often in haste to conjecture how a new acquaintance might be wrotch into they purpose , contente with very vague knowledge as to the way in which life have be shape he for that instrumentality . , in fact , count on swallow and assimilat he very comfortably . . " all that in woman be adore in thy fair self I find -- for the whole sex can but afford the handsome and the kind . " -- . the question whether should be appoint as salary chaplain to the hospital be a exciting topic to the Middlemarcher ; and hear it discuss in a way that throw much light on the power exercise in the town by . the banker be evidently a ruler , but there be a opposition party , and even among he supporter there be some who allow it to be see that they support be a compromise , and who frankly state they impression that the general scheme of thing , and especially the casualty of trade , require you to hold a candle to the devil . 's power be not due simply to he be a country banker , who know the financial secret of most trader in the town and could touch the spring of they credit ; it be fortify by a beneficence that be at once ready and severe -- ready to confer obligation , and severe in watch the result . he have gather , as a industrious man always at he post , a chief share in administer the town charity , and he private charity be both minute and abundant . he would take a great deal of pain about apprentice the shoemaker 's son , and he would watch over 's church - go ; he would defend . Strype the washerwoman against 's unjust exaction on the score of she drying - ground , and he would himself - scrutinize a calumny against . he private minor loans be numerous , but he would inquire strictly into the circumstance both before and after . in this way a man gather a domain in he neighbor 's hope and fear as well as gratitude ; and power , when once it have get into that subtle region , propagate itself , spread out of all proportion to its external means . it be a principle with to gain as much power as possible , that he might use it for the glory of . he go through a great deal of spiritual conflict and inward argument in order to adjust he motive , and make clear to himself what 's glory require . but , as we have see , he motives be not always rightly appreciate . there be many crass mind in whose reflective scale could only weigh thing in the lump ; and they have a strong suspicion that since could not enjoy life in they fashion , eat and drink so little as he do , and worret himself about everything , he must have a sort of vampire 's feast in the sense of mastery . the subject of the chaplaincy come up at 's table when be dine there , and the family connection with do not , he observe , prevent some freedom of remark even on the part of the host himself , though he reasons against the propose arrangement turn entirely on he objection to 's sermon , which be all doctrine , and he preference for , whose sermon be free from that taint . like well enough the notion of the chaplain 's have a salary , suppose it be give to , who be as good a little fellow as ever breathe , and the best preacher anywhere , and companionable too . " what line shall you take , then ? " say , the coroner , a great coursing comrade of 's . " oh , I be precious glad I be not one of the director now . I shall vote for refer the matter to the director and the Medical board together . I shall roll some of my responsibility on you shoulders , , " say , glance first at , the senior physician of the town , and then at who sit opposite . " you medical gentleman must consult which sort of black dratch you will prescribe , eh , ? " " I know little of either , " say ; " but
but in general , appointment be apt to be make too much a question of personal liking . the fittest man for a particular post be not always the best fellow or the most agreeable . sometimes , if you want to get a reform , you only way would be to pension off the good fellow whom everybody be fond of , and put they out of the question . " , who be consider the physician of most " weight , " though be usually say to have more " penetration , " divest he large heavy face of all expression , and look at he wine - glass while be speak . whatever be not problematical and suspect about this young man -- for example , a certain showiness as to foreign idea , and a disposition to unsetle what have be settle and forgote by he elder -- be positively unwelcome to a physician whose stand have be fix thirty year before by a treatise on , of which at least one copy mark " own " be bound in calf . for my part I have some fellow - feeling with : one 's self - satisfaction be a untaxed kind of property which it be very unpleasant to find deprecate . 's remark , however , do not meet the sense of the company . say , that if he could have _his_ way , he would not put disagreeable fellow anywhere . " hang you reform ! " say . " there be no greater humbug in the world . you never hear of a reform , but it mean some trick to put in new man . I hope you be not one of the ' 's ' men , -- want to take the coronership out of the hand of the legal profession : you word appear to point that way . " " I disapprove of , " interpose , " no man more : he be a ill - intentione fellow , who would sacrifice the respectability of the profession , which everybody know depend on the , for the sake of get some notoriety for himself . there be man who do not mind about be kick blue if they can only get talk about . but be right sometimes , " the doctor add , judicially . " I could mention one or two point in which be in the right . " " oh , well , " say , " I blame no man for stand up in favor of he own cloth ; but , come to argument , I should like to know how a coroner be to judge of evidence if he have not have a legal training ? " " in my opinion , " say , " legal training only make a man more incompetent in question that require knowledge a of another kind . people talk about evidence as if it could really be weigh in scale by a blind justice . no man can judge what be good evidence on any particular subject , unless he know that subject well . a lawyer be no better than a old woman at a post-mortem examination . how be he to know the action of a poison ? you might as well say that scan verse will teach you to scan the potato crop . " " you be aware , I suppose , that it be not the coroner 's business to conduct the post-mortem , but only to take the evidence of the medical witness ? " say , with some scorn . " who be often almost as ignorant as the coroner himself , " say . " question of medical jurisprudence ought not to be leave to the chance of decent knowledge in a medical witness , and the coroner ought not to be a man who will believe that strychnine will destroy the coat of the stomach if a ignorant practitioner happen to tell he so . " Lydgate have really lose sight of the fact that be he Majesty 's coroner , and end innocently with the question , " do not you agree with I , ? " " to a certain extent -- with regard to populious districts , and in the metropolis , " say the Doctor . " but I hope it will be long before this part of the country lose the service of my friend Chichely , even though it might get the best man in we profession to succeed he . I be sure will agree with I . " " yes , yes , give I a coroner who be a good coursing man , " say , jovially . " and in my opinion , you be safest with a lawyer . nobody can know everything . most thing be 's visitation of . ' and as to poiso , why , what you want to know be the law . come , shall we join the lady ? " 's private opinion be that might be the very coroner without bia as to the coat of the stomach , but he have not mean to be personal . this be one of the difficulty of move in good society : it be dangerous to insist on knowledge as a qualification for any salaried office . have call a prig , and now be inclin to call he prick - eare ; especially when , in the drawing - room , he seem to be make himself eminently agreeable to , whom he have easily monopolize in a tete - a - tete , since . Vincy herself sit at the tea - table . she resign no domestic function to she daughter ; and the matron 's bloom good - natured face , with the two volatile pink string float from she fine throat ,
, and she cheery manners to husband and child , be certainly among the great attraction of the house -- attraction which make it all the easier to fall in love with the daughter . the tinge of unpretentious , inoffensive vulgarity in . give more effect to 's refinement , which be beyond what have expect . certainly , small foot and perfectly turn shoulders aid the impression of refin manners , and the right thing say seem quite astonishingly right when it be accompany with exquisite curve of lip and eyelid . and could say the right thing ; for she be clever with that sort of cleverness which catch every tone except the humorous . happily she never attempt to joke , and this perhaps be the most decisive mark of she cleverness . she and readily get into conversation . he regrett that he have not hear she s the other day at . the only pleasure he allow himself during the latter part of he stay in be to go and hear music . " you have study music , probably ? " say . " no , I know the note of many bird , and I know many melody by ear ; but the music that I do not know at all , and have no notion about , delight I -- affect I . how stupid the world be that it do not make more use of such a pleasure within its reach ! " " yes , and you will find very tuneless . there be hardly any good musician . I only know two gentleman who s at all well . " " I suppose it be the fashion to s comic song in a rhythmic way , leave you to fancy the tune -- very much as if it be tap on a drum ? " " ah , you have hear , " say , with one of she rare smile . " but we be speak very ill of we neighbor . " be almost forget that he must carry on the conversation , in think how lovely this creature be , she garment seem to be make out of the faintest blue sky , herself so immaculately blond , as if the petal of some gigantic flower have just open and disclose she ; and yet with this infantine blondness show so much ready , self - possess grace . since he have have the memory of , have lose all taste for large - eye silence : the divine cow no longer attract he , and be she very opposite . but he recall himself . " you will let I hear some music to - night , I hope . " " I will let you hear my attempt , if you like , " say . " be sure to insist on my singing . but I shall tremble before you , who have hear the best singer in . I have hear very little : I have only once be to . but we organist at 's be a good musician , and I go on study with he . " " tell I what you see in . " " very little . " ( a more naive girl would have say , " oh , everything ! " but know better . ) " a few of the ordinary sight , such as raw country girl be always take to . " " do you call yourself a raw country girl ? " say Lydgate , look at she with a involuntary emphasis of admiration , which make blush with pleasure . but she remain simply serious , turn she long neck a little , and put up she hand to touch she wondrous hair - plait -- a habitual gesture with she as pretty as any movement of a kitten 's paw . not that be in the least like a kitten : she be a sylph catch young and educate at 's . " I assure you my mind be raw , " she say immediately ; " I pass at . I be not afraid of talk to we old neighbor . but I be really afraid of you . " " a accomplish woman almost always know more than we man , though she knowledge be of a different sort . I be sure you could teach I a thousand thing -- as a exquisite bird could teach a bear if there be any common language between they . happily , there be a common language between woman and man , and so the bear can get teach . " " ah , there be beginning to strum ! I must go and hinder he from jarr all you nerve , " say , move to the other side of the room , where have open the piano , at he father 's desire , that might give they some music , be parenthetically perform " ! " with one hand . able man who have pass they examination will do these thing sometimes , not less than the plucked . " , pray defer you practising till to - morrow ; you will make ill , " say . " he have a ear . " laugh , and go on with he tune to the end . turn to Lydgate , smile gently , and say , " you perceive , the bear will not always be teach . " " now then , ! " say , spring from the stool and twist it upward for she , with a hearty expectation of enjoyment . " some good rousing tune first . " play admirably . she master at 's school ( close to a county town with a memorable history that have its relic in church and castle ) be one of those
those excellent musician here and there to be find in we provinces , worthy to compare with many a note Kapellmeister in a country which offer more plentiful condition of musical celebrity . , with the executant 's instinct , have seize he manner of play , and give forth he large rendering of noble music with the precision of a echo . it be almost start , hear for the first time . a hidden soul seem to be flow forth from 's finger ; and so indeed it be , since soul live on in perpetual echoe , and to all fine expression there go somewhere a originating activity , if it be only that of a interpreter . be take possession of , and begin to believe in she as something exceptional . after all , he think , one need not be surprised to find the rare conjunction of nature under circumstance apparently unfavorable : come where they may , they always depend on condition that be not obvious . he sit look at she , and do not rise to pay she any compliment , leave that to other , now that he admiration be deepen . she singe be less remarkable , but also well train , and sweet to hear as a chime perfectly in tune . it be true she sang " meet I by moonlight , " and " I have be roam " ; for mortal must share the fashions of they time , and none but the ancient can be always classical . but could also se " - eye " with effect , or 's canzonet , or " , co sapete , " or " , batti " -- she only want to know what she audience like . she father look round at the company , delighte in they admiration . she mother sit , like a before she trouble , with she youngest little girl on she lap , softly beat the child 's hand up and down in time to the music . and , notwithstand he general scepticism about , listen to she music with perfect allegiance , wish he could do the same thing on he flute . it be the pleasantest family party that have see since he come to . the Vincys have the readiness to enjoy , the rejection of all anxiety , and the belief in life as a merry lot , which make a house exceptional in most county town at that time , when have cast a certain suspicion as of plague - infection over the few amusement which survive in the province . at the ' there be always whist , and the card - table stood ready now , make some of the company secretly impatient of the music . before it cease come in -- a handsome , broad - chested but otherwise small man , about forty , whose black be very threadbare : the brilliancy be all in he quick gray eye . he come like a pleasant change in the light , arrest little with fatherly nonsense as she be be lead out of the room by , greet everybody with some special word , and seem to condense more talk into ten minute than have be hold all through the evening . he claim from the fulfilment of a promise to come and see he . " I can not let you off , you know , because I have some beetle to show you . we collector feel a interest in every new man till he have see all we have to show he . " but soon he swerve to the whist - table , rub he hand and say , " come now , let we be serious ! ? not play ? ah ! you be too young and light for this kind of thing . " say to himself that the clergyman whose ability be so painful to , appear to have find a agreeable resort in this certainly not erudite household . he could half understand it : the good - humor , the good look of elder and younger , and the provision for pass the time without any labor of intelligence , might make the house beguil to people who have no particular use for they odd hour . everything look blooming and joyous except , who be brown , dull , and resign , and altogether , as . often say , just the sort of person for a governess . do not mean to pay many such visit himself . they be a wretched waste of the evening ; and now , when he have talk a little more to , he mean to excuse himself and go . " you will not like we at , I feel sure , " she say , when the whist - player be settled . " we be very stupid , and you have be use to something quite different . " " I suppose all country town be pretty much alike , " say . " but I have notice that one always believe one 's own town to be more stupid than any other . I have make up my mind to take as it come , and shall be much obliged if the town will take I in the same way . I have certainly find some charms in it which be much greater than I have expect . " " you mean the ride towards and ; every one be pleased with those , " say , with simplicity . " no , I mean something much nearer to I . " rise and reach she netting , and then say , " do you care about dancing at all ? I be not quite sure whether clever man ever dance . " " I would dance with
with you if you would allow I . " " oh ! " say , with a slight deprecatory laugh . " I be only go to say that we sometimes have dancing , and I want to know whether you would feel insulted if you be ask to come . " " not on the condition I mention . " after this chat think that he be go , but on move towards the whist - table , he get interested in watch 's play , which be masterly , and also he face , which be a striking mixture of the shrewd and the mild . at ten o'clock supper be brotch in ( such be the custom of ) and there be punch - drink ; but have only a glass of water . he be win , but there seem to be no reason why the renewal of rubber should end , and Lydgate at last took he leave . but as it be not eleven o'clock , he choose to walk in the brisk air towards the tower of 's , 's church , which stand out dark , square , and massive against the starlight . it be the oldest church in ; the living , however , be but a vicarage worth barely four hundr a - year . Lydgate have hear that , and he wonder now whether care about the money he win at card ; think , " he seem a very pleasant fellow , but may have he good reason . " many thing would be easier to Lydgate if it should turn out that be generally justifiable . " what be he religious doctrine to I , if he carry some good notion along with it ? one must use such brain as be to be find . " these be actually 's first meditation as he walk away from 's , and on this ground I fear that many lady will consider he hardly worthy of they attention . he think off and she music only in the second place ; and though , when she turn come , he dwelt on the image of she for the rest of he walk , he feel no agitation , and have no sense that any new current have set into he life . he could not marry yet ; he wish not to marry for several year ; and therefore he be not ready to entertain the notion of be in love with a girl whom he happen to admire . he do admire exceedingly ; but that madness which have once beset he about be not , he think , likely to recur in relation to any other woman . certainly , if fall in love have be at all in , it would have be quite safe with a creature like this , who have just the kind of intelligence one would desire in a woman -- polish , refin , docile , lend itself to finish in all the delicacies of life , and enshrin in a body which express this with a force of demonstration that exclude the need for other evidence . feel sure that if ever he marry , he wife would have that feminine radiance , that distinctive womanhood which must be class with flower and music , that sort of beauty which by its very nature be virtuous , be mould only for pure and delicate joy . but since he do not mean to marry for the next five year -- he more pressing business be to look into 's new book on , which he be specially interested in , because he have know in , and have follow many anatomical demonstration in order to ascertain the specific difference of typhus and typhoid . he go home and read far into the smallest hour , bring a much more testing vision of detail and relation into this pathological study than he have ever think it necessary to apply to the complexity of love and marriage , these be subject on which he feel himself amply inform by literature , and that traditional wisdom which be hand down in the genial conversation of man . whereas have obscure condition , and give he that delightful labor of the imagination which be not mere arbitrariness , but the exercise of disciplin power -- combine and construct with the clearest eye for probability and the fullest obedience to knowledge ; and then , in yet more energetic alliance with impartial nature , stand aloon to invent test by which to try its own work . many man have be praise as vividly imaginative on the strength of they profuseness in indifferent drawing or cheap narration :-- report of very poor talk go on in distant orb ; or portrait of come down on he bad errand as a large ugly man with bat 's wing and spurt of phosphorescence ; or exaggeration of wantonness that seem to reflect life in a diseased dream . but these kind of inspiration regard as rather vulgar and vinous compare with the imagination that reveal subtle action inaccessible by any sort of lens , but track in that outer darkness through long pathway of necessary sequence by the inward light which be the last refinement of , capable of bathing even the ethereal atom in its ideally illuminate space . he for he part have toss away all cheap invention where ignorance find itself able and at ease : he be enamoure of that arduous invention which be the very eye of research , provisionally fram its object and correct it to more and more exactness of relation ; he want to pierce the obscurity of those minute process which prepare human misery and joy , those invisible thoroughfare which be the first lurking - place of anguish , mania , and crime , that delicate
delicate poise and transition which determine the growth of happy or unhappy consciousness . as he throw down he book , stretch he leg towards the ember in the grate , and clasp he hand at the back of he head , in that agreeable afterglow of excitement when think lapse from examination of a specific object into a suffusive sense of its connection with all the rest of we existence -- seem , as it be , to throw itself on its back after vigorous swimming and float with the repose of unexhausted strength -- feel a triumphant delight in he study , and something like pity for those less lucky man who be not of he profession . " if I have not take that turn when I be a lad , " he think , " I might have get into some stupid dratch - horse work or other , and live always in blinker . I should never have be happy in any profession that do not call forth the highest intellectual strain , and yet keep I in good warm contact with my neighbor . there be nothing like the medical profession for that : one can have the exclusive scientific life that touch the distance and befriend the old fogy in the parish too . it be rather harder for a clergyman : Farebrother seem to be a anomaly . " this last thought bring back the and all the picture of the evening . they float in he mind agreeably enough , and as he take up he bed - candle he lip be curl with that incipient smile which be apt to accompany agreeable recollection . he be a ardent fellow , but at present he ardor be absorb in love of he work and in the ambition of make he life recognize as a factor in the better life of mankind -- like other heroe of science who have nothing but a obscure country practice to begin with . poor Lydgate ! or shall I say , poor ! live in a world of which the other kknow nothing . it have not occur to Lydgate that he have be a subject of eager meditation to , who have neither any reason for throw she marriage into distant perspective , nor any pathological study to divert she mind from that ruminat habit , that inward repetition of look , word , and phrase , which make a large part in the life of most girl . he have not mean to look at she or speak to she with more than the inevitable amount of admiration and compliment which a man must give to a beautiful girl ; indeed , it seem to he that he enjoyment of she music have remain almost silent , for he fear fall into the rudeness of tell she he great surprise at she possession of such accomplishment . but have register every look and word , and estimate they as the opening incident of a preconceive romance -- incidents which gather value from the foreseen development and climax . in 's romance it be not necessary to imagine much about the inward life of the hero , or of he serious business in the world : of course , he have a profession and be clever , as well as sufficiently handsome ; but the piquant fact about be he good birth , which distinguished he from all admirer , and present marriage as a prospect of rising in rank and get a little nearer to that celestial condition on earth in which she would have nothing to do with vulgar people , and perhaps at last associate with relative quite equal to the county people who look down on the . it be part of 's cleverness to discern very subtly the faintest aroma of rank , and once when she have see the accompany they uncle at the county assize , and seat among the aristocracy , she have envy they , notwithstand they plain dress . if you think it incredible that to imagine Lydgate as a man of family could cause thrill of satisfaction which have anything to do with the sense that she be in love with he , I will ask you to use you power of comparison a little more effectivly , and consider whether red cloth and epaulet have never have a influence of that sort . we passion do not live apart in locked chamber , but , dress in they small wardrobe of notion , bring they provision to a common table and mess together , feed out of the common store accord to they appetite . , in fact , be entirely occupy not exactly with as he be in himself , but with he relation to she ; and it be excusable in a girl who be accustom to hear that all young man might , could , would be , or actually be in love with she , to believe at once that could be no exception . he look and word mean more to she than other man 's , because she car more for they : she think of they diligently , and diligently attend to that perfection of appearance , behavior , sentiment , and all other elegancy , which would find in a more adequate admirer than she have yet be conscious of . for , though she would never do anything that be disagreeable to she , be industrious ; and now more than ever she be active in sketch she landscape and market - cart and portrait of friend , in practise she music , and in be from morning till night she own standard of a perfect lady , have always a audience in she own consciousness , with sometimes the not unwelcome addition of a more variable external audience in the numerous visitor of
of the house . she find time also to read the best novel , and even the second best , and she know much poetry by heart . she favorite poem be " . " " the best girl in the world ! he will be a happy fellow who get she ! " be the sentiment of the elderly gentleman who visit the Vincys ; and the reject young man think of try again , as be the fashion in country town where the horizon be not thick with come rival . but . think that have be educate to a ridiculous pitch , for what be the use of accomplishment which would be all laid aside as soon as she be marry ? while she aunt , who have a sisterly faithfulness towards she brother 's family , have two sincere wish for -- that she might show a more serious turn of mind , and that she might meet with a husband whose wealth correspond to she habits . . " the clerkly person smile and say be a pretty maid , but be poor she die unwed . " the , whom go to see the next evening , live in a old parsonage , build of stone , venerable enough to match the church which it look out upon . all the furniture too in the house be old , but with another grade of age -- that of 's father and grandfather . there be paint white chair , with gilding and wreat on they , and some linger red silk damask with slit in it . there be engrave portrait of and other celebrate lawyer of the last century ; and there be old pier - glass to reflect they , as well as the little satin - wood table and the sofa resembl a prolongation of uneasy chair , all stand in relief against the dark wainscot this be the physiognomy of the drawing - room into which be show ; and there be three lady to receive he , who be also old - fashioned , and of a faded but genuine respectability : , the 's white - haired mother , befrill and kerchief with dainty cleanliness , up right , quick - eye , and still under seventy ; , she sister , a tiny old lady of meeker aspect , with frill and kerchief decidedly more worn and mende ; and , the 's elder sister , well - look like himself , but nip and subdue as single woman be apt to be who spend they life in uninterrupted subjection to they elder . Lydgate have not expect to see so quaint a group : know simply that be a bachelor , he have think of be usher into a snuggery where the chief furniture would probably be book and collection of natural object . the himself seem to wear rather a change aspect , as most man do when acquaintance make elsewhere see they for the first time in they own home ; some indeed show like a actor of genial part disadvantageously cast for the curmudgeon in a new piece . this be not the case with : he seem a trifle milder and more silent , the chief talker be he mother , while he only put in a good - humored moderating remark here and there . the old lady be evidently accustom to tell she company what they ought to think , and to regard no subject as quite safe without she steering . she be afford leisure for this function by have all she little want attend to by . meanwhile tiny carry on she arm a small basket , into which she divert a bit of sugar , which she have first drop in she saucer as if by mistake ; look round furtively afterwards , and revert to she teacup with a small innocent noise as of a tiny timid quadru . pray think no ill of . that basket hold small savings from she more portable food , destin for the child of she poor friend among whom she trot on fine morning ; foster and pet all needy creature be so spontaneous a delight to she , that she regard it much as if it have be a pleasant vice that she be addict to . perhaps she be conscious of be tempt to steal from those who have much that she might give to those who have nothing , and carry in she conscience the guilt of that repress desire . one must be poor to know the luxury of give ! welcome the guest with a lively formality and precision . she presently inform he that they be not often in want of medical aid in that house . she have brotch up she child to wear flannel and not to over -eat themselve , which last habit she consider the chief reason why people need doctor . plead for those whose fathers and mother have over -eaten themselves , but hold that view of thing dangerous : be more just than that ; it would be easy for any felon to say that he ancestor ought to have be hang instead of he . if those he have bad fathers and mother be bad themselves , they be hang for that . there be no need to go back on what you could not see . " my mother be like old the , " say the , " she object to metaphysic . " " I object to what be wrong , . I say , keep hold of a few plain truth , and make everything square with they . when I be young , , there never be any question about right and wrong . we know we catechism , and that be enough ; we learn we creed and we duty
duty . every respectable person have the same opinion . but now , if you speak out of the prayer - book itself , you be liable to be contradict . " " that make rather a pleasant time of it for those who like to maintain they own point , " say . " but my mother always give way , " say the , slyly . " no , no , , you must not lead into a mistake about _me _. I shall never show that disrespect to my parent , to give up what they teach I . any one may see what come of turning . if you change once , why not twenty time ? " " a man might see good argument for change once , and not see they for change again , " say , amuse with the decisive old lady . " excuse I there . if you go upon argument , they be never want , when a man have no constancy of mind . my father never change , and he preache plain moral sermon without argument , and be a good man -- few better . when you get I a good man make out of argument , I will get you a good dinner with read you the cookery - book . that be my opinion , and I think anybody 's stomach will bear I out . " " about the dinner certainly , mother , " say . " it be the same thing , the dinner or the man . I be nearly seventy , , and I go upon experience . I be not likely to follow new light , though there be plenty of they here as elsewhere . I say , they come in with the mixed stuff that will neither wash nor wear . it be not so in my youth : a be a Churchman , and a clergyman , you might be pretty sure , be a gentleman , if nothing else . but now he may be no better than a Dissenter , and want to push aside my son on pretence of doctrine . but whoever may wish to push he aside , I be proud to say , , that he will compare with any preacher in this kingdom , not to speak of this town , which be but a low standard to go by ; at least , to my thinking , for I be bear and breed at . " " a mother be never partial , " say , smile . " what do you think 's mother say about he ? " " ah , poor creature ! what indeed ? " say , she sharpness blunt for the moment by she confidence in maternal judgment . " she say the truth to herself , depend upon it . " " and what be the truth ? " say . " I be curious to know . " " oh , nothing bad at all , " say . " he be a zealous fellow : not very learned , and not very wise , I think -- because I do not agree with he . " " why , ! " say , " and he wife tell I only to - day , that say they should have no more coal if they come to hear you preach . " lay down she knitt , which she have resume after she small allowance of tea and toast , and look at she son as if to say " you hear that ? " say , " oh poor thing ! poor thing ! " in reference , probably , to the double loss of preaching and coal . but the answer quietly -- " that be because they be not my parishioner . and I do not think my sermon be worth a load of coal to they . " " , " say , who could not let this pass , " you do not know my son : he always undervalue himself . I tell he he be undervalue the who make he , and make he a most excellent preacher . " " that must be a hint for I to take away to my study , mother , " say the Vicar , laugh . " I promise to show you my collection , " he add , turn to ; " shall we go ? " all three lady remonstrate . ought not to be hurry away without be allow to accept another cup of tea : have abundance of good tea in the pot . why be Camden in such haste to take a visitor to he den ? there be nothing but pick vermin , and drawer full of blue - bottle and moth , with no carpet on the floor . must excuse it . a game at cribbage would be far better . in short , it be plain that a vicar might be adore by he womankind as the king of man and preacher , and yet be hold by they to stand in much need of they direction . , with the usual shallowness of a young bachelor , wonder that have not teach they better . " my mother be not use to my have visitor who can take any interest in my hobby , " say the , as he open the door of he study , which be indeed as bare of luxuries for the body as the lady have imply , unless a short porcelain pipe and a tobacco - box be to be accept . " man of you profession do not generally smoke , " he say . smile and shake he head . " nor of mine either , properly , I suppose . you will hear that pipe allege
allege against I by and . they do not know how pleas the would be if I give it up . " " I understand . you be of a excitable temper and want a sedative . I be heavier , and should get idle with it . I should rush into idleness , and stagnate there with all my might . " " and you mean to give it all to you work . I be some ten or twelve year older than you , and have come to a compromise . I feed a weakness or two lest they should get clamorous . see , " continue the Vicar , open several small drawer , " I fancy I have make a exhaustive study of the entomology of this district . I be go on both with the fauna and flora ; but I have at least do my insect well . we be singularly rich in orthoptera : I do not know whether -- ah ! you have get hold of that glass jar -- you be look into that instead of my drawer . you do not really care about these thing ? " " not by the side of this lovely anencephalous monster . I have never have time to give myself much to natural history . I be early bitten with a interest in structure , and it be what lie most directely in my profession . I have no hobby beside . I have the sea to swim in there . " " ah ! you be a happy fellow , " say , turn on he heel and begin to fill he pipe . " you do not know what it be to want spiritual tobacco -- bad emendation of old text , or small item about a variety of , with the well - know signature of , for the 's ;' or a learn treatise on the entomology of the Pentateuch , include all the insect not mention , but probably meet with by the in they passage through the desert ; with a monograph on the ant , as treat by , show the harmony of the of with the result of modern research . you do not mind my fumigat you ? " be more surprised at the openness of this talk than at its implied meaning -- that the feel himself not altogether in the right vocation . the neat fitting - up of drawer and shelf , and the bookcase fill with expensive illustrate book on Natural History , make he think again of the winnings at card and they destination . but he be begin to wish that the very best construction of everything that do should be the true one . the 's frankness seem not of the repulsive sort that come from a uneasy consciousness seek to forestall the judgment of other , but simply the relief of a desire to do with as little pretence as possible . apparently he be not without a sense that he freedom of speech might seem premature , for he presently say -- " I have not yet tell you that I have the advantage of you , , and know you better than you know I . you remember who share you apartment at for some time ? I be a correspondent of he , and he tell I a good deal about you . I be not quite sure when you first come that you be the same man . I be very glad when I find that you be . only I do not forget that you have not have the like prologue about I . " divine some delicacy of feeling here , but do not half understand it . " by the way , " he say , " what have become of ? I have quite lost sight of he . he be hot on the french social systems , and talk of go to the Backwoods to find a sort of Pythagorean community . be he go ? " " not at all . he be practise at a german bath , and have marry a rich patient . " " then my notions wear the best , so far , " say , with a short scornful laugh . " he would have it , the medical profession be a inevitable system of humbug . I say , the fault be in the man -- men who truckle to lie and folly . instead of preach against humbug outside the wall , it might be better to set up a disinfecting apparatus within . in short -- I be report my own conversation -- you may be sure I have all the good sense on my side . " " you scheme be a good deal more difficult to carry out than the Pythagorean community , though . you have not only get the old in yourself against you , but you have get all those descendant of the original who form the society around you . you see , I have pay twelve or thirteen year more than you for my knowledge of difficulty . but " -- break off a moment , and then add , " you be eye that glass vase again . do you want to make a exchange ? you shall not have it without a fair barter . " " I have some sea-mice -- fine specimen -- in spirits . and I will throw in 's new thing --' microscopic observation on the Pollen of Plants ' -- if you do not happen to have it already . " " why , see how you long for the monster , I might ask a higher price . suppose I ask you to look through my drawer and agree with I about all my new species ? " the Vicar , while
while he talk in this way , alternately move about with he pipe in he mouth , and return to hang rather fondly over he drawer . " that would be good discipline , you know , for a young doctor who have to please he patient in . you must learn to be bore , remember . however , you shall have the monster on you own term . " " do not you think man overrate the necessity for humor everybody 's nonsense , till they get despise by the very fools they humor ? " say , move to 's side , and look rather absently at the insect range in fine gradation , with name subscribe in exquisite writing . " the shortest way be to make you value feel , so that people must put up with you whether you flatter they or not . " " with all my heart . but then you must be sure of have the value , and you must keep yourself independent . very few man can do that . either you slip out of service altogether , and become good for nothing , or you wear the harness and draw a good deal where you yoke - fellow pull you . but do look at these delicate orthoptera ! " have after all to give some scrutiny to each drawer , the Vicar laugh at himself , and yet persist in the exhibition . " Apropo of what you say about wear harness , " begin , after they have sit down , " I make up my mind some time ago to do with as little of it as possible . that be why I determine not to try anything in , for a good many year at least . I do not like what I see when I be study there -- so much empty bigwiggism , and obstructive trickery . in the country , people have less pretension to knowledge , and be less of companion , but for that reason they affect one 's amour - propre less : one make less bad blood , and can follow one be own course more quietly . " " yes -- well -- you have get a good start ; you be in the right profession , the work you feel yourself most fit for . some people miss that , and repent too late . but you must not be too sure of keep you independence . " " you mean of family tie ? " say , conceive that these might press rather tightly on . " not altogether . of course they make many thing more difficult . but a good wife -- a good unworldly woman -- may really help a man , and keep he more independent . there be a parishioner of mine -- a fine fellow , but who would hardly have pull through as he have do without he wife . do you know the Garth ? I think they be not 's patients . " " no ; but there be a at old 's , at . " " they daughter : a excellent girl . " " she be very quiet -- I have hardly notice she . " " she have take notice of you , though , depend upon it . " " I do not understand , " say ; he could hardly say " of course . " " oh , she gauge everybody . I prepare she for confirmation -- she be a favorite of mine . " puffe a few moment in silence , not care to know more about the Garth . at last the lay down he pipe , stretch out he leg , and turn he bright eye with a smile towards , say -- " but we Middlemarcher be not so tame as you take we to be . we have we intrigue and we party . I be a party man , for example , and be another . if you vote for I you will offend . " " what be there against ? " say Lydgate , emphatically . " I do not say there be anything against he except that . if you vote against he you will make he you enemy . " " I do not know that I need mind about that , " say , rather proudly ; " but he seem to have good idea about hospital , and he spend large sum on useful public object . he might help I a good deal in carry out my idea . as to he religious notions -- why , as say , incantation will destroy a flock of sheep if administer with a certain quantity of arsenic . I look for the man who will bring the arsenic , and do not mind about he incantation . " " very good . but then you must not offend you arsenic -man . you will not offend I , you know , " say , quite unaffectedly . " I do not translate my own convenience into other people 's duty . I be oppose to in many way . I do not like the set he belong to : they be a narrow ignorant set , and do more to make they neighbor uncomfortable than to make they better . they system be a sort of worldly - spiritual cliqueism : they really look on the rest of mankind as a doom carcass which be to nourish they for heaven . but , " he add , smilingly , " I do not say that 's new hospital be a bad thing ; and as to he want to oust I from the old one -- why , if he think I a mischievous fellow , he be only return a compliment . and I be
be not a model clergyman -- only a decent makeshift . " be not at all sure that the malign himself . a model clergyman , like a model doctor , ink to think he own profession the finest in the world , and take all knowledge as mere nourishment to he moral pathology and therapeutic . he only say , " what reason do give for supersed you ? " " that I do not teach he opinion -- which he call spiritual religion ; and that I have no time to spare . both statement be true . but then I could make time , and I should be glad of the forty pound . that be the plain fact of the case . but let we dismiss it . I only want to tell you that if you vote for you arsenic-man , you be not to cut I in consequence . I can not spare you . you be a sort of circumnavigator come to settle among we , and will keep up my belief in the antipode . now tell I all about they in . " . " oh , sir , the loftiest hope on earth draw lot with meaner hope : heroic breast , breathing bad air , run risk of pestilence ; or , lack lime - juice when they cross the line , may languish with the scurvy . " some week pass after this conversation before the question of the chaplaincy gather any practical import for , and without tell himself the reason , he defer the predetermination on which side he should give he vote . it would really have be a matter of total indifference to he -- that be to say , he would have take the more convenient side , and give he vote for the appointment of Tyke without any hesitation -- if he have not car personally for . but he like for the of 's grow with grow acquaintanceship . that , enter into 's position as a new - comer who have he own professional object to secure , should have take pain rather to warn off than to obtain he interest , show a unusual delicacy and generosity , which 's nature be keenly alive to . it go along with other point of conduct in Farebrother which be exceptionally fine , and make he character resemble those southern landscape which seem divide between natural grandeur and social slovenliness . very few man could have be as filial and chivalrous as he be to the mother , aunt , and sister , whose dependence on he have in many way shape he life rather uneasily for himself ; few man who feel the pressure of small need be so nobly resolute not to dress up they inevitably self - interested desire in a pretext of better motive . in these matter he be conscious that he life would bear the closest scrutiny ; and perhaps the consciousness encourage a little defiance towards the critical strictness of person whose celestial intimacy seem not to improve they domestic manners , and whose lofy aim be not need to account for they action . then , he preaching be ingenious and pithy , like the preaching of the in its robust age , and he sermon be deliver without book . people outside he parish go to hear he ; and , since to fill the church be always the most difficult part of a clergyman 's function , here be another ground for a careless sense of superiority . besides , he be a likable man : sweet - tempered , ready - wit , frank , without grin of suppress bitterness or other conversational flavors which make half of we a affliction to we friend . like he heartily , and wish for he friendship . with this feeling uppermost , he continue to waive the question of the chaplaincy , and to persuade himself that it be not only no proper business of he , but likely enough never to vex he with a demand for he vote . Lydgate , at 's request , be lay down plan for the internal arrangement of the new hospital , and the two be often in consultation . the banker be always presuppose that he could count in general on Lydgate as a coadjutor , but make no special recurrence to the come decision between and . when the general board of the have meet , however , and have notice that the question of the chaplaincy be throw on a council of the director and medical man , to meet on the follow , he have a vexed sense that he must make up he mind on this trivial business . he could not help hear within he the distinct declaration that be prime minister , and that the Tyke affair be a question of office or no office ; and he could not help a equally pronounce dislike to give up the prospect of office . for he observation be constantly confirm 's assurance that the banker would not overlook opposition . " Confound they petty politics ! " be one of he thought for three morning in the meditative process of shaving , when he have begin to feel that he must really hold a court of conscience on this matter . certainly there be valid thing to be say against the election of : he have too much on he hand already , especially consider how much time he spend on non-clerical occupations . then again it be a continually repeat shock , disturb 's esteem , that the Vicar should obviously play for the sake of money , like the play indeed , but evidently like some end which it serve . contend on theory for the desirability of all game , and say that 's wit be
be stagnant for want of they ; but feel certain that he would have play very much less but for the money . there be a billiard - room at the , which some anxious mother and wife regard as the chief temptation in . the be a first - rate billiard - player , and though he do not frequent the , there be report that he have sometimes be there in the daytime and have win money . and as to the chaplaincy , he do not pretend that he care for it , except for the sake of the forty pound . Lydgate be no Puritan , but he do not care for play , and win money at it have always see a meanness to he ; besides , he have a ideal of life which make this subservience of conduct to the gaining of small sum thoroughly hateful to he . in he own life he want have be supply without any trouble to himself , and he first impulse be always to be liberal with half - crown as matter of no importance to a gentleman ; it have never occur to he to devise a plan for get half -crown . he have always know in a general way that he be not rich , but he have never feel poor , and he have no power of imagine the part which the want of money play in determine the action of man . money have never be a motive to he . hence he be not ready to frame excuse for this deliberate pursuit of small gain . it be altogether repulsive to he , and he never enter into any calculation of the ratio between the 's income and he more or less necessary expenditure . it be possible that he would not have make such a calculation in he own case . and now , when the question of voting have come , this repulsive fact tell more strongly against Farebrother than it have do before . one would know much better what to do if man 's character be more consistent , and especially if one 's friend be invariably fin for any function they desire to undertake ! be convinc that if there have be no valid objection to , he would have vote for he , whatever Bulstrode might have feel on the subject : he do not intend to be a vassal of 's . on the other hand , there be , a man entirely give to he clerical office , who be simply curate at a chapel of ease in 's parish , and have time for extra duty . nobody have anything to say against , except that they could not bear he , and suspect he of cant . really , from he point of view , be thoroughly justified . but whichever way begin to incline , there be something to make he wince ; and be a proud man , he be a little exasperated at be oblige to wince . he do not like frustra he own best purpose by get on bad term with ; he do not like vote against , and help to deprive he of function and salary ; and the question occur whether the additional forty pound might not leave the free from that ignoble care about win at card . moreover , do not like the consciousness that in vote for he should be vote on the side obviously convenient for himself . but would the end really be he own convenience ? other people would say so , and would allege that he be curry favor with for the sake of make himself important and get on in the world . what then ? he for he own part know that if he personal prospect simply have be concerned , he would not have care a rotten nut for the banker 's friendship or enmity . what he really care for be a medium for he work , a vehicle for he idea ; and after all , be he not bound to prefer the object of get a good hospital , where he could demonstrate the specific distinctions of fever and test therapeutic result , before anything else connect with this chaplaincy ? for the first time be feel the hampering threadlike pressure of small social condition , and they frustrating complexity . at the end of he inward debate , when he set out for the hospital , he hope be really in the chance that discussion might somehow give a new aspect to the question , and make the scale dip so as to exclude the necessity for voting . I think he trust a little also to the energy which be beget by circumstance -- some feeling rush warmly and make resolve easy , while debate in cool blood have only make it more difficult . however it be , he do not distinctly say to himself on which side he would vote ; and all the while he be inwardly resent the subjection which have be force upon he . it would have seem beforehand like a ridiculous piece of bad logic that he , with he unmixed resolution of independence and he select purpose , would find himself at the very outset in the grasp of petty alternative , each of which be repugnant to he . in he student 's chamber , he have prearrange he social action quite differently . be late in set out , but , the two other surgeon , and several of the director have arrive early ; , treasurer and chairman , be among those who be still absent . the conversation seem to imply that the issue be problematical , and that a majority for be not so certain as have be generally suppose . the two physician ,
, for a wonder , turn out to be unanimous , or rather , through of different mind , they concur in action . , the rug and weighty , be , as every one have foreseen , a adherent of . the Doctor be more than suspect of have no religion , but somehow tolerate this deficiency in he as if he have be a ; indeed it be probable that he professional weight be the more believe in , the world - old association of cleverness with the evil principle be still potent in the mind even of lady - patient who have the strictest idea of frilling and sentiment . it be perhaps this negation in the doctor which make he neighbor call he hard - head and dry - wit ; condition of texture which be also hold favorable to the storing of judgment connect with drug . at all event , it be certain that if any medical man have come to Middlemarch with the reputation of have very definite religious view , of be give to prayer , and of otherwise show a active piety , there would have be a general presumption against he medical skill . on this ground it be ( professionally speak ) fortunate for that he religious sympathy be of a general kind , and such as give a distant medical sanction to all serious sentiment , whether of or , rather than any adhesion to particular tenet . if insist , as he be apt to do , on the Lutheran doctrine of justification , as that by which a church must stand or fall , in return be quite sure that man be not a mere machine or a fortuitous conjunction of atom ; if Mrs . insist on a particular providence in relation to she stomach complaint , for he part like to keep the mental window open and object to fix limit ; if the Unitarian brewer jest about the , quote " on . " he object to the rather free style of anecdote in which indulge , prefer well - sanction quotation , and like refinement of all kind : it be generally know that he have some kinship to a bishop , and sometimes spend he holiday at " the palace . " be soft - hand , pale - complexion , and of round outline , not to be distinguished from a mild clergyman in appearance : whereas be superfluously tall ; he trousers get crease at the knee , and show a excess of boot at a time when straps seem necessary to any dignity of bearing ; you hear he go in and out , and up and down , as if he have come to see after the roofing . in short , he have weight , and might be expect to grapple with a disease and throw it ; while might be better able to detect it lurk and to circumvent it . they enjoy about equally the mysterious privilege of medical reputation , and conceal with much etiquette they contempt for each other 's skill . regard themselves as institution , they be ready to combine against all innovator , and against non-professional give to interference . on this ground they be both in they heart equally averse to , though have never be in open hostility with he , and never differ from he without elaborate explanation to , who have find that alone understand she constitution . a layman who pry into the professional conduct of medical man , and be always obtrud he reform ,-- though he be less directly embarrassing to the two physician than to the surgeon - apothecary who attend pauper by contract , be nevertheless offensive to the professional nostril as such ; and share fully in the new pique against , excit by he apparent determination to patronize . the long -established practitioner , and ; be just now stand apart and have a friendly colloquy , in which they agree that be a jackanape , just make to serve 's purpose . to non-medical friend they have already concur in praise the other young practitioner , who have come into the town on 's retirement without further recommendation than he own merit and such argument for solid professional acquirement as might be gather from he have apparently waste no time on other branch of knowledge . it be clear that Lydgate , by not dispense drug , intend to cast imputation on he equal , and also to obscure the limit between he own rank as a general practitioner and that of the physician , who , in the interest of the profession , feel bound to maintain its various grade ,--especially against a man who have not be to either of the english university and enjoy the absence of anatomical and bedside study there , but come with a libellous pretension to experience in and , where observation might be abundant indeed , but hardly sound . thus it happen that on this occasion become identify with , and with ; and owe to this variety of interchangeable name for the chaplaincy question , diverse mind be enable to form the same judgment concern it . say at once bluntly to the group assemble when he enter , " I go for . a salary , with all my heart . but why take it from the Vicar ? he have none too much -- have to insure he life , besides keep house , and do a vicar 's charity . put forty pound in he pocket and you will do no harm . he be a good fellow , be Farebrother , with as little of the parson about he as will serve to carry order . " " Ho , ho ! , " say old , a retire iron - monger of some
some standing -- he interjection be something between a laugh and a Parliamentary disapproval ; " we must let you have you say . but what we have to consider be not anybody be income -- it be the soul of the poor sick people " -- here 's voice and face have a sincere patho in they . " he be a real preacher , be . I should vote against my conscience if I vote against -- I should indeed . " " 's opponent have not ask any one to vote against he conscience , I believe , " say , a rich tanner of fluent speech , whose glitter spectacle and erect hair be turn with some severity towards innocent . " but in my judgament it behove we , as Director , to consider whether we will regard it as we whole business to carry out proposition emanating from a single quarter . will any member of the committee aver that he would have entertain the idea of displace the gentleman who have always discharge the function of chaplain here , if it have not be suggest to he by party whose disposition it be to regard every institution of this town as a machinery for carry out they own view ? I tax no man 's motive : let they lie between himself and a higher power ; but I do say , that there be influence at work here which be incompatible with genuine independence , and that a crawling servility be usually dictate by circumstance which gentleman so conduct themselves could not afford either morally or financially to avow . I myself be a layman , but I have give no inconsiderable attention to the division in the Church and -- " " oh , damn the division ! " burst in , lawyer and town - clerk , who rarely present himself at the board , but now look in hurriedly , whip in hand . " we have nothing to do with they here . Farebrother have be do the work -- what there be -- without pay , and if pay be to be give , it should be give to he . I call it a confound job to take the thing away from . " " I think it would be as well for gentleman not to give they remark a personal bearing , " say . " I shall vote for the appointment of , but I should not have know , if have not hinte it , that I be a . " " I disclaim any personality . I expressly say , if I may be allow to repeat , or even to conclude what I be about to say -- " " ah , here be ! " say ; at which everybody turn away from , leave he to feel the uselessness of superior gift in . " come , , I must have you on the right side , eh ? " " I hope so , " say Minchin , nodd and shake hand here and there ; " at whatever cost to my feeling . " " if there be any feeling here , it should be feel for the man who be turn out , I think , " say . " I confess I have feeling on the other side also . I have a divided esteem , " say , rub he hand . " I consider a exemplary man -- none more so -- and I believe he to be propose from unimpeachable motive . I , for my part , wish that I could give he my vote . but I be constrain to take a view of the case which give the preponderance to 's claim . he be a amiable man , a able preacher , and have be longer among we . " look on , sad and silent . settle he cravat , uneasily . " you do not set up Farebrother as a pattern of what a clergyman ought to be , I hope , " say , the eminent carrier , who have just come in . " I have no ill - will towards he , but I think we owe something to the public , not to speak of anything higher , in these appointment . in my opinion Farebrother be too lax for a clergyman . I do not wish to bring up particular against he ; but he will make a little attendance here go as far as he can . " " and a devilish deal better than too much , " say , whose bad language be notorious in that part of the county . " sick people can not bear so much pray and preach . and that methodistical sort of religion be bad for the spirit -- bad for the inside , eh ? " he add , turn quickly round to the four medical man who be assemble . but any answer be dispense with by the entrance of three gentleman , with whom there be greeting more or less cordial . these be the , rector of 's , , and we friend of , who have lately allow himself to be put on the board of director in he turn , but have never before attend , he attendance now be due to 's exertion . Lydgate be the only person still expect . every one now sit down , presiding , pale and self - restrain as usual . , a moderate evangelical , wish for the appointment of he friend , a zealous able man , who , officiate at a chapel of ease , have not a cure of soul too extensive to leave he ample time for the new duty . it be desirable that chaplaincy of this kind should be enter on with
with a fervent intention : they be peculiar opportunity for spiritual influence ; and while it be good that a salary should be allot , there be the more need for scrupulous watch lest the office should be pervert into a mere question of salary . 's manner have so much quiet propriety that objector could only simmer in silence . believe that everybody mean well in the matter . he have not himself attend to the affair of the , though he have a strong interest in whatever be for the benefit of , and be most happy to meet the gentleman present on any public question -- " any public question , you know , " repeat , with he nod of perfect understanding . " I be a good deal occupy as a magistrate , and in the collection of documentary evidence , but I regard my time as be at the disposal of the public -- and , in short , my friend have convince I that a chaplain with a salary -- a salary , you know -- be a very good thing , and I be happy to be able to come here and vote for the appointment of , who , I understand , be a unexceptionable man , apostolic and eloquent and everything of that kind -- and I be the last man to withhold my vote -- under the circumstance , you know . " " it seem to I that you have be cramm with one side of the question , , " say , who be afraid of nobody , and be a Tory suspicious of electioneer intention . " you do not seem to know that one of the worthiest man we have have be do duty as chaplain here for year without pay , and that be propose to supersede he . " " excuse I , , " say . " have be fully inform of 's character and position . " " by he enemy , " flash out . " I trust there be no personal hostility concern here , " say . " I will swear there be , though , " retort . " gentlemen , " say , in a subdu tone , " the merit of the question may be very briefly state , and if any one present doubt that every gentleman who be about to give he vote have not be fully inform , I can now recapitulate the consideration that should weigh on either side . " " I do not see the good of that , " say . " I suppose we all know whom we mean to vote for . any man who want to do justice do not wait till the last minute to hear both side of the question . I have no time to lose , and I propose that the matter be put to the vote at once . " a brief but still hot discussion follow before each person write " " or " Farebrother " on a piece of paper and slipp it into a glass tumbler ; and in the mean time see Lydgate enter . " I perceive that the vote be equally divide at present , " say , in a clear biting voice . then , look up at -- " there be a casting - vote still to be give . it be yours , : will you be good enough to write ? " " the thing be settle now , " say , rise . " we all know how will vote . " " you seem to speak with some peculiar meaning , sir , " say , rather defiantly , and keep he pencil suspend . " I merely mean that you be expect to vote with . do you regard that mean as offensive ? " " it may be offensive to other . but I shall not desist from voting with he on that account . " immediately write down " . " so the become chaplain to the , and continue to work with . he be really uncertain whether be not the more suitable candidate , and yet he consciousness tell he that if he have be quite free from indirect bia he should have vote for . the affair of the chaplaincy remain a sore point in he memory as a case in which this petty medium of have be too strong for he . how could a man be satisfied with a decision between such alternative and under such circumstance ? no more than he can be satisfied with he hat , which he have choose from among such shape as the resource of the age offer he , wear it at best with a resignation which be chiefly support by comparison . but meet he with the same friendliness as before . the character of the publican and sinner be not always practically incompatible with that of the modern Pharisee , for the majority of we scarcely see more distinctly the faultiness of we own conduct than the faultiness of we own argument , or the dulness of we own joke . but the of . 's have certainly escape the slightest tincture of the , and by dint of admitting to himself that he be too much as other man were , he have become remarkably unlike they in this -- that he could excuse other for think slightly of he , and could judge impartially of they conduct even when it tell against he . " the world have be to strong for _me_, I know , " he say one day to Lydgate . " but then I be not a mighty man -- I shall never be a man of renown . the choice of Hercule be a pretty fable ; but make it easy work for the hero
hero , as if the first resolve be enough . another story say that he come to hold the distaff , and at last wore the shirt . I suppose one good resolve might keep a man right if everybody else 's resolve help he . " the 's talk be not always inspirit : he have escape be a Pharisee , but he have not escape that low estimate of possibility which we rather hastily arrive at as a inference from we own failure . think that there be a pitiable infirmity of will in . . " L' altra vedete ch 'ha fatto alla guancia della sua palma , sospirando , letto . " -- Purgatorio , vii . when the be still reign over the privacy of , when the of be , and be mayor of the old corporation in , , bear , have take she wedding journey to . in those day the world in general be more ignorant of good and evil by forty year than it be at present . traveller do not often carry full information on Christian art either in they head or they pocket ; and even the most brilliant English critic of the day mistake the flower - flush tomb of the ascend for a ornamental vase due to the painter 's fancy . , which have help to fill some dull blank with love and knowledge , have not yet penetrate the time with its leaven and enter into everybody 's food ; it be ferment still as a distinguishable vigorous enthusiasm in certain long - hair german artist at , and the youth of other nation who work or id near they be sometimes catch in the spreading movement . one fine morning a young man whose hair be not immoderately long , but abundant and curly , and who be otherwise English in he equipment , have just turn he back on the in the and be look out on the magnificent view of the mountain from the adjoining round vestibule . he be sufficientely absorb not to notice the approach of a dark - ey , animate German who come up to he and place a hand on he shoulder , say with a strong accent , " come here , quick ! else she will have change she pose . " Quickness be ready at the call , and the two figure pass lightly along by the , towards the hall where the recline , then call the , lie in the marble voluptuousness of she beauty , the drapery fold around she with a petal - like ease and tenderness . they be just in time to see another figure stand against a pedestal near the recline marble : a breathing blooming girl , whose form , not sham by the , be clad in Quakerish gray drapery ; she long cloak , fasten at the neck , be throw backward from she arm , and one beautiful ungloved hand pillow she cheek , push somewhat backward the white beaver bonnet which make a sort of halo to she face around the simply braide dark - brown hair . she be not look at the sculpture , probably not think of it : she large eye be fix dreamily on a streak of sunlight which fall across the floor . but she become conscious of the two stranger who suddenly pause as if to contemplate the , and , without look at they , immediately turn away to join a maid - servant and courier who be loiter along the hall at a little distance off . " what do you think of that for a fine bit of antithesis ? " say the german , search in he friend 's face for responding admiration , but go on volubly without wait for any other answer . " there lie antique beauty , not corpse - like even in death , but arrest in the complete contentment of its sensuous perfection : and here stand beauty in its breathing life , with the consciousness of Christian century in its bosom . but she should be dress as a nun ; I think she look almost what you call a Quaker ; I would dress she as a nun in my picture . however , she be marry ; I see she wedding - ring on that wonderful left hand , otherwise I should have think the sallow be she father . I see he part from she a good while ago , and just now I find she in that magnificent pose . only think ! he be perhaps rich , and would like to have she portrait take . ah ! it be no use look after she -- there she go ! let we follow she home ! " " no , no , " say he companion , with a little frown . " you be singular , . you look struck together . do you know she ? " " I know that she be marry to my cousin , " say , saunter down the hall with a preoccupied air , while he german friend keep at he side and watch he eagerly . " what ! the Geistlicher ? he look more like a uncle -- a more useful sort of relation . " " he be not my uncle . I tell you he be my second cousin , " say , with some irritation . " Schon , schon . do not be snappish . you be not angry with I for think - the most perfect young I ever see ? " " ? nonsense . I have only see she once before , for a couple of minute , when my cousin introduce she to I , just before I leave . they be not marry then . I do not know they
they be come to . " " but you will go to see they now -- you will find out what they have for a address -- since you know the name . shall we go to the post ? and you could speak about the portrait . " " Confound you , ! I do not know what I shall do . I be not so brazen as you . " " Bah ! that be because you be dilettantish and amateurish . if you be a artist , you would think of - as antique form animate by sentiment -- a sort of -- sensuous force control by spiritual passion . " " yes , and that you paint she be the chief outcome of she existence -- the divinity pass into higher completeness and all but exhaust in the act of cover you bit of canva . I be amateurish if you like : I do _not think that all the universe be straine towards the obscure significance of you picture . " " but it be , my dear !-- so far as it be straine through I , : that stand firm , " say the good - natured painter , put a hand on 's shoulder , and not in the least disturb by the unaccountable touch of ill - humor in he tone . " see now ! my existence presuppose the existence of the whole universe -- do it _not ?_ and my function be to paint -- and as a painter I have a conception which be altogether genialisch , of you great - aunt or second grandmother as a subject for a picture ; therefore , the universe be straine towards that picture through that particular hook or claw which it put forth in the shape of I -- not true ? " " but how if another claw in the shape of I be strain to thwart it ?-- the case be a little less simple then . " " not at all : the result of the struggle be the same thing -- picture or no picture -- logically . " will could not resist this imperturbable temper , and the cloud in he face break into sunshiny laughter . " come now , my friend -- you will help ? " say , in a hopeful tone . " no ; nonsense , ! English lady be not at everybody 's service as models . and you want to express too much with you painting . you would only have make a better or worse portrait with a background which every connoisseur would give a different reason for or against . and what be a portrait of a woman ? you painting and Plastik be poor stuff after all . they perturb and dull conception instead of raise they . language be a finer medium . " " yes , for those who can not paint , " say . " there you have perfect right . I do not recommend you to paint , my friend . " the amiable artist carry he sting , but do not choose to appear stung . he go on as if he have not hear . " language give a fuller image , which be all the better for beings vague . after all , the true seeing be within ; and paint star at you with a insistent imperfection . I feel that especially about representation of woman . as if a woman be a mere colore superficy ! you must wait for movement and tone . there be a difference in they very breathe : they change from moment to moment .-- this woman whom you have just see , for example : how would you paint she voice , pray ? but she voice be much diviner than anything you have see of she . " " I see , I see . you be jealous . no man must presume to think that he can paint you ideal . this be serious , my friend ! you great - aunt ! ' als ' in a tragic sense -- ungeheuer ! " " you and I shall quarrel , , if you call that lady my aunt again . " " how be she to be call then ? " " . " " good . suppose I get acquaint with she in spite of you , and find that she very much wish to be pain ? " " yes , suppose ! " say , in a contemptuous undertone , intend to dismiss the subject . he be conscious of be irritate by ridiculously small cause , which be half of he own creation . why be he make any fuss about ? and yet he feel as if something have happene to he with regard to she . there be character which be continually create collision and node for themselves in drama which nobody be prepared to act with they . they susceptibility will clash against object that remain innocently quiet . . " a child forsake , wake suddenly , whose gaze afeard on all thing round doth rove , and seeth only that it can not see the meeting eyes of love . " two hour later , be seat in a inner room or boudoir of a handsome apartment in the . I be sorry to add that she be sobb bitterly , with such abandonment to this relief of a oppress heart as a woman habitually control by pride on she own account and thoughtfulness for other will sometimes allow herself when she feel securely alone . and be certain to remain away for some time at the . yet have no distinctly shapen grievance that she could state even to herself ; and in the midst of she confused thought and passion , the mental act that be
be struggle forth into clearness be a self - accuse cry that she feel of desolation be the fault of she own spiritual poverty . she have marry the man of she choice , and with the advantage over most girl that she have contemplate she marriage chiefly as the beginning of new duty : from the very first she have think of as have a mind so much above she own , that he must often be claim by study which she could not entirely share ; moreover , after the brief narrow experience of she girlhood she be behold , the city of visible history , where the past of a whole hemisphere seem move in funeral procession with strange ancestral image and trophy gather from afar . but this stupendous fragmentariness heighten the dreamlike strangeness of she bridal life . Dorothea have now be five week in , and in the kindly morning when autumn and winter seem to go hand in hand like a happy aged couple one of whom would presently survive in chiller loneliness , she have drive about at first with , but of late chiefly with and they experienced courier . she have be lead through the best gallery , have be take to the chief point of view , have be show the grandest ruin and the most glorious church , and she have end by oftenest choosing to drive out to the Campagna where she could feel alone with the earth and sky , away - from the oppressive masquerade of age , in which she own life to seem to become a masque with enigmatical costume . to those who have look at with the quickening power of a knowledge which breath a grow soul into all historic shape , and trace out the suppress transition which unite all contrast , may still be the spiritual centre and interpreter of the world . but let they conceive one more historical contrast : the gigantic break revelation of that Imperial and Papal city thrust abruptly on the notion of a girl who have be bring up in and , feed on meagre Protestant histories and on art chiefly of the hand - screen sort ; a girl whose ardent nature turn all she small allowance of knowledge into principle , fuse she action into they mould , and whose quick emotion give the most abstract thing the quality of a pleasure or a pain ; a girl who have lately become a wife , and from the enthusiastic acceptance of untried duty find herself plunge in tumultuous preoccupation with she personal lot . the weight of unintelligible might lie easily on bright nymph to whom it form a background for the brilliant picnic of - foreign society ; but have no such defence against deep impressions . ruin and basilica , palace and colossi , set in the midst of a sordid present , where all that be living and warm - blood seem sunk in the deep degeneracy of a superstition divorc from reverence ; the dimmer but yet eager life gaze and struggle on wall and ceiling ; the long vista of white form whose marble eye seem to hold the monotonous light of a alien world : all this vast wreck of ambitious ideal , sensuous and spiritual , mix confusedly with the sign of breathing forgetfulness and degradation , at first jar she as with a electric shock , and then urge themselves on she with that ache belong to a glut of confused idea which check the flow of emotion . form both pale and glow take possession of she young sense , and fix themselves in she memory even when she be not think of they , prepare strange associations which remain through she after - year . we mood be apt to bring with they image which succeed each other like the magic - lantern picture of a doze ; and in certain state of dull forlornness Dorothea all she life continue to see the vastness of 's , the huge bronze canopy , the excited intention in the attitude and garment of the prophet and evangelist in the mosaic above , and the red drapery which be be hang for spread itself everywhere like a disease of the retina . not that this inward amazement of 's be anything very exceptional : many soul in they young nudity be tumble out among incongruity and leave to " find they foot " among they , while they elder go about they business . can I suppose that when be discover in a fit of weepe six week after she wedding , the situation will be regard as tragic . some discouragement , some faintness of heart at the new real future which replace the imaginary , be not unusual , and we do not expect people to be deeply move by what be not unusual . that element of tragedy which lie in the very fact of frequency , have not yet wrotch itself into the coarse emotion of mankind ; and perhaps we frame could hardly bear much of it . if we have a keen vision and feeling of all ordinary human life , it would be like hear the grass grow and the squirrel 's heart beat , and we should die of that roar which lie on the other side of silence . as it be , the quickest of we walk about well wad with stupidity . however , be cry , and if she have be require to state the cause , she could only have do so in some such general word as I have already use : to have be drive to be more particular would have be like try to give a history of the light and shadows , for that new real future which be replace the imaginary drew its material from the endless
endless minutia by which she view of and she wifely relation , now that she be marry to he , be gradually change with the secret motion of a watch - hand from what it have be in she maiden dream . it be too early yet for she fully to recognize or at least admit the change , still more for she to have readjust that devotedness which be so necessary a part of she mental life that she be almost sure sooner or later to recover it . permanent rebellion , the disorder of a life without some loving reverent resolve , be not possible to she ; but she be now in a interval when the very force of she nature heighten its confusion . in this way , the early month of marriage often be time of critical tumult -- whether that of a shrimp - pool or of deeper water -- which afterwards subside into cheerful peace . but be not just as learn as before ? have he form of expression change , or he sentiment become less laudable ? oh waywardness of womanhood ! do he chronology fail he , or he ability to state not only a theory but the name of those who hold it ; or he provision for give the head of any subject on demand ? and be not Rome the place in all the world to give free play to such accomplishment ? besides , have not 's enthusiasm especially dwelt on the prospect of relieive the weight and perhaps the sadness with which great task lie on he who have to achieve they ?-- and that such weight press on be only plainer than before . all these be crush question ; but whatever else remain the same , the light have change , and you can not find the pearly dawn at noonday . the fact be unalterable , that a fellow - mortal with whose nature you be acquaint solely through the brief entrance and exit of a few imaginative week call courtship , may , when see in the continuity of married companionship , be disclose as something better or worse than what you have preconceive , but will certainly not appear altogether the same . and it would be astonishing to find how soon the change be feel if we have no kindred change to compare with it . to share lodging with a brilliant dinner - companion , or to see you favorite politician in the , may bring about change quite as rapid : in these case too we begin by know little and believe much , and we sometimes end by invert the quantity . still , such comparison might mislead , for no man be more incapable of flashy make - believe than : he be as genuine a character as any ruminant animal , and he have not actively assist in create any illusion about himself . how be it that in the week since she marriage , have not distinctly observ but feel with a stifling depression , that the large vista and wide fresh air which she have dream of finding in she husband 's mind be replace by anteroom and win passage which seem to lead nowhither ? I suppose it be that in courtship everything be regard as provisional and preliminary , and the smallest sample of virtue or accomplishment be take to guarantee delightful store which the broad leisure of marriage will reveal . but the door - sill of marriage once cross , expectation be concentrate on the present . have once embark on you marital voyage , it be impossible not to be aware that you make no way and that the sea be not within sight -- that , in fact , you be explore a enclose basin . in they conversation before marriage , have often dwelt on some explanation or questionable detail of which do not see the bearing ; but such imperfect coherence seem due to the brokenness of they intercourse , and , support by she faith in they future , she have listen with fervid patience to a recitation of possible argument to be bring against 's entirely new view of the and other fish - deity , think that hereafter she should see this subject which touch he so nearly from the same high ground whence doubtless it have become so important to he . again , the matter - of - course statement and tone of dismissal with which he treat what to she be the most stirring thought , be easily account for as belong to the sense of haste and preoccupation in which she herself share during they engagement . but now , since they have be in , with all the depth of she emotion rouse to tumultuous activity , and with life make a new problem by new element , she have be become more and more aware , with a certain terror , that she mind be continually slide into inward fit of anger and repulsion , or else into forlorn weariness . how far the judicious Hooker or any other hero of erudition would have be the same at 's time of life , she have no means of knowing , so that he could not have the advantage of comparison ; but she husband 's way of commenting on the strangely impressive object around they have begin to affect she with a sort of mental shiver : he have perhaps the best intention of acquitting himself worthily , but only of acquitting himself . what be fresh to she mind be wear out to he ; and such capacity of think and feel as have ever be stimulate in he by the general life of mankind have long shrunk to a sort of dried preparation , a lifeless embalmment of knowledge . when he say ,
, " do this interest you , ? shall we stay a little longer ? I be ready to stay if you wish it , " -- it seem to she as if go or stay be alike dreary . or , " should you like to go to the , ? it contain celebrated fresco design or pain by , which most person think it worth while to visit . " " but do you care about they ? " be always 's question . " they be , I believe , highly esteem . some of they represent the fable of and , which be probably the romantic invention of a literary period , and can not , I think , be reckon as a genuine mythical product . but if you like these wall - painting we can easily drive thither ; and you will then , I think , have see the chief work of , any of which it be a pity to omit in a visit to . he be the painter who have be hold to combine the most complete grace of form with sublimity of expression . such at least I have gather to be the opinion of cognoscenti. " this kind of answer give in a measure official tone , as of a clergyman reading accord to the rubric , do not help to justify the glory of the , or to give she the hope that if she know more about they the world would be joyously illuminate for she . there be hardly any contact more depresse to a young ardent creature than that of a mind in which year full of knowledge seem to have issue in a blank absence of interest or sympathy . on other subjects indeed show a tenacity of occupation and a eagerness which be usually regard as the effect of enthusiasm , and be anxious to follow this spontaneous direction of he thought , instead of be make to feel that she drag he away from it . but she be gradually cease to expect with she former delightful confidence that she should see any wide opening where she follow he . poor himself be lose among small closet and win stair , and in a agitate dimness about the , or in a exposure of other mythologist ' ill - consider parallel , easily lose sight of any purpose which have prompt he to these labors . with he taper stick before he he forget the absence of window , and in bitter manuscript remark on other man 's notion about the solar deity , he have become indifferent to the sunlight . these characteristic , fix and unchangeable as bone in , might have remain longer unfelt by if she have be encourage to pour forth she girlish and womanly feel -- if he would have hold she hand between he and listen with the delight of tenderness and understand to all the little histories which make up she experience , and would have give she the same sort of intimacy in return , so that the past life of each could be include in they mutual knowledge and affection -- or if she could have feed she affection with those childlike caress which be the bent of every sweet woman , who have begin by shower kiss on the hard pate of she bald doll , create a happy soul within that woodenness from the wealth of she own love . that be 's bent . with all she year to know what be afar from she and to be widly benignant , she have ardor enough for what be near , to have kiss 's coat - sleeve , or to have caress he shoe - latchet , if he would have make any other sign of acceptance than pronounce she , with he unfailing propriety , to be of a most affectionate and truly feminine nature , indicate at the same time by politely reach a chair for she that he regard these manifestation as rather crude and startling . have make he clerical toilet with due care in the morning , he be prepare only for those amenity of life which be sui to the well - adjust stiff cravat of the period , and to a mind weighte with unpublished matter . and by a sad contradiction Dorothea 's idea and resolve seem like melte ice float and lose in the warm flood of which they have be but another form . she be humiliated to find herself a mere victim of feeling , as if she could know nothing except through that medium : all she strength be scatter in fit of agitation , of struggle , of despondency , and then again in vision of more complete renunciation , transform all hard condition into duty . poor Dorothea ! she be certainly troublesome -- to herself chiefly ; but this morning for the first time she have be troublesome to . she have begin , while they be take coffee , with a determination to shake off what she inwardly call she selfishness , and turn a face all cheerful attention to she husband when he say , " my dear Dorothea , we must now think of all that be yet left undone , as a preliminary to we departure . I would afain have return home earlier that we might have be at for the ; but my inquirie here have be protract beyond they anticipat period . I trust , however , that the time here have not be pass unpleasantly to you . among the sight of , that of have ever be hold one of the most striking and in some respects edifying . I well remember that I consider it a epoch in my life when I visit it for the first time ; after the fall of ,
, a event which open the continent to traveller . indeed I think it be one among several city to which a extreme hyperbole have be apply --' see and die :' but in you case I would propose a emendation and say , see as a bride , and live henceforth as a happy wife . " pronounce this little speech with the most conscientious intention , blink a little and sway he head up and down , and conclude with a smile . he have not find marriage a rapturous state , but he have no idea of be anything else than a irreproachable husband , who would make a charming young woman as happy as she deserv to be . " I hope you be thoroughly satisfied with we stay -- I mean , with the result so far as you study be concerned , " say , try to keep she mind fix on what must affect she husband . " yes , " say , with that peculiar pitch of voice which make the word half a negative . " I have be lead farther than I have foreseen , and various subject for annotation have present themselves which , though I have no direct need of they , I could not pretermit . the task , notwithstand the assistance of my amanuensis , have be a somewhat laborious one , but you society have happily prevent I from that too continuous prosecution of think beyond the hour of study which have be the snare of my solitary life . " " I be very glad that my presence have make any difference to you , " say , who have a vivid memory of evening in which she have suppose that 's mind have go too deep during the day to be able to get to the surface again . I fear there be a little temper in she reply . " I hope when we get to , I shall be more useful to you , and be able to enter a little more into what interest you . " " doubtless , my dear , " say , with a slight bow . " the note I have here make will want sifting , and you can , if you please , extract they under my direction . " " and all you note , " say , whose heart have already burn within she on this subject , so that now she could not help speak with she tongue . " all those row of volume -- will you not now do what you use to speak of ?-- will you not make up you mind what part of they you will use , and begin to write the book which will make you vast knowledge useful to the world ? I will write to you dictation , or I will copy and extract what you tell I : I can be of no other use . " Dorothea , in a most unaccountable , darkly feminine manner , end with a slight sob and eye full of tear . the excessive feeling manifest would alone have be highly disturb to , but there be other reason why 's word be among the most cutting and irritat to he that she could have be impell to use . she be as blind to he inward trouble as he to her : she have not yet learn those hidden conflict in she husband which claim we pity . she have not yet listen patiently to he heartbeat , but only feel that she own be beat violently . in 's ear , 's voice give loud emphatic iteration to those muff suggestion of consciousness which it be possible to explain as mere fancy , the illusion of exaggerated sensitiveness : always when such suggestion be unmistakably repeat from without , they be resist as cruel and unjust . we be angere even by the full acceptance of we humiliating confessions -- how much more by hearing in hard distinct syllable from the lip of a near observer , those confused murmur which we try to call morbid , and strive against as if they be the oncoming of numbness ! and this cruel outward accuser be there in the shape of a wife -- nay , of a young bride , who , instead of observe he abundant pen-scratch and amplitude of paper with the uncritical awe of a elegant - minded canary - bird , seem to present herself as a spy watch everything with a malign power of inference . here , towards this particular point of the compass , have a sensitiveness to match 's , and a equal quickness to imagine more than the fact . he have formerly observ with approbation she capacity for worship the right object ; he now foresee with sudden terror that this capacity might be replace by presumption , this worship by the most exasperating of all criticism , -- that which see vaguly a great many fine end , and have not the least notion what it cost to reach they . for the first time since have know he , 's face have a quick angry flush upon it . " my love , " he say , with irritation reine in by propriety , " you may rely upon I for know the time and the season , adapt to the different stage of a work which be not to be measure by the facile conjecture of ignorant onlooker . it have be easy for I to gain a temporary effect by a mirage of baseless opinion ; but it be ever the trial of the scrupulous explorer to be salute with the impatient scorn of chatterer who attempt only the smallest achievement , be indeed equip for no other . and it be well if all such could be
be admonish to discriminate judgment of which the true subject - matter lie entirely beyond they reach , from those of which the element may be compass by a narrow and superficial survey . " this speech be deliver with a energy and readiness quite unusual with . it be not indeed entirely a improvisation , but have take shape in inward colloquy , and rush out like the round grains from a fruit when sudden heat crack it . be not only he wife : she be a personification of that shallow world which surround the appreciate or despond author . be indignant in she turn . have she not be repress everything in herself except the desire to enter into some fellowship with she husband 's chief interest ? " my judgament _be a very superficial one -- such as I be capable of form , " she answer , with a prompt resentment , that need no rehearsal . " you show I the row of notebooks -- you have often speak of they -- you have often say that they want digesting . but I never hear you speak of the writing that be to be publish . those be very simple fact , and my judgament go no farther . I only beg you to let I be of some good to you . " rise to leave the table and make no reply , take up a letter which lay beside he as if to reperuse it . both be shocked at they mutual situation -- that each should have betrayed anger towards the other . if they have be at home , settle at in ordinary life among they neighbor , the clash would have be less embarrassing : but on a wedding journey , the express object of which be to isolate two people on the ground that they be all the world to each other , the sense of disagreement be , to say the least , confound and stultify . to have change you longitude extensively and place yourselves in a moral solitude in order to have small explosion , to find conversation difficult and to hand a glass of water without look , can hardly be regard as satisfactory fulfilment even to the toughest mind . to 's inexperienced sensitiveness , it seem like a catastrophe , change all prospect ; and to it be a new pain , he never have be on a wedding journey before , or find himself in that close union which be more of a subjection than he have be able to imagine , since this charme young bride not only oblige he to much consideration on she behalf ( which he have sedulously give ) , but turn out to be capable of agitat he cruelly just where he must need soothing . instead of get a soft fence against the cold , shadowy , unapplausive audience of he life , have he only give it a more substantial presence ? neither of they feel it possible to speak again at present . to have reverse a previous arrangement and decline to go out would have be a show of persistent anger which 's conscience shrank from , see that she already begin to feel herself guilty . however just she indignation might be , she ideal be not to claim justice , but to give tenderness . so when the carriage come to the door , she drive with to the , walk with he through the stony avenue of inscription , and when she part with he at the entrance to the , go on through the out of mere listlessness as to what be around she . she have not spirit to turn round and say that she would drive anywhere . it be when be quit she that have first see she , and he have enter the long gallery of sculpture at the same time with she ; but here have to await Ladislaw with whom he be to settle a bet of champagne about a enigmatical mediaeval - look figure there . after they have examine the figure , and have walk on finish they dispute , they have part , linger behind while have go into the of where he again see , and see she in that brooding abstraction which make she pose remarkable . she do not really see the streak of sunlight on the floor more than she see the statue : she be inwardly see the light of year to come in she own home and over the english field and elm and hedge - border highroad ; and feel that the way in which they might be fill with joyful devotedness be not so clear to she as it have be . but in 's mind there be a current into which all think and feel be apt sooner or later to flow -- the reach forward of the whole consciousness towards the fullest truth , the least partial good . there be clearly something better than anger and despondency . . " hire facounde eke full womanly and plain , no contrefet term have she to semen wise . " -- . it be in that way come to be sobb as soon as she be securely alone . but she be presently rouse by a knock at the door , which make she hastily dry she eye before say , " come in . " have bring a card , and say that there be a gentleman wait in the lobby . the courier have tell he that only be at home , but he say he be a relation of 's : would she see he ? " yes , " say , without pause ; " show he into the salon . " she chief impression about young be that when she have see he at she
she have be make aware of 's generosity towards he , and also that she have be interested in he own hesitation about he career . she be alive to anythe that give she a opportunity for active sympathy , and at this moment it seem as if the visit have come to shake she out of she self - absorb discontent -- to remind she of she husband 's goodness , and make she feel that she have now the right to be he helpmate in all kind deed . she wait a minute or two , but when she pass into the next room there be just sign enough that she have be cry to make she open face look more youthful and appeal than usual . she meet with that exquisite smile of good - will which be unmixed with vanity , and hold out she hand to he . he be the elder by several year , but at that moment he look much the younger , for he transparent complexion flush suddenly , and he speak with a shyness extremely unlike the ready indifference of he manner with he male companion , while become all the calmer with a wonder desire to put he at ease . " I be not aware that you and be in , until this morning , when I see you in the , " he say . " I know you at once -- but -- I mean , that I conclude 's address would be find at the , and I be anxious to pay my respects to he and you as early as possible . " " pray sit down . he be not here now , but he will be glad to hear of you , I be sure , " say , seat herself unthinkingly between the fire and the light of the tall window , and point to a chair opposite , with the quietude of a benignant matron . the sign of girlish sorrow in she face be only the more striking . " be much engage ; but you will leave you address -- will you not ?-- and he will write to you . " " you be very good , " say , begin to lose he diffidence in the interest with which he be observe the sign of weeping which have alte she face . " my address be on my card . but if you will allow I I will call again to - morrow at a hour when be likely to be at home . " " he go to read in the of the Vatican every day , and you can hardly see he except by a appointment . especially now . we be about to leave , and he be very busy . he be usually away almost from breakfast till dinner . but I be sure he will wish you to dine with we . " will be struck mute for a few moment . he have never be fond of , and if it have not be for the sense of obligation , would have laugh at he as a bat of erudition . but the idea of this dry - up pedant , this elaborator of small explanation about as important as the surplus stock of false antiquities keep in a vendor 's back chamber , have first get this adorable young creature to marry he , and then pass he honeymoon away from she , grope after he mouldy futility ( be give to hyperbole ) -- this sudden picture stir he with a sort of comic disgust : he be divide between the impulse to laugh aloud and the equally unseasonable impulse to burst into scornful invective . for a instant he feel that the struggle , be cause a queer contortion of he mobile feature , but with a good effort he resolve it into nothing more offensive than a merry smile . wonder ; but the smile be irresistible , and shone back from she face too . will 's smile be delightful , unless you be angry with he beforehand : it be a gush of inward light illuminat the transparent skin as well as the eyes , and play about every curve and line as if some be touch they with a new charm , and banish forever the trace of moodiness . the reflection of that smile could not but have a little merriment in it too , even under dark eyelash still moist , as say inquiringly , " something amuse you ? " " yes , " say , quick in find resource . " I be think of the sort of figure I cut the first time I see you , when you annihilate my poor sketch with you criticism . " " my criticism ? " say , wonder still more . " surely not . I always feel particularly ignorant about painting . " " I suspect you of know so much , that you know how to say just what be most cutting . you say -- I dare say you do not remember it as I do -- that the relation of my sketch to nature be quite hidden from you . at least , you imply that . " will could laugh now as well as smile . " that be really my ignorance , " say , admir 's good - humor . " I must have say so only because I never could see any beauty in the picture which my uncle tell I all judge think very fine . and I have go about with just the same ignorance in . there be comparatively few painting that I can really enjoy . at first when I enter a room where the wall be cover with fresco , or with rare picture , I feel a
a kind of awe -- like a child present at great ceremony where there be grand rob and procession ; I feel myself in the presence of some higher life than my own . but when I begin to examine the picture one by on the life go out of they , or else be something violent and strange to I . it must be my own dulness . I be see so much all at once , and not understand half of it . that always make one feel stupid . it be painful to be tell that anything be very fine and not be able to feel that it be fine -- something like be blind , while people talk of the sky . " " oh , there be a great deal in the feeling for art which must be acquire , " say . ( it be impossible now to doubt the directness of 's confession . ) " be a old language with a great many artificial affec style , and sometimes the chief pleasure one get out of know they be the mere sense of knowing . I enjoy the art of all sort here immensely ; but I suppose if I could pick my enjoyment to piece I should find it make up of many different thread . there be something in daub a little one 's self , and have a idea of the process . " " you mean perhaps to be a painter ? " say , with a new direction of interest . " you mean to make paint you profession ? will like to hear that you have choose a profession . " " no , oh no , " say , with some coldness . " I have quite make up my mind against it . it be too one - side a life . I have be see a great deal of the german artist here : I travel from with one of they . some be fine , even brilliant fellow -- but I should not like to get into they way of look at the world entirely from the studio point of view . " " that I can understand , " say , cordially . " and in it seem as if there be so many thing which be more want in the world than picture . but if you have a genius for painting , would it not be right to take that as a guide ? perhaps you might do better thing than these -- or different , so that there might not be so many picture almost all alike in the same place . " there be no mistaking this simplicity , and be win by it into frankness . " a man must have a very rare genius to make change of that sort . I be afraid mine would not carry I even to the pitch of do well what have be do already , at least not so well as to make it worth while . and I should never succeed in anything by dint of drudgery . if thing do not come easily to I I never get they . " " I have hear say that he regret you want of patience , " say , gently . she be rather shocked at this mode of take all life as a holiday . " yes , I know 's opinion . he and I differ . " the slight streak of contempt in this hasty reply offend Dorothea . she be all the more susceptible about because of she morning 's trouble . " certainly you differ , " she say , rather proudly . " I do not think of compare you : such power of persevering devote labor as 's be not common . " will see that she be offended , but this only give a additional impulse to the new irritation of he latent dislike towards . it be too intolerable that should be worship this husband : such weakness in a woman be pleasant to no man but the husband in question . Mortal be easily tempt to pinch the life out of they neighbor 's buzzing glory , and think that such killing be no murder . " no , indeed , " he answer , promptly . " and therefore it be a pity that it should be throw away , as so much English scholarship be , for want of know what be be do by the rest of the world . if read german he would save himself a great deal of trouble . " " I do not understand you , " say , start and anxious . " I merely mean , " say , in a offhand way , " that the have take the lead in historical inquiry , and they laugh at result which be get by grope about in wood with a pocket - compass while they have make good road . when I be with I see that he deafen himself in that direction : it be almost against he while that he read a Latin treatise write by a German . I be very sorry . " will only think of give a good pinch that would annihilate that vaunted laboriousness , and be unable to imagine the mode in which would be wounded . yong be not at all deep himself in german writer ; but very little achievement be require in order to pity another man 's shortcoming . poor feel a pang at the thought that the labor of she husband 's life might be void , which leave she no energy to spare for the question whether this young relative who be so much oblige to he ought not to have repress he observation . she do not even speak , but sit look at
at she hand , absorb in the piteousness of that thought . will , however , have give that annihilat pinch , be rather asham , imagine from 's silence that he have offend she still more ; and have also a conscience about pluck the tail - feather from a benefactor . " I regrett it especially , " he resume , take the usual course from detraction to insincere eulogy , " because of my gratitude and respect towards my cousin . it would not signify so much in a man whose talents and character be less distinguished . " raise she eye , brighter than usual with excited feeling , and say in she saddest recitative , " how I wish I have learn german when I be at ! there be plenty of german teacher . but now I can be of no use . " there be a new light , but still a mysterious light , for in 's last word . the question how she have come to accept -- which he have dismiss when he first see she by say that she must be disagreeable in spite of appearance -- be not now to be answer on any such short and easy method . whatever else she might be , she be not disagreeable . she be not coldly clever and indirectly satirical , but adorably simple and full of feeling . she be a angel beguil . it would be a unique delight to wait and watch for the melodious fragment in which she heart and soul come forth so directly and ingenuously . the AEolian harp again come into he mind . she must have make some original romance for herself in this marriage . and if have be a dragon who have carry she off to he lair with he talon simply and without legal form , it would have be a unavoidable feat of heroism to release she and fall at she foot . but he be something more unmanageable than a dragon : he be a benefactor with collective society at he back , and he be at that moment enter the room in all the unimpeachable correctness of he demeanor , while be look animated with a newly roused alarm and regret , and be look animated with he admiring speculation about she feeling . feel a surprise which be quite unmixed with pleasure , but he do not swerve from he usual politeness of greeting , when will rise and explain he presence . be less happy than usual , and this perhaps make he look all the dimmer and more faded ; else , the effect might easily have be produce by the contrast of he young cousin 's appearance . the first impression on see be one of sunny brightness , which add to the uncertainty of he change expression . surely , he very feature change they form , he jaw look sometimes large and sometimes small ; and the little ripple in he nose be a preparation for metamorphosis . when he turn he head quickly he hair seem to shake out light , and some person think they see decide genius in this coruscation . , on the contrary , stand rayless . as 's eye be turn anxiously on she husband she be perhaps not insensible to the contrast , but it be only mingled with other cause in make she more conscious of that new alarm on he behalf which be the first stirring of a pitying tenderness feed by the reality of he lot and not by she own dream . yet it be a source of greater freedom to she that be there ; he young equality be agreeable , and also perhaps he openness to conviction . she feel a immense need of some one to speak to , and she have never before see any one who see so quick and pliable , so likely to understand everything . gravely hope that be pass he time profitably as well as pleasantly in -- have think he intention be to remain in -- but beg he to come and dine to - morrow , when he could converse more at large : at present he be somewhat weary . Ladislaw understood , and accept the invitation immediately take he leave . 's eye follow she husband anxiously , while he sank down wearily at the end of a sofa , and rest he elbow support he head and look on the floor . a little flush , and with bright eye , she seat herself beside he , and say -- " forgive I for speak so hastily to you this morning . I be wrong . I fear I hurt you and make the day more burdensome . " " I be glad that you feel that , my dear , " say . he speak quietly and bow he head a little , but there be still a uneasy feeling in he eye as he look at she . " but you do forgive I ? " say , with a quick sob . in she need for some manifestation of feeling she be ready to exaggerate she own fault . would not love see return penitence afar off , and fall on its neck and kiss it ? " my dear Dorothea --' who with repentance be not satisfied , be not of heaven nor earth :' -- you do not think I worthy to be banish by that severe sentence , " say , exert himself to make a strong statement , and also to smile faintly . be silent , but a tear which have come up with the sob would insist on falling . " you be excite , my dear .. and I also be feel some unpleasant consequence of too much mental disturbance , " say . in
in fact , he have it in he thought to tell she that she ought not to have receive young in he absence : but he abstain , partly from the sense that it would be ungracious to bring a new complaint in the moment of she penitent acknowledgment , partly because he want to avoy further agitation of himself by speech , and partly because he be too proud to betray that jealousy of disposition which be not so exhaust on he scholarly compeer that there be none to spare in other direction . there be a sort of jealousy which need very little fire : it be hardly a passion , but a blight breed in the cloudy , damp despondency of uneasy egoism . " I think it be time for we to dress , " he add , look at he watch . they both rose , and there be never any further allusion between they to what have pass on this day . but remembe it to the last with the vividness with which we all remember epoch in we experience when some dear expectation die , or some new motive be bear . today she have begin to see that she have be under a wild illusion in expect a response to she feel from , and she have feel the waking of a presentiment that there might be a sad consciousness in he life which make as great a need on he side as on she own . we be all of we bear in moral stupidity , take the world as a udder to feed we supreme selve : have early begin to emerge from that stupidity , but yet it have be easier to she to imagine how she would devote herself to , and become wise and strong in he strength and wisdom , than to conceive with that distinctness which be no longer reflection but feel -- a idea wrotch back to the directness of sense , like the solidity of object -- that he have a equivalent centre of self , whence the light and shadows must always fall with a certain difference . . " Nous causame longtemps ; elle etait simple et bonne . Ne sachant pa le mal , elle faisait le bien ; Des richess do coeur elle I fit l'aumone , tout en ecoutant comme le coeur se donne , Sans oser y penser je lui donnai le mien ; emporta ma vie , et and 'en sut jamais rien . " -- . will be delightfully agreeable at dinner the next day , and give no opportunity for to show disapprobation . on the contrary it seem to that will have a happier way of draw she husband into conversation and of deferentially listen to he than she have ever observe in any one before . to be sure , the listener about be not highly gift ! will talk a good deal himself , but what he say be throw in with such rapidity , and with such a unimportant air of say something by the way , that it see a gay little chime after the great bell . if be not always perfect , this be certainly one of he good day . he describe touch of incident among the poor people in , only to be see by one who could move about freely ; he find himself in agreement with as to the unsound opinion of concern the relation of and ; and pass easily to a half - enthusiastic half - playful picture of the enjoyment he get out of the very miscellaneousness of , which make the mind flexible with constant comparison , and save you from see the world 's age as a set of box - like partition without vital connection . 's study , will observ , have always be of too broad a kind for that , and he have perhaps never feel any such sudden effect , but for himself he confess that have give he quite a new sense of history as a whole : the fragment stimulate he imagination and make he constructive . then occasionally , but not too often , he appeal to , and discuss what she say , as if she sentiment be a item to be consider in the final judgment even of the or the Laocoon . a sense of contribute to form the world 's opinion make conversation particularly cheerful ; and too be not without he pride in he young wife , who speak better than most woman , as indeed he have perceive in choose she . since thing be go on so pleasantly , 's statement that he labors in the would be suspend for a couple of day , and that after a brief renewal he should have no further reason for stay in , encourage to urge that should not go away without see a studio or two . would not take she ? that sort of thing ought not to be miss : it be quite special : it be a form of life that grow like a small fresh vegetation with its population of insect on huge fossil . will would be happy to conduct they -- not to anything wearisome , only to a few example . , see look earnestly towards he , could not but ask she if she would be interested in such visit : he be now at she service during the whole day ; and it be agree that will should come on the morrow and drive with they . will could not omit , a liive celebrity about whom even inquire , but before the day be far advanced he lead the way to the studio of he friend , whom he mention as one of the chief renovator of art , one of those who have not
not only revive but expand that grand conception of supreme event as mystery at which the successive ag be spectator , and in relation to which the great soul of all period become as it be contemporary . will add that he have make himself 's pupil for the nonce . " I have be make some oil - sketch under he , " say . " I hate copy . I must put something of my own in . have be paint the Saints draw the car of the , and I have be make a sketch of 's the conquer kings in he . I be not so ecclesiastical as , and I sometimes twit he with he excess of meaning . but this time I mean to outdo he in breadth of intention . I take in he chariot for the tremendous course of the world 's physical history lash on the harnessed dynasty . in my opinion , that be a good mythical interpretation . " will here look at , who receive this offhand treatment of symbolism very uneasily , and bow with a neutral air . " the sketch must be very grand , if it convey so much , " say . " I should need some explanation even of the meaning you give . do you intend to represent earthquake and volcanoe ? " " oh yes , " say , laugh , " and migration of races and clearing of forests -- and and the steam - engine . everything you can imagine ! " " what a difficult kind of shorthand ! " say , smile towards she husband . " it would require all you knowledge to be able to read it . " blink furtively at . he have a suspicion that he be be laugh at . but it be not possible to include in the suspicion . they find paint industriously , but no model be present ; he picture be advantageously arrange , and he own plain vivacious person set off by a dove - color blouse and a maroon velvet cap , so that everything be as fortunate as if he have expect the beautiful young lady exactly at that time . the painter in he confident give little dissertation on he finished and unfinished subject , seem to observe as much as he do . will burst in here and there with ardent word of praise , mark out particular merit in he friend 's work ; and feel that she be get quite new notion as to the significance of seate under inexplicable canopy throne with the simple country as a background , and of saint with architectural model in they hand , or knife accidentally wedge in they skull . some thing which have seem monstrous to she be gather intelligibility and even a natural meaning : but all this be apparently a branch of knowledge in which have not interest himself . " I think I would rather feel that painting be beautiful than have to read it as a enigma ; but I should learn to understand these picture sooner than yours with the very wide meaning , " say , speak to . " do not speak of my painting before , " say . " he will tell you , it be all pfuscherei , which be he most opprobrious word ! " " be that true ? " say , turn she sincere eye on , who make a slight grimace and say -- " oh , he do not mean it seriously with painting . he walk must be belle - lettre . that be wi- ide . " 's pronunciation of the vowel seem to stretch the word satirically . will do not half like it , but manage to laugh : and , while he feel some disgust at the artist 's german accent , begin to entertain a little respect for he judicious severity . the respect be not diminish when , after draw aside for a moment and look , first at a large canva , then at , come forward again and say -- " my friend think you will pardon I , sir , if I say that a sketch of you head would be invaluable to I for the in my picture there . it be too much to ask ; but I so seldom see just what I want -- the idealistic in the real . " " you astonish I greatly , sir , " say , he look improve with a glow of delight ; " but if my poor physiognomy , which I have be accustom to regard as of the commonest order , can be of any use to you in furnish some trait for the angelical doctor , I shall feel honored . that be to say , if the operation will not be a lengthy one ; and if Casaubon will not object to the delay . " as for , nothing could have please she more , unless it have be a miraculous voice pronounce the wisest and worthiest among the son of man . in that case she totter faith would have become firm again . 's apparatus be at hand in wonderful completeness , and the sketch go on at once as well as the conversation . sit down and subsid into calm silence , feel happier than she have do for a long while before . every one about she seem good , and she say to herself that , if she have only be less ignorant , would have be full of beauty its sadness would have be win with hope . no nature could be less suspicious than hers : when she be a child she believe in the gratitude of wasp and the honorable susceptibility of sparrow , and be proportionately indignant when they baseness
baseness be make manifest . the adroit artist be ask question about English polity , which bring long answer , and , will meanwhile have perch himself on some step in the background overlook all . presently say -- " now if I could lay this by for half a hour and take it up again -- come and look , Ladislaw -- I think it be perfect so far . " will vent those adjur interjection which imply that admiration be too strong for syntax ; and say in a tone of piteous regret -- " ah -- now -- if I could but have have more -- but you have other engagement -- I could not ask it -- or even to come again to - morrow . " " oh , let we stay ! " say . " we have nothing to do to - day except go about , have we ? " she add , look entreatingly at . " it would be a pity not to make the head as good as possible . " " I be at you service , sir , in the matter , " say , with polite condescension . " have give up the interior of my head to idleness , it be as well that the exterior should work in this way . " " you be unspeakably good -- now I be happy ! " say , and then go on in to , point here and there to the sketch as if he be consider that . put it aside for a moment , he look round vaguly , as if seek some occupation for he visitor , and afterwards turn to , say -- " perhaps the beautiful bride , the gracious lady , would not be unwilling to let I fill up the time by try to make a slight sketch of she -- not , of course , as you see , for that picture -- only as a single study . " , bow , doubt not that would oblige he , and say , at once , " where shall I put myself ? " be all apology in ask she to stand , and allow he to adjust she attitude , to which she submit without any of the affect air and laugh frequently think necessary on such occasion , when the painter say , " it be as that I want you to stand -- lean so , with you cheek against you hand -- so -- look at that stool , please , so ! " will be divide between the inclination to fall at the 's foot and kiss she robe , and the temptation to knock down while he be adjust she arm . all this be impudence and desecration , and he repent that he have bring she . the artist be diligent , and will recovere himself move about and occupy as ingeniously as he could ; but he do not in the end prevent the time from see long to that gentleman , as be clear from he express a fear that would be tired . take the hint and say -- " now , sir , if you can oblige I again ; I will release the lady - wife . " so 's patience hold out further , and when after all it turn out that the head of would be more perfect if another sitting could be have , it be grant for the morrow . on the morrow too be retouch more than once . the result of all be so far from displease to , that he arrange for the purchase of the picture in which sit among the doctor of the in a disputation too abstract to be represent , but listen to with more or less attention by a audience above . the , which be speak of in the second place , declare himself to be dissatisfie with -- he could not , in conscience , engage to make a worthy picture of it ; so about the the arrangement be conditional . I will not dwell on 's joke at the expense of Casaubon that even , or on he dithyramb about 's charm , in all which will join , but with a difference . no sooner do mention any detail of 's beauty , than will get exasperated at he presumption : there be grossness in he choice of the most ordinary word , and what business have he to talk of she lip ? she be not a woman to be speak of as other woman were . will could not say just what he think , but he become irritable . and yet , when after some resistance he have consent to take the Casaubon to he friend 's studio , he have be allure by the gratification of he pride in be the person who could grant such a opportunity of study she loveliness -- or rather she divineness , for the ordinary phrasis which might apply to mere bodily prettiness be not applicable to she . ( certainly all and its neighborhood , as well as herself , would have be surprise at she beauty be make so much of . in that part of the world have be only a " fine young woman . " ) " Oblige I by let the subject drop , . be not to be talk of as if she be a model , " say . star at he . " ! I will talk of my Aquinas . the head be not a bad type , after all . I dare say the great scholastic himself would have be flatter to have he portrait ask for . nothing like these starchy doctor for vanity ! it be as I think : he car much less for she portrait
portrait than he own . " " he be a curse white - blooded pedantic coxcomb , " say , with gnash impetuosity . he obligation to be not know to he hearer , but will himself be think of they , and wish that he could discharge they all by a check . give a shrug and say , " it be good they go away soon , my dear . they be spoile you fine temper . " all 's hope and contrivance be now concentrate on see when she be alone . he only want she to take more emphatic notice of he ; he only want to be something more special in she remembrance than he could yet believe himself likely to be . he be rather impatient under that open ardent good - will , reach he see be she usual state of feeling . the remote worship of a woman thron out of they reach play a great part in man 's life , but in most case the worshipper long for some queenly recognition , some approve sign by which he soul 's sovereign may cheer he without descende from she high place . that be precisely what will want . but there be plenty of contradiction in he imaginative demand . it be beautiful to see how 's eye turn with wifely anxiety and beseech to : she would have lose some of she halo if she have be without that duteous preoccupation ; and yet at the next moment the husband 's sandy absorption of such nectar be too intolerable ; and 's long to say damage thing about he be perhaps not the less tormenting because he feel the strongest reason for restrain it . will have not be invite to dine the next day . hence he persuade himself that he be bound to call , and that the only eligible time be the middle of the day , when would not be at home . , who have not be make aware that she former reception of have displease she husband , have no hesitation about see he , especially as he might be come to pay a farewell visit . when he enter she be look at some cameo which she have be buy for . she greet as if he visit be quite a matter of course , and say at once , have a cameo bracelet in she hand -- " I be so glad you be come . perhaps you understand all about cameo , and can tell I if these be really good . I wish to have you with we in choose they , but object : he think there be not time . he will finish he work to - morrow , and we shall go away in three day . I have be uneasy about these cameo . pray sit down and look at they . " " I be not particularly know , but there can be no great mistake about these little Homeric bits : they be exquisitely neat . and the color be fine : it will just suit you . " " oh , they be for my sister , who have quite a different complexion . you see she with I at : she be light - haired and very pretty -- at least I think so . we be never so long away from each other in we life before . she be a great pet and never be naughty in she life . I find out before I come away that she want I to buy she some cameo , and I should be sorry for they not to be good -- after they kind . " add the last word with a smile . " you seem not to care about cameo , " say , seat himself at some distance from she , and observe she while she close the case . " no , frankly , I do not think they a great object in life , " say " I fear you be a heretic about art generally . how be that ? I should have expect you to be very sensitive to the beautiful everywhere . " " I suppose I be dull about many thing , " say , simply . " I should like to make life beautiful -- I mean everybody 's life . and then all this immense expense of art , that seem somehow to lie outside life and make it no better for the world , pain one . it spoil my enjoyment of anything when I be make to think that most people be shut out from it . " " I call that the fanaticism of sympathy , " say , impetuously . " you might say the same of landscape , of poetry , of all refinement . if you carry it out you ought to be miserable in you own goodness , and turn evil that you might have no advantage over other . the best piety be to enjoy -- when you can . you be do the most then to save the earth 's character as a agreeable planet . and enjoyment radiate . it be of no use to try and take care of all the world ; that be be take care of when you feel delight -- in art or in anything else . would you turn all the youth of the world into a tragic chorus , wail and moralize over misery ? I suspect that you have some false belief in the virtue of misery , and want to make you life a martyrdom . " will have go further than he intend , and check himself . but 's thought be not take just the same direction as he own , and she answer without any special emotion -- " indeed
indeed you mistake I . I be not a sad , melancholy creature . I be never unhappy long together . I be angry and naughty -- not like : I have a great outburst , and then all seem glorious again . I can not help believe in glorious thing in a blind sort of way . I should be quite willing to enjoy the art here , but there be so much that I do not know the reason of -- so much that seem to I a consecration of ugliness rather than beauty . the painting and sculpture may be wonderful , but the feeling be often low and brutal , and sometimes even ridiculous . here and there I see what take I at once as noble -- something that I might compare with the or the sunset from the ; but that make it the greater pity that there be so little of the best kind among all that mass of thing over which man have toil so . " " of course there be always a great deal of poor work : the rarer thing want that soil to grow in . " " oh dear , " say , take up that think into the chief current of she anxiety ; " I see it must be very difficult to do anything good . I have often feel since I have be in that most of we life would look much uglier and more bungling than the picture , if they could be put on the wall . " parte she lips again as if she be go to say more , but change she mind and pause . " you be too young -- it be a anachronism for you to have such thought , " say , energetically , with a quick shake of the head habitual to he . " you talk as if you have never know any youth . it be monstrous -- as if you have have a vision of Hades in you childhood , like the boy in the legend . you have be bring up in some of those horrible notion that choose the sweetest woman to deavor -- like and now you will go and be shut up in that stone prison at : you will be bury alive . it make I savage to think of it ! I would rather never have see you than think of you with such a prospect . " will again fear that he have go too far ; but the meaning we attach to word depend on we feeling , and he tone of angry regret have so much kindness in it for 's heart , which have always be give out ardor and have never be feed with much from the living being around she , that she feel a new sense of gratitude and answer with a gentle smile -- " it be very good of you to be anxious about I . it be because you do not like yourself : you have set you heart on another kind of life . but be my chosen home . " the last sentence be speak with a almost solemn cadence , and will do not know what to say , since it would not be useful for he to embrace she slipper , and tell she that he would die for she : it be clear that she require nothing of the sort ; and they be both silent for a moment or two , when begin again with a air of say at last what have be in she mind beforehand . " I want to ask you again about something you say the other day . perhaps it be half of it you lively way of speak : I notice that you like to put thing strongly ; I myself often exaggerate when I speak hastily . " " what be it ? " say , observe that she speak with a timidity quite new in she . " I have a hyperbolical tongue : it catch fire as it go . I dare say I shall have to retract . " " I mean what you say about the necessity of know german -- I mean , for the subject that be engage in . I have be think about it ; and it seem to I that with 's learn he must have before he the same material as german scholar -- have he not ? " 's timidity be due to a indistinct consciousness that she be in the strange situation of consult a third person about the adequacy of 's learn . " not exactly the same materials , " say , think that he would be duly reserve . " he be not a Orientalist , you know . he do not profess to have more than second - hand knowledge there . " " but there be very valuable book about antiquity which be write a long while ago by scholar who know nothing about these modern thing ; and they be still use . why should be not be valuable , like theirs ? " say , with more remonstrant energy . she be impell to have the argument aloud , which she have be have in she own mind . " that depend on the line of study take , " say , also get a tone of rejoinder . " the subject have choose be as change as chemistry : new discoveries be constantly make new point of view . who want a system on the basis of the four element , or a book to refute ? do you not see that it be no use now to be crawl a little way after man of the last century -- man like -- and correcte they mistake ?--live in a lumber - room
room and furbish up break - leg theories about and ? " " how can you bear to speak so lightly ? " say , with a look between sorrow and anger . " if it be as you say , what could be sadder than so much ardent labor all in vain ? I wonder it do not affect you more painfully , if you really think that a man like , of so much goodness , power , and learn , should in any way fail in what have be the labor of he best year . " she be begin to be shocked that she have get to such a point of supposition , and indignant with for have lead she to it . " you question I about the matter of fact , not of feeling , " say . " but if you wish to punish I for the fact , I submit . I be not in a position to express my feeling toward : it would be at best a pensioner 's eulogy . " " pray excuse I , " say , color deeply . " I be aware , as you say , that I be in fault in have introduce the subject . indeed , I be wrong altogether . failure after long perseverance be much grander than never to have a striving good enough to be call a failure . " " I quite agree with you , " say , determine to change the situation --" so much so that I have make up my mind not to run that risk of never attaine a failure . 's generosity have perhaps be dangerous to I , and I mean to renounce the liberty it have give I . I mean to go back to shortly and work my own way -- depend on nobody else than myself . " " that be fine -- I respect that feel , " say , with return kindness . " but , I be sure , have never think of anything in the matter except what be most for you welfare . " " she have obstinacy and pride enough to serve instead of love , now she have marry he , " say to himself . Alould he say , rise -- " I shall not see you again . " " oh , stay till come , " say , earnestly . " I be so glad we meet in . I want to know you . " ? " and I have make you angry , " say . " I have make you think ill of I . " " oh no . my sister tell I I be always angry with people who do not say just what I like . but I hope I be not give to think ill of they . in the end I be usually oblige to think ill of myself for be so impatient . " " still , you do not like I ; I have make myself a unpleasant thought to you . " " not at all , " say , with the most open kindness . " I like you very much . " will be not quite contente , think that he would apparently have be of more importance if he have be dislike . he say nothing , but look dull , not to say sulky . " and I be quite interested to see what you will do , " go on cheerfully . " I believe devoutly in a natural difference of vocation . if it be not for that belief , I suppose I should be very narrow -- there be so many thing , besides painting , that I be quite ignorant of . you would hardly believe how little I have take in of music and literature , which you know so much of . I wonder what you vocation will turn out to be : perhaps you will be a poet ? " " that depend . to be a poet be to have a soul so quick to discern that no shade of quality escape it , and so quick to feel , that discernment be but a hand play with finely order variety on the chord of emotion -- a soul in which knowledge pass instantaneously into feeling , and feel flash back as a new organ of knowledge . one may have that condition by fit only . " " but you leave out the poem , " say . " I think they be want to complete the poet . I understand what you mean about pass into feeling , for that seem to be just what I experience . but I be sure I could never produce a poem . " " you _are a poem -- and that be to be the best part of a poet -- what make up the poet 's consciousness in he best mood , " say , show such originality as we all share with the morning and the spring - time and other endless renewal . " I be very glad to hear it , " say , laugh out she word in a bird - like modulation , and look at with playful gratitude in she eye . " what very kind thing you say to I ! " " I wish I could ever do anything that would be what you call kind -- that I could ever be of the slightest service to you I fear I shall never have the opportunity . " will speak with fervor . " oh yes , " say , cordially . " it will come ; and I shall remember how well you wish I . I quite hope that we should be friend when I first see you -- because of you relationship to .
. " there be a certain liquid brightness in she eye , and will be conscious that he own be obey a law of nature and fill too . the allusion to would have spoil all if anything at that moment could have spoil the subduing power , the sweet dignity , of she noble unsuspicious inexperience . " and there be one thing even now that you can do , " say , rise and walk a little way under the strength of a recurr impulse . " promise I that you will not again , to any one , speak of that subject -- I mean about 's writing -- I mean in that kind of way . it be I who lead to it . it be my fault . but promise I . " she have return from she brief pacing and stand opposite Will , look gravely at he . " certainly , I will promise you , " say , redden however . if he never say a cut word about again and leave off receive favor from he , it would clearly be permissible to hate he the more . the poet must know how to hate , say ; and will be at least ready with that accomplishment . he say that he must go now without wait for , whom he would come to take leave of at the last moment . give he she hand , and they exchange a simple " good - by . " but go out of the porte cochere he meet , and that gentleman , express the best wish for he cousin , politely waive the pleasure of any further leave - take on the morrow , which would be sufficiently crowded with the preparation for departure . " I have something to tell you about we cousin , which I think will heighten you opinion of he , " say to she husband in the coarse of the evening . she have mention immediately on he entering that will have just go away , and would come again , but have say , " I meet he outside , and we make we final adieux , I believe , " say this with the air and tone by which we imply that any subject , whether private or public , do not interest we enough to wish for a further remark upon it . so have wait . " what be that , my love ? " say ( he always say " my love " when he manner be the coldest ) . " he have make up he mind to leave off wander at once , and to give up he dependence on you generosity . he mean soon to go back to , and work he own way . I think you would consider that a good sign , " say , with a appeal look into she husband 's neutral face . " do he mention the precise order of occupation to which he would addict himself ? " " no . but he say that he feel the danger which lay for he in you generosity . of course he will write to you about it . do you not think better of he for he resolve ? " " I shall await he communication on the subject , " say . " I tell he I be sure that the thing you consider in all you do for he be he own welfare . I remembe you goodness in what you say about he when I first see he at , " say , put she hand on she husband 's . " I have a duty towards he , " say , lay he other hand on 's in conscientious acceptance of she caress , but with a glance which he could not hinder from be uneasy . " the young man , I confess , be not otherwise a object of interest to I , nor need we , I think , discuss he future course , which it be not ours to determine beyond the limit which I have sufficiently indicate . " do not mention will again . . waiting for . . " you horse of the , " he say , " and first - rate whip ! Whate 'er they be , I will eat my head , but I will beat they hollow . " , we have see , have a debt on he mind , and though no such immaterial burthen could depress that buoyant - hear young gentleman for many hour together , there be circumstance connect with this debt which make the thought of it unusually importunate . the creditor be a horse - dealer of the neighborhood , whose company be much seek in by young man understand to be " addict to pleasure . " during the vacations have naturally require more amusement than he have ready money for , and have be accommodating enough not only to trust he for the hire of horse and the accidental expense of ruin a fine hunter , but also to make a small advance by which he might be able to meet some loss at billiards . the total debt be a hundred and sixty pound . be in no alarm about he money , be sure that young Vincy have backer ; but he have require something to show for it , and have at first give a bill with he own signature . three month later he have renew this bill with the signature of . on both occasion have feel confident that he should meet the bill himself , have ample fund at disposal in he own hopefulness . you will hardly demand that he confidence should have a basis in external fact ; such confidence , we know , be something less
less coarse and materialistic : it be a comfortable disposition lead we to expect that the wisdom of providence or the folly of we friend , the mystery of luck or the still greater mystery of we high individual value in the universe , will bring about agreeable issue , such as be consistent with we good taste in costume , and we general preference for the best style of thing . feel sure that he should have a present from he uncle , that he should have a run of luck , that by dint of " swapping " he should gradually metamorphose a horse worth forty pound into a horse that would fetch a hundred at any moment -- " judgment " be always equivalent to a unspecified sum in hard cash . and in any case , even suppose negation which only a morbid distrust could imagine , have always ( at that time ) he father 's pocket as a last resource , so that he asset of hopefulness have a sort of gorgeous superfluity about they . of what might be the capacity of he father 's pocket , have only a vague notion : be not trade elastic ? and would not the deficiency of one year be make up for by the surplus of another ? the live in a easy profuse way , not with any new ostentation , but accord to the family habit and tradition , so that the child have no standard of economy , and the elder one retain some of they infantine notion that they father might pay for anything if he would . himself have expensive Middlemarch habit -- spend money on coursing , on he cellar , and on dinner - give , while have those run account with tradespeople , which give a cheerful sense of get everything one want without any question of payment . but it be in the nature of father , know , to bully one about expense : there be always a little storm over he extravagance if he have to disclose a debt , and dislike bad weather within door . he be too filial to be disrespectful to he father , and he bear the thunder with the certainty that it be transient ; but in the mean time it be disagreeable to see he mother cry , and also to be oblige to look sulky instead of have fun ; for be so good - tempere that if he look glum under scolding , it be chiefly for propriety 's sake . the easier course plainly , be to renew the bill with a friend 's signature . why not ? with the superfluous security of hope at he command , there be no reason why he should not have increase other people 's liability to any extent , but for the fact that man whose name be good for anything be usually pessimist , indispose to believe that the universal order of thing would necessarily be agreeable to a agreeable young gentleman . with a favor to ask we review we list of friend , do justice to they more amiable quality , forgive they little offense , and concern each in turn , try to arrive at the conclusion that he will be eager to oblige we , we own eagerness to be oblige be as communicable as other warmth . still there be always a certain number who be dismiss as but moderately eager until the other have refuse ; and it happen that check off all he friend but one , on the ground that apply to they would be disagreeable ; be implicitly convince that he at least ( whatever might be maintain about mankind generally ) have a right to be free from anything disagreeable . that he should ever fall into a thoroughly unpleasant position -- wear trousers shrunk with washing , eat cold mutton , have to walk for want of a horse , or to " duck under " in any sort of way -- be a absurdity irreconcilable with those cheerful intuitions implant in he by nature . and wince under the idea of be look down upon as want fund for small debt . thus it come to pass that the friend whom he choose to apply to be at once the poorest and the kindest -- namely , . the Garth be very fond of , as he be of they ; for when he and be little one , and the Garth be better off , the slight connection between the two family through 's double marriage ( the first to 's sister , and the second to . 's ) have lead to a acquaintance which be carry on between the child rather than the parent : the child drank tea together out of they toy teacup , and spend whole day together in play . be a little hoyden , and Fred at six year old think she the nicest girl in the world make she he wife with a brass ring which he have cut from a umbrella . through all the stage of he education he have keep he affection for the Garths , and he habit of go to they house as a second home , though any intercourse between they and the elder of he family have long cease . even when be prosperous , the be on condescending term with he and he wife , for there be nice distinction of rank in ; and though old manufacturer could not any more than duke be connect with none but equals , they be conscious of a inherent social superiority which be define with great nicety in practice , though hardly expressible theoretically . since then have fail in the building business , which he have unfortunately add to he other avocation of surveyor , valuer , and
and agent , have conduct that business for a time entirely for the benefit of he assignee , and have be live narrowly , exert himself to the utmost that he might after all pay twenty shilling in the pound . he have now achieve this , and from all who do not think it a bad precedent , he honorable exertion have win he due esteem ; but in no part of the world be genteel visit found on esteem , in the absence of suitable furniture and complete dinner - service . have never be at she ease with , and frequently speak of she as a woman who have have to work for she bread -- mean that have be a teacher before she marriage ; in which case a intimacy with and 's question be something like a draper 's discrimination of calico trademarks , or a courier 's acquaintance with foreign country : no woman who be better off need that sort of thing . and since have be keep 's house , . Vincy's want of liking for the Garth have be convert into something more positive , by alarm lest should engage himself to this plain girl , whose parent " live in such a small way . " , be aware of this , never speak at home of he visit to , which have of late become more frequent , the increase ardor of he affection for inclin he the more towards those who belong to she . have a small office in the town , and to this go with he request . he obtain it without much difficulty , for a large amount of painful experience have not suffice to make cautious about he own affair , or distrustful of he fellow - man when they have not prove themselves untrustworthy ; and he have the highest opinion of , be " sure the lad would turn out well -- a open affectionate fellow , with a good bottom to he character -- you might trust he for anything . " be 's psychological argument . he be one of those rare man who be rigid to themselves and indulgent to other . he have a certain shame about he neighbor ' error , and never speak of they willingly ; hence he be not likely to divert he mind from the best mode of hardening timber and other ingenious device in order to preconceive those error . if he have to blame any one , it be necessary for he to move all the papers within he reach , or describe various diagram with he stick , or make calculation with the odd money in he pocket , before he could begin ; and he would rather do other man 's work than find fault with they do . I fear he be a bad disciplinarian . when state the circumstance of he debt , he wish to meet it without trouble he father , and the certainty that the money would be forthcome so as to cause no one any inconvenience , push he spectacle upward , listen , look into he favorite 's clear young eye , and believe he , not distinguishe confidence about the future from veracity about the past ; but he feel that it be a occasion for a friendly hint as to conduct , and that before give he signature he must give a rather strong admonition . accordingly , he take the paper and lower he spectacle , measure the space at he command , reach he pen and examine it , dip it in the ink and examine it again , then push the paper a little way from he , lift up he spectacle again , show a deepen depression in the outer angle of he bushy eyebrow , which give he face a peculiar mildness ( pardon these detail for once -- you would have learn to love they if you have know ) , and say in a comfortable tone -- " it be a misfortune , eh , that break the horse 's knee ? and then , these exchange , they do not answer when you have ' cute jockey to deal with . you will be wiser another time , my boy . " draw down he spectacle , and proceed to write he signature with the care which he always give to that performance ; for whatever he do in the way of business he do well . he contemplate the large well -proportion letter and final flourish , with he head a trifle on one side for a instant , then hand it to , say " good - by , " and return forthwith to he absorption in a plan for 's new farm - building . either because he interest in this work thrust the incident of the signature from he memory , or for some reason of which be more conscious , remain ignorant of the affair . since it occur , a change have come over 's sky , which alte he view of the distance , and be the reason why he uncle 's present of money be of importance enough to make he color come and go , first with a too definite expectation , and afterwards with a proportionate disappointment . he failure in pass he examination , have make he accumulation of college debt the more unpardonable by he father , and there have be a unprecedented storm at home . have swear that if he have anything more of that sort to put up with , should turn out and get he liive how he could ; and he have never yet quite recover he good - humored tone to he son , who have especially enrage he by say at this stage of thing that he do not want to be a
a clergyman , and would rather not " go on with that . " be conscious that he would have be yet more severely deal with if he family as well as himself have not secretly regard he as 's heir ; that old gentleman 's pride in he , and apparent fondness for he , serve in the stead of more exemplary conduct -- just as when a youthful nobleman steal jewellery we call the act kleptomania , speak of it with a philosophical smile , and never think of he be send to the house of correction as if he be a ragged boy who have steal turnip . in fact , tacit expectation of what would be do for he by uncle determine the angle at which most people view in ; and in he own consciousness , what uncle Featherstone would do for he in a emergency , or what he would do simply as a incorporate luck , form always a immeasurable depth of aerial perspective . but that present of bank - note , once make , be measurable , and be apply to the amount of the debt , show a deficit which have still to be fill up either by 's " judgment " or by luck in some other shape . for that little episode of the allege borrowing , in which he have make he father the agent in get the certificate , be a new reason against go to he father for money towards meet he actual debt . be keen enough to foresee that anger would confuse distinction , and that he denial of have borrowed expressly on the strength of he uncle 's will would be take as a falsehood . he have go to he father and tell he one vexatious affair , and he have leave another untold : in such case the complete revelation always produce the impression of a previous duplicity . now pique himself on keep clear of lie , and even fib ; he often shrug he shoulders and make a significant grimace at what he call 's fib ( it be only brothers who can associate such idea with a lovely girl ) ; and rather than yoincu the accusation of falsehood he would even incur some trouble and self - restraint . it be under strong inward pressure of this kind that have take the wise step of deposite the eighty pound with he mother . it be a pity that he have not at once give they to ; but he mean to make the sum complete with another sixty , and with a view to this , he have keep twenty pound in he own pocket as a sort of see - corn , which , plan by judgment , and water by luck , might yield more than threefold - - a very poor rate of multiplication when the field be a young gentleman 's infinite soul , with all the numeral at command . be not a gambler : he have not that specific disease in which the suspension of the whole nervous energy on a chance or risk become as necessary as the dram to the drunkard ; he have only the tendency to that diffusive form of gambling which have no alcoholic intensity , but be carry on with the healthiest chyle - feed blood , keep up a joyous imaginative activity which fashions event accord to desire , and have no fear about its own weather , only see the advantage there must be to other in go aboard with it . Hopefulness have a pleasure in make a throw of any kind , because the prospect of success be certain ; and only a more generous pleasure in offer as many as possible a share in the stake . like play , especially billiards , as he like hunt or ride a steeple - chase ; and he only like it the better because he want money and hope to win . but the twenty pound ' worth of see - corn have be plan in vain in the seductive green plot -- all of it at least which have not be disperse by the roadside -- and find himself close upon the term of payment with no money at command beyond the eighty pound which he have deposit with he mother . the break - win horse which he ride represent a present which have be make to he a long while ago by he uncle Featherstone : he father always allow he to keep a horse , 's own habit make he regard this as a reasonable demand even for a son who be rather exasperat . this horse , then , be 's property , and in he anxiety to meet the imminent bill he determine to sacrifice a possession without which life would certainly be worth little . he make the resolution with a sense of heroism -- heroism force on he by the dread of break he word to , by he love for and awe of she opinion . he would start for horse - fair which be to be hold the next morning , and -- simply sell he horse , bring back the money by coach ?-- well , the horse would hardly fetch more than thirty pound , and there be no know what might happen ; it would be folly to balk himself of luck beforehand . it be a hundred to one that some good chance would fall in he way ; the longer he think of it , the less possible it seem that he should not have a good chance , and the less reasonable that he should not equip himself with the powder and shot for bring it down . he would ride to with and with Horrock " the vet , " and without ask they anything
anything expressly , he should virtually get the benefit of they opinion . before he set out , get the eighty pound from he mother . most of those who see ride out of in company with and , on he way of course to horse - fair , think that young Vincy be pleasure - seek as usual ; and but for a unwonted consciousness of grave matter on hand , he himself would have have a sense of dissipation , and of do what might be expect of a gay young fellow . consider that be not at all coarse , that he rather look down on the manners and speech of young man who have not be to the university , and that he have write stanza as pastoral and unvoluptuous as he flute - play , he attraction towards and be a interesting fact which even the love of horse - flesh would not wholly account for without that mysterious influence of which determinate so much of mortal choice . under any other name than " pleasure " the society of and must certainly have be regard as monotonous ; and to arrive with they at on a drizzling afternoon , to get down at the in a street shade with coal - dust , and dine in a room furnish with a dirt - enamell map of the county , a bad portrait of a anonymous horse in a stable , he the fourth with leg and cravat , and various leaden spittoon , might have see a hard business , but for the sustain power of nomenclature which determine that the pursuit of these thing be " gay . " in there be certainly a apparent unfathomableness which offer play to the imagination . , at a glance , give he a thrilling association with horse ( enough to specify the hat - brim which take the slightest upward angle just to escape the suspicion of bend downward ) , and nature have give he a face which by dint of mongolian eye , and a nose , mouth , and ching seem to follow he hat - brim in a moderate inclination upwards , give the effect of a subdue unchangeable sceptical smile , of all expression the most tyrannous over a susceptible mind , and , when accompany by adequate silence , likely to create the reputation of a invincible understanding , a infinite fund of humor -- too dry to flow , and probably in a state of immovable crust , -- and a critical judgment which , if you could ever be fortunate enough to know it , would be _the_ thing and no other . it be a physiognomy see in all vocation , but perhaps it have never be more powerful over the youth of than in a judge of horse . , at a question from about he horse 's fetlock , turn sideway in he saddle , and watch the horse 's action for the space of three minute , then turn forward , twitch he own bridle , and remain silent with a profile neither more nor less sceptical than it have be . the part thus play in dialogue by be terribly effective . a mixture of passion be excite in -- a mad desire to thrash 's opinion into utterance , restrain by anxiety to retain the advantage of he friendship . there be always the chance that might say something quite invaluable at the right moment . have more open manners , and appear to give forth he idea without economy . he be loud , robust , and be sometimes speak of as be " give to indulgence " -- chiefly in swearing , drink , and beat he wife . some people who have lose by he call he a vicious man ; but he regard horse - deal as the finest of the art , and might have argue plausibly that it have nothing to do with morality . he be undeniably a prosperous man , bear he drinking better than other bear they moderation , and , on the whole , flourish like the green bay - tree . but he range of conversation be limit , and like the fine old tune , " drop of brandy , " give you after a while a sense of return upon itself in a way that might make weak head dizzy . but a slight infusion of be feel to give tone and character to several circle in ; and he be a distinguished figure in the bar and billiard - room at the . he know some anecdote about the heroe of the turf , and various clever trick of Marquess and Viscount which seem to prove that blood assert its pre-eminence even among black - leg ; but the minute retentiveness of he memory be chiefly show about the horse he have himself buy and sell ; the number of mile they would trot you in no time without turn a hair be , after the lapse of year , still a subject of passionate asseveration , in which he would assist the imagination of he hearer by solemnly swear that they never see anything like it . in short , be a man of pleasure and a gay companion . be subtle , and do not tell he friend that he be go to bend on sell he horse : he wish to get indirectly at they genuine opinion of its value , not be aware that a genuine opinion be the last thing likely to be extract from such eminent critic . it be not 's weakness to be a gratuitous flatterer . he have never before be so much struck with the fact that this unfortunate bay be a roarer to a degree which require the roundest word for perdition to give you any idea
idea of it . " you make a bad hand at swapping when you go to anybody but I , ! why , you never throw you leg across a finer horse than that chestnut , and you give he for this brute . if you set he cantering , he go on like twenty sawyer . I never hear but one worse roarer in my life , and that be a roan : it belong to , the corn -factor ; he use to drive he in he gig seven year ago , and he want I to take he , but I say , ' thank you , , I do not deal in wind - instrument . ' that be what I say . it go the round of the country , that joke do . but , what the hell ! the horse be a penny trumpet to that roarer of yours . " " why , you say just now he be worse than mine , " say , more irritable than usual . " I say a lie , then , " say , emphatically . " there be not a penny to choose between th'ey . " spurr he horse , and they trot on a little way . when they slacken again , say -- " not but what the roan be a better trotter than yours . " " I be quite satisfied with he pace , I know , " say , who require all the consciousness of be in gay company to support he ; " I say he trot be a uncommonly clean one , eh , ? " look before he with as complete a neutrality as if he have be a portrait by a great master . give up the fallacious hope of get a genuine opinion ; but on reflection he see that 's depreciation and Horrock 's silence be both virtually encourage , and indicate that they think better of the horse than they choose to say . that very evening , indeed , before the fair have set in , think he see a favorable opening for disposing advantageously of he horse , but a opening which make he congratulate himself on he foresight in bring with he he eighty pound . a young farmer , acquaint with , come into the , and enter into conversation about part with a hunter , which he introduce at once as , imply that it be a public character . for himself he only want a useful hack , which would draw upon occasion ; be about to marry and to give up hunting . the hunter be in a friend 's stable at some little distance ; there be still time for gentleman to see it before dark . the friend 's stable have to be reache through a back street where you might as easily have be poisone without expense of drug as in any grim street of that unsanitary period . be not fortify against disgust by brandy , as he companion be , but the hope of have at last see the horse that would enable he to make money be exhilarat enough to lead he over the same ground again the first thing in the morning . he feel sure that if he do not come to a bargain with the farmer , would ; for the stress of circumstance , felt , be sharpen he acuteness and endow he with all the constructive power of suspicion . have run down in a way that he never would have do ( the horse be a friend 's ) if he have not think of buy it ; every one who look at the animal -- even -- be evidently impressed with its merit . to get all the advantage of be with man of this sort , you must know how to draw you inference , and not be a spoon who take thing literally . the color of the horse be a dappled gray , and happen to know that 's man be on the look - out for just such a horse . after all he run down , let it out in the course of the evening , when the farmer be absent , that he have see worse horse go for eighty pound . of course he contradict himself twenty time over , but when you know what be likely to be true you can test a man 's admission . and could not but reckon he own judgment of a horse as worth something . the farmer have pause over 's respectable though break - win steed long enough to show that he think it worth consideration , and it seem probable that he would take it , with five - and - twenty pound in addition , as the equivalent of . in that case F , when he have part with he new horse for at least eighty pound , would be fifty - five pound in pocket by the transaction , and would have a hundred and thirty - five pound towards meeting the bill ; so that the deficit temporarily throw on would at the utmost be twenty - five pound . by the time he be hurry on he clothes in the morning , he see so clearly the importance of not lose this rare chance , that if and have both dissuad he , he would not have be delude into a direct interpretation of they purpose : he would have be aware that those deep hand hold something else than a young fellow 's interest . with regard to horse , distrust be you only clew . but scepticism , as we know , can never be thoroughly apply , else life would come to a standstill : something we must believe in and do , and whatever that
that something may be call , it be virtually we own judgment , even when it seem like the most slavish reliance on another . believe in the excellence of he bargain , and even before the fair have well set in , have get possession of the dappled gray , at the price of he old horse and thirty pound in addition -- only five pound more than he have expect to give . but he feel a little worried and weary , perhaps with mental debate , and without wait for the further gayety of the horse - fair , he set out alone on he fourteen mile ' journey , mean to take it very quietly and keep he horse fresh . . " the offender 's sorrow bring but small relief to he who wear the strong offence 's cross . " -- : . I be sorry to say that only the third day after the propitious event at have fall into worse spirit than he have know in he life before . not that he have be disappoint as to the possible market for he horse , but that before the bargain could be conclude with 's man , this , in which hope to the amount of eighty pound have be invest , have without the slightest warning exhibit in the stable a most vicious energy in kicking , have just miss kill the groom , and have end in laming himself severely by catche he leg in a rope that overhing the stable - board . there be no more redress for this than for the discovery of bad temper after marriage -- which of course old companion be aware of before the ceremony . for some reason or other , have none of he usual elasticity under this stroke of ill - fortune : he be simply aware that he have only fifty pound , that there be no chance of he get any more at present , and that the bill for a hundred and sixty would be present in five day . even if he have apply to he father on the plea that should be save from loss , feel smartingly that he father would angrily refuse to rescue from the consequence of what he would call encourage extravagance and deceit . he be so utterly downcast that he could frame no other project than to go straight to and tell he the sad truth , carry with he the fifty pound , and get that sum at least safely out of he own hand . he father , be at the warehouse , do not yet know of the accident : when he do , he would storm about the vicious brute be bring into he stable ; and before meet that lesser annoyance want to get away with all he courage to face the greater . he take he father 's nag , for he have make up he mind that when he have tell , he would ride to and confess all to . in fact , it be probable that but for 's existence and 's love for she , he conscience would have be much less active both in previously urge the debt on he thought and impell he not to spare himself after he usual fashion by deferr a unpleasant task , but to act as directly and simply as he could . even much stronger mortal than hold half they rectitude in the mind of the being they love best . " the theatre of all my action be fall , " say a antique personage when he chief friend be dead ; and they be fortunate who get a theatre where the audience demand they best . certainly it would have make a considerable difference to at that time if have have no decided notion as to what be admirable in character . be not at the office , and ride on to he house , which be a little way outside the town -- a homely place with a orchard in front of it , a rambling , old - fashioned , half - timber building , which before the town have spread have be a farm - house , but be now surround with the private garden of the townsman . we get the fonder of we house if they have a physiognomy of they own , as we friend have . the family , which be rather a large one , for have four brothers and one sister , be very fond of they old house , from which all the best furniture have long be sell . like it too , know it by heart even to the attic which smelt deliciously of apple and quince , and until to - day he have never come to it without pleasant expectation ; but he heart beat uneasily now with the sense that he should probably have to make he confession before , of whom he be rather more in awe than of she husband . not that she be inclin to sarcasm and to impulsive sally , as be . in she present matronly age at least , never commit herself by over -hasty speech ; have , as she say , borne the yoke in she youth , and learn self - control . she have that rare sense which discern what be unalterable , and submit to it without murmuring . Ador she husband 's virtue , she have very early make up she mind to he incapacity of mind he own interest , and have meet the consequence cheerfully . she have be magnanimous enough to renounce all pride in teapot or child 's frilling , and have never pour any pathetic confidence into the ear of she feminine neighbor concern 's want of prudence and the sum he might have have if he
he have be like other man . hence these fair neighbor think she either proud or eccentric , and sometimes spoke of she to they husband as " you fine . " she be not without she criticism of they in return , be more accurately instruct than most matron in , and -- where be the blameless woman ?-- apt to be a little severe towards she own sex , which in she opinion be fram to be entirely subordinate . on the other hand , she be disproportionately indulgent towards the failings of man , and be often hear to say that these be natural . also , it must be admit that be a trifle too emphatic in she resistance to what she hold to be folly : the passage from governess into housewife have wrotch itself a little too strongly into she consciousness , and she rarely forget that while she grammar and accent be above the town standard , she wear a plain cap , cook the family dinner , and darn all the stocking . she have sometimes take pupil in a peripatetic fashion , make they follow she about in the kitchen with they book or slate . she think it good for they to see that she could make a excellent lather while she correcte they blunder " without look , " -- that a woman with she sleeve tuck up above she elbow might know all about the or the -- that , in short , she might possess " education " and other good thing end in " tion , " and worthy to be pronounce emphatically , without be a useless doll . when she make remark to this edifying effect , she have a firm little frown on she brow , which yet do not hinder she face from look benevolent , and she word which come forth like a procession be uttere in a fervid agreeable contralto . certainly , the exemplary have she droll aspect , but she character sustain she oddity , as a very fine wine sustain a flavor of skin . she have a motherly feeling , and have always be dispose to excuse he error , though she would probably not have excuse for engage herself to he , she daughter be include in that more rigorous judgment which she apply to she own sex . but this very fact of she exceptional indulgence towards he make it the harder to that he must now inevitably sink in she opinion . and the circumstance of he visit turn out to be still more unpleasant than he have expect ; for have go out early to look at some repair not far off . at certain hour be always in the kitchen , and this morning she be carry on several occupations at once there -- make she pie at the well - scour deal table on one side of that airy room , observe 's movement at the oven and dough - tub through a open door , and give lesson to she youngest boy and girl , who be stand opposite to she at the table with they book and slate before they . a tub and a clothes - horse at the other end of the kitchen indicate a intermittent wash of small thing also go on . , with she sleeve turn above she elbow , deftly handle she pastry -- apply she rolling - pin and give ornamental pinch , while she expound with grammatical fervor what be the right view about the concord of verb and pronoun with " noun of multitude or signify many , " be a sight agreeably amuse . she be of the same curly - haire , square - face type as , but handsomer , with more delicacy of feature , a pale skin , a solid matronly figure , and a remarkable firmness of glance . in she snowy - frill cap she remind one of that delightful Frenchwoman whom we have all seen marketing , basket on arm . look at the mother , you might hope that the daughter would become like she , which be a prospective advantage equal to a dowry -- the mother too often stand behind the daughter like a malignant prophecy -- " such as I be , she will shortly be . " " now let we go through that once more , " say , pinch a apple - puff which seem to distract , a energetic young male with a heavy brow , from due attention to the lesson . " ' not without regard to the import of the word as convey unity or plurality of ideag -- tell I again what that mean , . " ( . , like more celebrated educator , have she favorite ancient path , and in a general wreck of society would have try to hold she " " above the wave . ) " oh -- it mean -- you must think what you mean , " say , rather peevishly . " I hate grammar . what be the use of it ? " " to teach you to speak and write correctly , so that you can be understand , " say , with severe precision . " should you like to speak as old job do ? " " yes , " say , stoutly ; " it be funnier . he say , ' yo go ' -- that be just as good as ' you go . ' " " but he say , 'A ship 's in the garden , ' instead of 'a sheep , ' " say , with a air of superiority . " you might think he mean a ship off the sea . " " no , you might not , if you be not silly , " say . "
" how could a ship off the sea come there ? " " these thing belong only to pronunciation , which be the least part of grammar , " say . " that apple - peel be to be eat by the pig , ; if you eat it , I must give they you piece of pasty . job have only to speak about very plain thing . how do you think you would write or speak about anything more difficult , if you know no more of grammar than he do ? you would use wrong word , and put word in the wrong place , and instead of make people understand you , they would turn away from you as a tiresome person . what would you do then ? " " I should not care , I should leave off , " say , with a sense that this be a agreeable issue where grammar be concerned . " I see you be get tired and stupid , , " say , accustom to these obstructive argument from she male offspring . have finish she pie , she move towards the clothes - horse , and say , " come here and tell I the story I tell you on , about . " " I know ! he be a farmer , " say . " now , , he be a Roman -- let _me_ tell , " say , use she elbow contentiously . " you silly thing , he be a farmer , and he be plough . " " yes , but before that -- that do not come first -- people want he , " say . " well , but you must say what sort of a man he be first , " insist . " he be a wise man , like my father , and that make the people want he advice . and he be a brave man , and could fight . and so could my father -- could not he , mother ? " " now , , let I tell the story straight on , as mother tell it we , " say , frown . " please , mother , tell not to speak . " " Letty , I be asham of you , " say she mother , wringe out the cap from the tub . " when you brother begin , you ought to have wait to see if he could not tell the story . how rude you look , push and frown , as if you want to conquer with you elbow ! , I be sure , would have be sorry to see he daughter behave so . " ( deliver this awful sentence with much majesty of enunciation , and feel that between repress volubility and general disesteem , that of the inclusive , life be already a painful affair . ) " now , . " " well -- oh -- well -- why , there be a great deal of fight , and they be all blockhead , and -- I can not tell it just how you tell it -- but they want a man to be and king and everything -- " " dictator , now , " say , with injured look , and not without a wish to make she mother repent . " very well , dictator ! " say , contemptuously . " but that be not a good word : he do not tell they to write on slate . " " come , come , , you be not so ignorant as that , " say , carefully serious . " , there be a knock at the door ! , , and open it . " the knock be 's ; and when say that she father be not in yet , but that she mother be in the kitchen , have no alternative . he could not depart from he usual practice of go to see in the kitchen if she happen to be at work there . he put he arm round 's neck silently , and lead she into the kitchen without he usual joke and caress . be surprised to see F at this hour , but surprise be not a feeling that she be give to express , and she only say , quietly continue she work -- " you , , so early in the day ? you look quite pale . have anything happen ? " " I want to speak to , " say , not yet ready to say more -- " and to you also , " he add , after a little pause , for he have no doubt that know everything about the bill , and he must in the end speak of it before she , if not to she solely . " will be in again in a few minute , " say , who imagine some trouble between and he father . " he be sure not to be long , because he have some work at he desk that must be do this morning . do you mind stay with I , while I finish my matter here ? " " but we need not go on about , need we ? " say , who have take 's whip out of he hand , and be try it be efficiency on the cat . " no , go out now . but put that whip down . how very mean of you to whip poor old Tortoise ! pray take the whip from he , . " " come , old boy , give it I , " say , put out he hand . " will you let I ride on you horse to - day ? " say , render up the whip , with a
a air of not be obliged to do it . " not to - day -- another time . I be not ride my own horse . " " shall you see to - day ? " " yes , I think so , " say , with a unpleasant twinge . " tell she to come home soon , and play at forfeit , and make fun . " " enough , enough , run away , " say , see that be tease . . . " be and you only pupil now , ? " say , when the child be gone and it be needful to say something that would pass the time . he be not yet sure whether he should wait for , or use any good opportunity in conversation to confess to herself , give she the money and ride away . " one -- only one . come at half past eleven . I be not get a great income now , " say , smile . " I be at a low ebb with pupil . but I have save my little purse for 's premium : I have ninety - two pound . he can go to 's now ; he be just at the right age . " this do not lead well towards the news that be on the brink of lose ninety - two pound and more . be silent . " young gentleman who go to college be rather more costly than that , " innocently continue , pull out the edging on a cap - border . " and think that will turn out a distinguished engineer : he want to give the boy a good chance . there he be ! I hear he come in . we will go to he in the parlor , shall we ? " when they enter the parlor have throw down he hat and be seat at he desk . " what ! , my boy ! " he say , in a tone of mild surprise , hold he pen still undip ; " you be here betimes . " but miss the usual expression of cheerful greeting in 's face , he immediately add , " be there anything up at home ?-- anything the matter ? " " yes , , I be come to tell something that I be afraid will give you a bad opinion of I . I be come to tell you and . that I can not keep my word . I can not find the money to meet the bill after all . I have be unfortunate ; I have only get these fifty pound towards the hundred and sixty . " while be speak , he have take out the note and lay they on the desk before . he have burst forth at once with the plain fact , feel boyishly miserable and without verbal resource . be mutely astonish , and look at she husband for a explanation . blush , and after a little pause say -- " oh , I do not tell you , : I put my name to a bill for ; it be for a hundred and sixty pound . he make sure he could meet it himself . " there be a evident change in 's face , but it be like a change below the surface of water which remain smooth . she fix she eye on , say -- " I suppose you have ask you father for the rest of the money and he have refuse you . " " no , " say , bite he lip , and speak with more difficulty ; " but I know it will be of no use to ask he ; and unless it be of use , I should not like to mention 's name in the matter . " " it have come at a unfortunate time , " say , in he hesitat way , look down at the note and nervously finger the paper , " upon we -- I be rather hard up just now . you see , I have to cut out everything like a tailor with short measure . what can we do , ? I shall want every farthing we have in the bank . it be a hundred and ten pound , the deuce take it ! " " I must give you the ninety - two pound that I have put by for 's premium , " say , gravely and decisively , though a nice ear might have discern a slight tremor in some of the word . " and I have no doubt that have twenty pound save from she salary by this time . she will advance it . " have not again look at , and be not in the least calculate what word she should use to cut he the most effectivly . like the eccentric woman she be , she be at present absorbed in consider what be to be do , and do not fancy that the end could be better achieve by bitter remark or explosion . but she have make feel for the first time something like the tooth of remorse . Curiously enough , he pain in the affair beforehand have consist almost entirely in the sense that he must seem dishonorable , and sink in the opinion of the Garth : he have not occupy himself with the inconvenience and possible injury that he breach might occasion they , for this exercise of the imagination on other people 's need be not common with hopeful young gentleman . indeed we be most of we brotch up in the notion that the highest motive for not do a wrong be something irrespective of the being who would suffer the wrong . but at this moment he suddenly
suddenly see himself as a pitiful rascal who be rob two woman of they savings . " I shall certainly pay it all , --ultimately , " he stammer out . " yes , ultimately , " say , who have a special dislike to fine word on ugly occasion , could not now repress a epigram . " but boy can not well be apprentice ultimately : they should be apprentice at fifteen . " she have never be so little inclin to make excuse for . " I be the most in the wrong , , " say . " F make sure of find the money . but I would no business to be finger bill . I suppose you have look all round and try all honest mean ? " he add , fix he merciful gray eye on . be too delicate , to specify . " yes , I have try everything -- I really have . I should have have a hundred and thirty pound ready but for a misfortune with a horse which I be about to sell . my uncle have give I eighty pound , and I pay away thirty with my old horse in order to get another which I be go to sell for eighty or more -- I mean to go without a horse -- but now it have turn out vicious and lam itself . I wish I and the horse too have be at the devil , before I have bring this on you . there be no one else I care so much for : you and have always be so kind to I . however , it be no use say that . you will always think I a rascal now . " turn round and hurrie out of the room , conscious that he be get rather womanish , and feel confusedly that he be sorry be not of much use to the Garth . they could see he mount , and quickly pass through the gate . " I be disappointed in , " say . " I would not have believe beforehand that he would have draw you into he debt . I know he be extravagant , but I do not think that he would be so mean as to hang he risk on he oldest friend , who could the least afford to lose . " " I be a fool , :" " that you be , " say the wife , nodding and smile . " but I should not have go to publish it in the market - place . why should you keep such thing from I ? it be just so with you button : you let they burst off without tell I , and go out with you wristband hang . if I have only know I might have be ready with some better plan . " " you be sadly cut up , I know , , " say , look feelingly at she . " I can not abide you lose the money you have scrape together for . " " it be very well that I _have scrape it together ; and it be you who will have to suffer , for you must teach the boy yourself . you must give up you bad habit . some man take to drink , and you have take to work without . you must indulge yourself a little less in that . and you must ride over to , and ask the child what money she have . " have push he chair back , and be lean forward , shak he head slowly , and fit he finger - tip together with much nicety . " poor ! " he say . " , " he go on in a lowered tone , " I be afraid she may be fond of . " " oh no ! she always laugh at he ; and he be not likely to think of she in any other than a brotherly way . " make no rejoinder , but presently lower he spectacle , draw up he chair to the desk , and say , " take the bill -- I wish it be at ! these thing be a sad interruption to business ! " the first part of this speech comprise he whole store of maledictory expression , and be utter with a slight snarl easy to imagine . but it would be difficult to convey to those who never hear he utter the word " business , " the peculiar tone of fervid veneration , of religious regard , in which he wrap it , as a consecrate symbol be wrap in its gold - fringed linen . often shook he head in meditation on the value , the indispensable might of that myriad - head , myriad - hand labor by which the social body be feed , clothed , and hous . it have laid hold of he imagination in boyhood . the echoe of the great hammer where roof or keel be a - making , the signal - shout of the workman , the roar of the furnace , the thunder and plash of the engine , be a sublime music to he ; the felling and lading of timber , and the huge trunk vibrat star - like in the distance along the highway , the crane at work on the wharf , the pile - up produce in warehouse , the precision and variety of muscular effort wherever exact work have to be turn out ,-- all these sight of he youth have act on he as poetry without the aid of the poet , have make a philosophy for he without the aid of philosopher , a religion without the aid of theology . he early ambition have be to have as
as effective a share as possible in this sublime labor , which be peculiarly dignify by he with the name of " business ; " and though he have only be a short time under a surveyor , and have be chiefly he own teacher , he know more of land , building , and mine than most of the special man in the county . he classification of human employment be rather crude , and , like the category of more celebrated man , would not be acceptable in these advanced time . he divide they into " business , politics , preach , learn , and amusement . " he have nothing to say against the last four ; but he regard they as a reverential pagan regard other gods than he own . in the same way , he think very well of all rank , but he would not himself have like to be of any rank in which he have not such close contact with " business " as to get often honorably decorate with mark of dust and mortar , the damp of the engine , or the sweet soil of the wood and field . though he have never regard himself as other than a orthodox , and would argue on prevenient grace if the subject be propose to he , I think he virtual divinity be good practical scheme , accurate work , and the faithful completion of undertaking : he prince of darkness be a slack workman . but there be no spirit of denial in , and the world seem so wondrous to he that he be ready to accept any number of system , like any number of firmament , if they do not obviously interfere with the best land - drainage , solid building , correct measuring , and judicious boring ( for coal ) . in fact , he have a reverential soul with a strong practical intelligence . but he could not manage finance : he know value well , but he have no keenness of imagination for monetary result in the shape of profit and loss : and have ascertain this to he cost , he determine to give up all form of he beloved " business " which require that talent . he give himself up entirely to the many kind of work which he could do without handling capital , and be one of those precious man within he own district whom everybody would choose to work for they , because he do he work well , charge very little , and often decline to charge at all . it be no wonder , then , that the be poor , and " live in a small way . " however , they do not mind it . . " love seeketh not itself to please , for itself hath any care but for another give its ease and build a heaven in hell 's despair . . . . . . . . love seeketh only self to please , to bind another to its delight , in another 's loss of ease , and build a hell in heaven 's despite . " -- w . Blake : songs of Experience want to arrive at when could not expect he , and when he uncle be not down - stair in that case she might be sit alone in the wainscote parlor . he leave he horse in the yard to avoid make a noise on the gravel in front , and enter the parlor without other notice than the noise of the door - handle . be in she usual corner , laugh over 's recollection of , and look up with the fun still in she face . it gradually fade as she see approach she without speaking , and stand before she with he elbow on the mantel - piece , look ill . she too be silent , only raise she eye to he inquiringly . " , " he begin , " I be a good - for - nothing blackguard . " " I should think one of those epithet would do at a time , " say , try to smile , but feel alarmed . " I know you will never think well of I any more . you will think I a liar . you will think I dishonest . you will think I do not care for you , or you father and mother . you always do make the worst of I , I know . " " I can not deny that I shall think all that of you , , if you give I good reason . but please to tell I at once what you have do . I would rather know the painful truth than imagine it . " " I owed money -- a hundred and sixty pound . I ask you father to put he name to a bill . I think it would not signify to he . I make sure of pay the money myself , and I have try as hard as I could . and now , I have be so unlucky -- a horse have turn out badly -- I can only pay fifty pound . and I can not ask my father for the money : he would not give I a farthing . and my uncle give I a hundr a little while ago . so what can I do ? and now you father have no ready money to spare , and you mother will have to pay away she ninety - two pound that she have save , and she say you savings must go too . you see what a -- " " oh , poor mother , poor father ! " say , she eye fill with tear , and a little sob rise
rise which she try to repress . she look straight before she and take no notice of , all the consequence at home become present to she . he too remain silent for some moment , feel more miserable than ever . " I would not have hurt you for the world , , " he say at last . " you can never forgive I . " " what do it matter whether I forgive you ? " say , passionately . " would that make it any better for my mother to lose the money she have be earn by lesson for four year , that she might send to ? should you think all that pleasant enough if I forgave you ? " " say what you like , . I deserve it all . " " I do not want to say anything , " say , more quietly , " and my anger be of no use . " she dry she eye , throw aside she book , rose and fetch she sew . follow she with he eye , hope that they would meet hers , and in that way find access for he imploring penitence . but no ! could easily avoid look upward . " I do care about you mother 's money go , " he say , when she be seat again and sew quickly . " I want to ask you , -- do not you think that -- if you be to tell he -- tell he , I mean , about apprentice -- would advance the money ? " " my family be not fond of begging , . we would rather work for we money . besides , you say that have lately give you a hundred pound . he rarely make present ; he have never make present to we . I be sure my father will not ask he for anything ; and even if I choose to beg of he , it would be of no use . " " I be so miserable , -- if you know how miserable I be , you would be sorry for I . " " there be other thing to be more sorry for than that . but selfish people always think they own discomfort of more importance than anything else in the world . I see enough of that every day . " " it be hardly fair to call I selfish . if you know what thing other young man do , you would think I a good way off the worst . " " I know that people who spend a great deal of money on themselves without know how they shall pay , must be selfish . they be always think of what they can get for themselves , and not of what other people may lose . " " any man may be unfortunate , , and find himself unable to pay when he mean it . there be not a better man in the world than you father , and yet he get into trouble . " " how dare you make any comparison between my father and you , ? " say , in a deep tone of indignation . " he never get into trouble by think of he own idle pleasure , but because he be always think of the work he be do for other people . and he have far hard , and work hard to make good everybody be lose . " " and you think that I shall never try to make good anything , . it be not generous to believe the worst of a man . when you have get any power over he , I think you might try and use it to make he better ; but that be what you never do . however , I be go , " end , languidly . " I shall never speak to you about anything again . I be very sorry for all the trouble I have cause -- that be all . " have drop she work out of she hand and look up . there be often something maternal even in a girlish love , and 's hard experience have wrotch she nature to a impressibility very different from that hard slight thing which we call girlishness . at 's last word she feel a instantaneous pang , something like what a mother feel at the imagined sob or cry of she naughty truant child , which may lose itself and get harm . and when , look up , she eye meet he dull despairing glance , she pity for he surmount she anger and all she other anxiety . " oh , , how ill you look ! sit down a moment . do not go yet . let I tell uncle that you be here . he have be wonder that he have not see you for a whole week . " speak hurriedly , say the word that come first without know very well what they be , but say they in a half - soothing half - beseeching tone , and rise as if to go away to . of course feel as if the cloud have part and a gleam have come : he move and stand in she way . " say one word , , and I will do anything . say you will not think the worst of I -- will not give I up altogether . " " as if it be any pleasure to I to think ill of you , " say , in a mournful tone . " as if it be not very painful to I to see you a idle frivolous creature . how can you bear to be so contemptible , when other be work and strive , and there be
be so many thing to be do -- how can you bear to be fit for nothing in the world that be useful ? and with so much good in you disposition , , -- you might be worth a great deal . " " I will try to be anything you like , , if you will say that you love I . " " I should be asham to say that I love a man who must always be hang on other , and reckon on what they would do for he . what will you be when you be forty ? like , I suppose -- just as idle , live in . 's front parlor -- fat and shabby , hope somebody will invite you to dinner -- spend you morning in learn a comic song -- oh no ! learn a tune on the flute . " 's lip have begin to curl with a smile as soon as she have ask that question about 's future ( young soul be mobile ) , and before she end , she face have it be full illumination of fun . to he it be like the cessation of a ache that could laugh at he , and with a passive sort of smile he try to reach she hand ; but she slipp away quickly towards the door and say , " I shall tell uncle . you _must see he for a moment or two . " secretly feel that he future be guarantee against the fulfilment of 's sarcastic prophecy , apart from that " anything " which he be ready to do if she would define it he never da in 's presence to approach the subject of he expectation from , and she always ignore they , as if everything depend on himself . but if ever he actually come into the property , she must recognize the change in he position . all this pass through he mind somewhat languidly , before he go up to see he uncle . he stay but a little while , excuse himself on the ground that he have a cold ; and do not reappear before he leave the house . but as he ride home , he begin to be more conscious of be ill , than of be melancholy . when arrive at soon after dusk , be not surprised , although he seldom have leisure for pay she a visit , and be not at all fond of have to talk with . the old man , on the other hand , feel himself ill at ease with a brother - in - law whom he could not annoy , who do not mind about be consider poor , have nothing to ask of he , and understand all kind of farming and min business better than he do . but have feel sure that she parent would want to see she , and if she father have not come , she would have obtain leave to go home for a hour or two the next day . after discuss price during tea with rise to bid he good - by , and say , " I want to speak to you , . " she take a candle into another large parlor , where there be no fire , and set down the feeble light on the dark mahogany table , turn round to she father , and put she arm round he neck kiss he with childish kiss which he delighte in , -- the expression of he large brows soften as the expression of a great beautiful dog soften when it be caress . be he favorite child , and whatever might say , and right as she be on all other subject , think it natural that or any one else should think more lovable than other girl . " I have get something to tell you , my dear , " say in he hesitating way . " no very good news ; but then it might be worse . " " about money , father ? I think I know what it be . " " ay ? how can that be ? you see , I have be a bit of a fool again , and put my name to a bill , and now it come to pay ; and you mother have get to part with she savings , that be the worst of it , and even they will not quite make thing even . we want a hundred and ten pound : you mother have ninety - two , and I have none to spare in the bank ; and she think that you have some savings . " " oh yes ; I have more than four - and - twenty pound . I think you would come , father , so I put it in my bag . see ! beautiful white note and gold . " take out the fold money from she reticule and put it into she father 's hand . " well , but how -- we only want eighteen -- here , put the rest back , child , -- but how do you know about it ? " say , who , in he unconquerable indifference to money , be begin to be chiefly concerned about the relation the affair might have to 's affections . " tell I this morning . " " ah ! do he come on purpose ? " " yes , I think so . he be a good deal distress . " " I be afraid be not to be trust , , " say the father , with hesitat tenderness . " he mean better than he act , perhaps . but I should think it a pity for any body 's happiness to be wrap
wrap up in he , and so would you mother . " " and so should I , father , " say , not look up , but put the back of she father 's hand against she cheek . " I do not want to pry , my dear . but I be afraid there might be something between you and F , and I want to caution you . you see , " -- here 's voice become more tender ; he have be push he hat about on the table and look at it , but finally he turn he eye on he daughter -- " a woman , let she be as good as she may , have get to put up with the life she husband make for she . you mother have have to put up with a good deal because of I . " turn the back of she father 's hand to she lip and smile at he . " well , well , nobody be perfect , but " -- here shook he head to help out the inadequacy of word --" what I be think of be -- what it must be for a wife when she be never sure of she husband , when he have not get a principle in he to make he more afraid of do the wrong thing by other than of get he own toe pinch . that be the long and the short of it , . young folk may get fond of each other before they know what life be , and they may think it all holiday if they can only get together ; but it soon turn into work day , my dear . however , you have more sense than most , and you have not be keep in cotton - wool : there may be no occasion for I to say this , but a father tremble for he daughter , and you be all by yourself here . " " do not fear for I , father , " say , gravely meet she father 's eye ; " have always be very good to I ; he be kind - hearted and affectionate , and not false , I think , with all he self - indulgence . but I will never engage myself to one who have no manly independence , and who go on loiter away he time on the chance that other will provide for he . you and my mother have teach I too much pride for that . " " that be right -- that be right . then I be easy , " say , take up he hat . " but it be hard to run away with you earning , eh child . " " ! " say , in she deepest tone of remonstrance . " take pocketful of love besides to they all at home , " be she last word before he close the outer door on himself . " I suppose you father want you earning , " say old , with he usual power of unpleasant surmise , when return to he . " he make but a tight fit , I reckon . you be of age now ; you ought to be save for yourself . " " I consider my father and mother the best part of myself , sir , " say , coldly . grunt : he could not deny that a ordinary sort of girl like she might be expect to be useful , so he think of another rejoinder , disagreeable enough to be always apropo . " if come to - morrow , now , do not you keep he chatter : let he come up to I . " . " he beat I and I rail at he : of worthy satisfaction ! would it be otherwise -- that I could beat he while he rail at I .-- " -- and . but do not go to the next day , for reason that be quite peremptory . from those visit to unsanitary streets in search of , he have bring back not only a bad bargain in horse - flesh , but the further misfortune of some ailment which for a day or two have deem mere depression and headache , but which get so much worse when he return from he visit to that , go into the dining - room , he throw himself on the sofa , and in answer to he mother 's anxious question , say , " I feel very ill : I think you must send for . " Wrench come , but do not apprehend anything serious , spoke of a " slight derangement , " and do not speak of come again on the morrow . he have a due value for the 's house , but the wariest man be apt to be dull by routine , and on worried morning will sometimes go through they business with the zest of the daily bell - ringer . be a small , neat , bilious man , with a well - dress wig : he have a laborious practice , a irascible temper , a lymphatic wife and seven child ; and he be already rather late before set out on a four -mile drive to meet on the other side of , the decease of , a rural practitioner , have increase practice in that direction . great statesman err , and why not small medical man ? do not neglect send the usual white parcel , which this time have black and drastic contents . they effect be not alleviat to poor , who , however , unwilling as he say to believe that he be " in for a illness , " rise at he usual easy hour the next
next morning and go down - stair meane to breakfast , but succeed in nothing but in sit and shiver by the fire . be again send for , but be go on he round , and . see she darling 's change look and general misery , begin to cry and say she would send for . " oh , nonsense , mother ! it be nothing , " say , put out he hot dry hand to she , " I shall soon be all right . I must have take cold in that nasty damp ride . " " ! " say , who be seat near the window ( the dining - room window look on that highly respectable street call ) , " there be , stop to speak to some one . if I be you I would call he in . he have cure . they say he cure every one . " . spring to the window and open it in a instant , think only of and not of medical etiquette . be only two yard off on the other side of some iron palisading , and turn round at the sudden sound of the sash , before she call to he . in two minute he be in the room , and go out , after wait just long enough to show a pretty anxiety conflict with she sense of what be become . have to hear a narrative in which . 's mind insist with remarkable instinct on every point of minor importance , especially on what have say and have not say about come again . that there might be a awkward affair with , see at once ; but the ease be serious enough to make he dismiss that consideration : he be convince that be in the pink - skinn stage of typhoid fever , and that he have take just the wrong medicines . he must go to bed immediately , must have a regular nurse , and various appliance and precaution must be use , about which be particular . poor 's terror at these indication of danger find vent in such word as come most easily . she think it " very ill usage on the part of , who have attend they house so many year in preference to , though be equally a friend . why should neglect she child more than other , she could not for the life of she understand . he have not neglect 's when they have the measle , nor indeed would . have wish that he should . and if anything should happen -- " here poor . 's spirit quite break down , and she Niobe throat and good - humored face be sadly convulse . this be in the hall out of 's hearing , but have open the drawing - room door , and now come forward anxiously . apologize for , say that the symptom yesterday might have be disguise , and that this form of fever be very equivocal in its beginning : he would go immediately to the druggist' and have a prescription make up in order to lose no time , but he would write to and tell he what have be do . " but you must come again -- you must go on attending . I can not have my boy left to anybody who may come or not . I bear nobody ill - will , thank , and save I in the pleurisy , but he would better have let I die -- if -- if -- " " I will meet here , then , shall I ? " say , really believe that be not well prepare to deal wisely with a case of this kind . " pray make that arrangement , , " say , come to she mother 's aid , and support she arm to lead she away . when come home he be very angry with , and do not care if he never come into he house again . Lydgate should go on now , whether like it or not . it be no joke to have fever in the house . everybody must be send to now , not to come to dinner on . and need not get up any wine : brandy be the best thing against infection . " I shall drink brandy , " add , emphatically -- as much as to say , this be not a occasion for fire with blank - cartridge . " he be a uncommonly unfortunate lad , be . he would need have -- some luck by - and - by to make up for all this -- else I do not know who would have a eldest son . " " do not say so , , " say the mother , with a quivering lip , " if you do not want he to be take from I . " " it will worret you to death , Lucy ; _that I can see , " say , more mildly . " however , Wrench shall know what I think of the matter . " ( what think confusedly be , that the fever might somehow have be hinder if Wrench have show the proper solicitude about he -- the 's -- family . ) " I be the last man to give in to the cry about new doctor , or new parson either -- whether they be 's man or not . but Wrench shall know what I think , take it as he will . " Wrench do not take it at all well . be as polite as he could be in he offhand way , but politeness in a man who have place you at a disadvantage be only a additional exasperation , especially if he happen
happen to have be a object of dislike beforehand . country practitioner use to be a irritable species , susceptible on the point of honor ; and be one of the most irritable among they . he do not refuse to meet Lydgate in the evening , but he temper be somewhat try on the occasion . he have to hear . Vincy say -- " oh , , what have I ever do that you should use I so ?-- to go away , and never to come again ! and my boy might have be stretch a corpse ! " , who have be keep up a sharp fire on the enemy Infection , and be a good deal heat in consequence , start up when he hear come in , and go into the hall to let he know what he think . " I will tell you what , , this be beyond a joke , " say the , who of late have have to rebuke offender with a official air , and how broaden himself by put he thumb in he armhole .-- " to let fever get unawar into a house like this . there be some thing that ought to be actionable , and be not so -- that be my opinion . " but irrational reproach be easier to bear than the sense of be instruct , or rather the sense that a younger man , like , inwardly consider he in need of instruction , for " in point of fact , " afterwards say , Lydgate parade flighty , foreign notion , which would not wear . he swallow he ire for the moment , but he afterwards write to decline further attendance in the case . the house might be a good one , but be not go to truckle to anybody on a professional matter . he reflect , with much probability on he side , that would by - and - by be catch trippe too , and that he ungentlemanly attempt to discredit the sale of drug by he professional breth , would by - and - by recoil on himself . he throw out bite remark on 's trick , worthy only of a quack , to get himself a factitious reputation with credulous people . that cant about cure be never get up by sound practitioner . this be a point on which smart as much as Wrench could desire . to be puffe by ignorance be not only humiliate , but perilous , and not more enviable than the reputation of the weather - prophet . he be impatient of the foolish expectation amidst which all work must be carry on , and likely enough to damage himself as much as could wish , by a unprofessional openness . however , be install as medical attendent on the , and the event be a subject of general conversation in . some say , that the have behave scandalously , that have threaten , and that Mr . have accuse he of poiso she son . other be of opinion that have pass by be providential , that he be wonderfully clever in fevers , and that be in the right to bring he forward . many people believe that 's come to the town at all be really due to ; and . , who be always count stitch and gather she information in misleading fragment catch between the row of she knitt , have get it into she head that be a natural son of 's , a fact which seem to justify she suspicions of evangelical layman . she one day communicate this piece of knowledge to Farebrother , who do not fail to tell she son of it , observe -- " I should not be surprised at anything in , but I should be sorry to think it of . " " why , mother , " say Farebrother , after a explosive laugh , " you know very well that be of a good family in the . he never hear of Bulstrode before he come here . " " that be satisfactory so far as Lydgate be concerned , , " say the old lady , with a air of precision .--" but as to -- the report may be true of some other son . " . let the high Muse chant love : we be but mortal , and must se of man . a eminent philosopher among my friend , who can dignify even you ugly furniture by lift it into the serene light of science , have show I this pregnant little fact . you pier - glass or extensive surface of polish steel make to be rub by a housemaid , will be minutely and multitudinously scratch in all direction ; but place now against it a lighted candle as a centre of illumination , and lo ! the scratch will seem to arrange themselves in a fine series of concentric circle round that little sun . it be demonstrable that the scratch be go everywhere impartially and it be only you candle which produce the flattering illusion of a concentric arrangement , its light fal with a exclusive optical selection . these thing be a parable . the scratch be event , and the candle be the egoism of any person now absent -- of , for example . have a Providence of she own who have kindly make she more charming than other girl , and who seem to have arrange 's illness and 's mistake in order to bring she and Lydgate within effective proximity . it would have be to contravene these arrangement if have consent to go away to or elsewhere , as she parent wish she to do , especially since think the precaution needless . therefore , while and the child be send away to
to a farmhouse the morning after 's illness have declare itself , refuse to leave papa and mamma . poor mamma indeed be a object to touch any creature born of woman ; and , who do on he wife , be more alarmed on she account than on 's . but for he insistence she would have take no rest : she brightness be all bedimmed ; unconscious of she costume which have always be so fresh and gay , she be like a sick bird with languid eye and plumage ruffle , she sense dull to the sight and sound that use most to interest she . 's delirium , in which he seem to be wander out of she reach , tore she heart . after she first outburst against - Wrench she go about very quietly : she one low cry be to Lydgate . she would follow he out of the room and put she hand on he arm moan out , " save my boy . " once she plead , " he have always be good to I , : he never have a hard word for he mother , " -- as if poor 's suffering be a accusation against he . all the deepest fibre of the mother 's memory be stir , and the young man whose voice take a gentler tone when he speak to she , be one with the babe whom she have love , with a love new to she , before he be bear . " I have good hope , , " Lydgate would say . " come down with I and let we talk about the food . " in that way he lead she to the parlor where be , and make a change for she , surprise she into take some tea or broth which have be prepare for she . there be a constant understanding between he and on these matters . he almost always see she before go to the sickroom , and she appeal to he as to what she could do for mamma . she presence of mind and adroitness in carry out he hint be admirable , and it be not wonderful that the idea of see begin to mingle itself with he interest in the case . especially when the critical stage be pass , and he begin to feel confident of 's recovery . in the more doubtful time , he have advise call in ( who , if he could , would rather have remain neutral on 's account ) ; but after two consultation , the conduct of the case be leave to Lydgate , and there be every reason to make he assiduous . and evening he be at 's , and gradually the visit become cheerful as become simply feeble , and lay not only in need of the utmost petting but conscious of it , so that . feel as if , after all , the illness have make a festival for she tenderness . both father and mother hold it a add reason for good spirit , when old send message by , say that -must make haste and get well , as he , , could not do without he , and miss he visit sadly . the old man himself be get bedridden . . tell these message to when he could listen , and he turn towards she he delicate , pinch face , from which all the thick blond hair have be cut away , and in which the eye seem to have get larger , yearning for some word about -- wonder what she feel about he illness . no word pass he lip ; but " to hear with eye belong to love 's rare wit , " and the mother in the fulness of she heart not only divine 's long , but feel ready for any sacrifice in order to satisfy he . " if I can only see my boy strong again , " she say , in she love folly ; " and who know ?--perhaps master of ! and he can marry anybody he like then . " " not if they will not have I , mother , " say . the illness have make he childish , and tear come as he speak . " oh , take a bit of jelly , my dear , " say . Vincy , secretly incredulous of any such refusal . she never leave 's side when she husband be not in the house , and thus be in the unusual position of be much alone . Lydgate , naturally , never think of stay long with she , yet it seem that the brief impersonal conversation they have together be create that peculiar intimacy which consist in shyness . they be oblige to look at each other in speak , and somehow the look could not be carry through as the matter of course which it really be . begin to feel this sort of consciousness unpleasant and one day look down , or anywhere , like a ill - worked puppet . but this turn out badly : the next day , look down , and the consequence be that when they eye meet again , both be more conscious than before . there be no help for this in science , and as do not want to flirt , there seem to be no help for it in folly . it be therefore a relief when neighbor no longer consider the house in quarantine , and when the chance of see alone be very much reduce . but that intimacy of mutual embarrassment , in which each feel that the other be feel something , have once exist , it be effect be not to be do away with . talk about the weather and other
other well - breed topic be apt to seem a hollow device , and behavior can hardly become easy unless it frankly recognize a mutual fascination -- which of course need not mean anything deep or serious . this be the way in which and slid gracefully into ease , and make they intercourse lively again . visitor come and go as usual , there be once more music in the draw - room , and all the extra hospitality of 's mayoralty return . , whenever he could , take he seat by 's side , and linger to hear she music , call himself she captive -- mean , all the while , not to be she captive . the preposterousness of the notion that he could at once set up a satisfactory establishment as a married man be a sufficient guarantee against danger . this play at be a little in love be agreeable , and do not interfere with graver pursuit . Flirtation , after all , be not necessarily a singeing process . , for she part , have never enjoy the day so much in she life before : she be sure of be admire by some one worth captivating , and she do not distinguish flirtation from love , either in herself or in another . she seem to be sail with a fair wind just whither she would go , and she thought be much occupy with a handsome house in which she hope would by - and - by be vacant . she be quite determined , when she be marry , to ry herself adroitly of all the visitor who be not agreeable to she at she father 's ; and she imagine the drawing - room in she favorite house with various style of furniture . certainly she thought be much occupy with himself ; he seem to she almost perfect : if he have know he note so that he enchantment under she music have be less like a emotional elephant 's , and if he have be able to discriminate better the refinement of she taste in dress , she could hardly have mention a deficiency in he . how different he be from young or ! those young man have not a notion of , and could speak on no subject with striking knowledge , except perhaps the dyeing and carry trade , which of course they be asham to mention ; they be gentry , elate with they silver - head whip and satin stock , but embarrass in they manners , and timidly jocose : even be above they , have at least the accent and manner of a university man . whereas be always listen to , bear himself with the careless politeness of conscious superiority , and seem to have the right clothes on by a certain natural affinity , without ever have to think about they . be proud when he enter the room , and when he approach she with a distinguishing smile , she have a delicious sense that she be the object of enviable homage . if have be aware of all the pride he excite in that delicate bosom , he might have be just as well please as any other man , even the most densely ignorant of humoral pathology or fibrous tissue : he hold it one of the prettiest attitude of the feminine mind to adore a man 's pre-eminence without too precise a knowledge of what it consiste in . but be not one of those helpless girl who betray themselves unaware , and whose behavior be awkwardly drive by they impulse , instead of be steer by wary grace and propriety . do you imagine that she rapid forecast and rumination concern house - furniture and society be ever discernible in she conversation , even with she mamma ? on the contrary , she would have express the prettiest surprise and disapprobation if she have hear that another young lady have be detect in that immodest prematureness -- indeed , would probably have disbelieve in its possibility . for never show any unbecoming knowledge , and be always that combination of correct sentiment , music , dancing , draw , elegant note - write , private album for extracte verse , and perfect blond loveliness , which make the irresistible woman for the doom man of that date . think no unfair evil of she , pray : she have no wicked plot , nothing sordid or mercenary ; in fact , she never think of money except as something necessary which other people would always provide . she be not in the habit of devising falsehood , and if she statement be no direct clew to fact , why , they be not intend in that light -- they be among she elegant accomplishment , intend to please . have inspire many art in finish 's favorite pupil , who by general consent ( 's accept ) be a rare compound of beauty , cleverness , and amiability . find it more and more agreeable to be with she , and there be no constraint now , there be a delightful interchange of influence in they eye , and what they say have that superfluity of meaning for they , which be observable with some sense of flatness by a third person ; still they have no interview or aside from which a third person need have be exclude . in fact , they flirt ; and be secure in the belief that they do nothing else . if a man could not love and be wise , surely he could flirt and be wise at the same time ? really , the man in , except , be great bore , and do not care about commercial politics or card : what be he to do for relaxation ? he be
be often invite to the ' ; but the girl there be hardly out of the schoolroom ; and 's _naive_ way of conciliat piety and worldliness , the nothingness of this life and the desirability of cut glass , the consciousness at once of filthy rag and the best damask , be not a sufficient relief from the weight of she husband 's invariable seriousness . the 's house , with all its fault , be the pleasanter by contrast ; besides , it nourished -- sweet to look at as a half - open blush - rose , and adorn with accomplishment for the refin amusement of man . but he make some enemy , other than medical , by he success with . one evening he come into the drawing - room rather late , when several other visitor were there . the card - table have draw off the elder , and ( one of the good match in , though not one of its lead mind ) be in tete - a - tete with . he have bring the last " , " the gorgeous water - silk publication which mark modern progress at that time ; and he consider himself very fortunate that he could be the first to look over it with she , dwell on the ladie and gentleman with shiny copper - plate cheek and copper - plate smile , and point to comic verse as capital and sentimental story as interesting . be gracious , and be satisfie that he have the very best thing in art and literature as a medium for " pay addresses " -- the very thing to please a nice girl . he have also reason , deep rather than ostensible , for be satisfied with he own appearance . to superficial observer he ching have to vanish a aspect , look as if it be be gradually reabsor . and it do indeed cause he some difficulty about the fit of he satin stock , for which chin be at that time useful . " I think the be something like you , " say . he keep the book open at the bewitching portrait , and look at it rather languishingly . " she back be very large ; she seem to have sat for that , " say , not mean any satire , but think how red young Plymdale 's hand were , and wonder why Lydgate do not come . she go on with she tatt all the while . " I do not say she be as beautiful as you be , " say , venture to look from the portrait to its rival . " I suspect you of be a adroit flatterer , " say , feel sure that she should have to reject this young gentleman a second time . but now come in ; the book be close before he reach 's corner , and as he take he seat with easy confidence on the other side of she , yong 's jaw fall like a barometer towards the cheerless side of change . enjoy not only 's presence but it be effect : she like to excite jealousy . " what a late comer you be ! " she say , as they shook hand . " have give you up a little while ago . how do you find ? " " as usual ; go on well , but slowly . I want he to go away -- to , for example . but you mamma seem to have some objection . " " poor fellow ! " say , prettily . " you will see so change , " she add , turn to the other suitor ; " we have look to as we guardian angel during this illness . " smile nervously , while Lydgate , draw the " " towards he and open it , give a short scornful laugh and toss up he chill , as if in wonderment at human folly . " what be you laugh at so profanely ? " say , with bland neutrality . " I wonder which would turn out to be the silliest -- the engraving or the writing here , " say , in he most convinced tone , while he turn over the page quickly , seem to see all through the book in no time , and show he large white hand to much advantage , as thought . " do look at this bridegroom come out of church : do you ever see such a ' sugared invention ' -- as the use to say ? do any haberdasher ever look so smirking ? yet I will answer for it the story make he one of the first gentleman in the land . " " you be so severe , I be frightene at you , " say , keep she amusement duly moderate . poor young have linger with admiration over this very engrave , and he spirit be stir . " there be a great many celebrated people write in the ' , ' at all event , " he say , in a tone at once pique and timid . " this be the first time I have hear it call silly . " " I think I shall turn round on you and accuse you of be a Goth , " say , look at with a smile . " I suspect you know nothing about and . " herself be not without relish for these writer , but she do not readily commit herself by admiration , and be alive to the slightest hint that anything be not , accord to , in the very highest taste . " but -- I suppose know he , " say young , a little cheer by this advantage . " oh , I
I read no literature now , " say , shutt the book , and push it away . " I read so much when I be a lad , that I suppose it will last I all my life . I use to know 's poem by heart . " " I should like to know when you leave off , " say , " because then I might be sure that I know something which you do not know . " " would say that be not worth know , " say , purposely caustic . " on the contrary , " say , show no smart ; but smile with exasperating confidence at . " it would be worth know by the fact that could tell it I . " yong Plymdale soon go to look at the whist - play , think that be one of the most conceited , unpleasant fellow it have ever be he ill - fortune to meet . " how rash you be ! " say , inwardly delighte . " do you see that you have give offence ? " " what ! be it 's book ? I be sorry . I do not think about it . " " I shall begin to admit what you say of yourself when you first come here -- that you be a bear , and want teaching by the bird . " " well , there be a bird who can teach I what she will . do not I listen to she willingly ? " to it seem as if she and be as good as engage . that they be some time to be engage have long be a idea in she mind ; and idea , we know , tend to a more solid kind of existence , the necessary material be at hand . it be true , have the counter - idea of remain unengaged ; but this be a mere negative , a shadow east by other resolve which themselves be capable of shrinking . Circumstance be almost sure to be on the side of 's idea , which have a shaping activity and look through watchful blue eye , whereas 's lay blind and unconcerned as a jelly - fish which get melte without know it . that eve when he go home , he look at he phial to see how a process of maceration be go on , with undisturbed interest ; and he write out he daily note with as much precision as usual . the revery from which it be difficult for he to detach himself be ideal construction of something else than 's virtue , and the primitive tissue be still he fair unknown . moreover , he be begin to feel some zest for the grow though half - suppress feud between he and the other medical man , which be likely to become more manifest , now that 's method of manage the new hospital be about to be declare ; and there be various inspiriting sign that he non-acceptance by some of Peacock 's patient might be counterbalance by the impression he have produce in other quarter . only a few day later , when he have happen to overtake on the Lowick road and have get down from he horse to walk by she side until he have quite protect she from a passing drive , he have be stop by a servant on horseback with a message call he in to a house of some importance where have never attend ; and it be the second instance of this kind . the servant be 's , and the house be . . 1st Gent . all time be good to seek you wedded home bring a mutual delight. 2d . why , true . the calendar hath not a evil day for soul make one by love , and even death sweetness , if it come like roll wave while they twill clasp each other , and foresee no life apart . and , return from they wedding journey , arrive at in the middle of . a light snow be fall as they descende at the door , and in the morning , when pass from she dressing - room avenue the blue - green boudoir that we know of , she see the long avenue of lime lift they trunk from a white earth , and spread white branch against the dun and motionless sky . the distant flat shrank in uniform whiteness and low - hang uniformity of cloud . the very furniture in the room seem to have shrunk since she see it before : the slag in the tapestry look more like a ghost in he ghostly blue - green world ; the volume of polite literature in the bookcase look more like immovable imitation of book . the bright fire of dry oak - bough burn on the dog seem a incongruous renewal of life and glow -- like the figure of herself as she enter carry the red - leather case contain the cameo for . she be glow from she morning toilet as only healthful youth can glow : there be gem - like brightness on she coiled hair and in she hazel eye ; there be warm red life in she lip ; she throat have a breathing whiteness above the differing white of the fur which itself seem to wind about she neck and cling down she blue - gray pelisse with a tenderness gather from she own , a sentient commingled innocence which keep its loveliness against the crystalline purity of the outdoor snow . as she lay the cameo - casis on the table in the bow - window , she unconsciously keep she hand on they , immediately absorb in look out on the still , white enclosure which make she visible world
world . , who have risen early complain of palpitation , be in the library give audience to he curate . by - and - by would come in she quality of bridesmaid as well as sister , and through the next week there would be wedding visit receive and give ; all in continuance of that transitional life understand to correspond with the excitement of bridal felicity , and keep up the sense of busy ineffectiveness , as of a dream which the dreamer begin to suspect . the duty of she married life , contemplate as so great beforehand , seem to be shrink with the furniture and the white vapor - wall landscape . the clear height where she expect to walk in full communion have become difficult to see even in she imagination ; the delicious repose of the soul on a complete superior have be shake into uneasy effort and alarme with dim presentiment . when would the day begin of that active wifely devotion which be to strengthen she husband 's life and exal she own ? never perhaps , as she have preconceive they ; but somehow -- still somehow . in this solemnly pledge union of she life , duty would present itself in some new form of inspiration and give a new meaning to wifely love . meanwhile there be the snow and the low arch of dun vapor -- there be the stifling oppression of that gentlewoman 's world , where everything be do for she and none ask for she aid -- where the sense of connection with a manifold pregnant existence have to be keep up painfully as a inward vision , instead of come from without in claim that would have shape she energie .-- " what shall I do ? " " whatever you please , my dear : " that have be she brief history since she have leave off learn morning lesson and practise silly rhythm on the hate piano . marriage , which be to bring guidance into worthy and imperative occupation , have not yet freed she from the gentlewoman 's oppressive liberty : it have not even fill she leisure with the ruminant joy of unchecked tenderness . she bloom full - pulse youth stand there in a moral imprisonment which make itself one with the chill , colorless , narrowed landscape , with the shrunken furniture , the never-read book , and the ghostly stag in a pale fantastic world that seem to be vanish from the daylight . in the first minute when look out she feel nothing but the dreary oppression ; then come a keen remembrance , and turn away from the window she walk round the room . the idea and hope which be live in she mind when she first see this room nearly three month before be present now only as memory : she judge they as we judge transient and depart thing . all existence seem to beat with a lower pulse than she own , and she religious faith be a solitary cry , the struggle out of a nightmare in which every object be wither and shrink away from she . each remember thing in the room be disenchant , be deaden as a unlit transparency , till she wander come to the group of miniature , and there at last she see something which have gather new breath and mean : it be the miniature of 's aunt , who have make the unfortunate marriage -- of 's grandmother . Dorothea could fancy that it be alive now -- the delicate woman 's face which yet have a headstrong look , a peculiarity difficult to interpret . be it only she friend who think she marriage unfortunate ? or do she herself find it out to be a mistake , and taste the salt bitterness of she tear in the merciful silence of the night ? what breadth of experience seem to have pass over since she first look at this miniature ! she feel a new companionship with it , as if it have a ear for she and could see how she be look at it . here be a woman who have know some difficulty about marriage . Nay , the color deepen , the lip and ching seem to get larger , the hair and eye seem to be send out light , the face be masculine and beam on she with that full gaze which tell she on whom it fall that she be too interesting for the slightest movement of she eyelid to pass unnoticed and uninterpreted . the vivid presentation come like a pleasant glow to : she feel herself smile , and turn from the miniature sit down and look up as if she be again talk to a figure in front of she . but the smile disappear as she go on meditating , and at last she say aloud -- " oh , it be cruel to speak so ! how sad -- how dreadful ! " she rise quickly and go out of the room , hurrie along the corridor , with the irresistible impulse to go and see she husband and inquire if she could do anything for he . perhaps be gone and be alone in the library . she feel as if all she morning 's gloom would vanish if she could see she husband glad because of she presence . but when she reach the head of the dark oak there be come up , and below there be , exchange welcom and congratulation with . " ! " say , in she quiet staccato ; then kiss she sister , whose arm encircle she , and say no more . I think they both cry a little in a furtive manner , while run down - stair to greet she uncle . " I need
need not ask how you be , my dear , " say , after kiss she forehead . " have agree with you , I see -- happiness , fresco , the antique -- that sort of thing . well , it be very pleasant to have you back again , and you understand all about art now , eh ? but be a little pale , I tell he - - a little pale , you know . study hard in he holiday be carry it rather too far . I overdo it at one time " -- . still hold 's hand , but have turn he face to -- " about topography , ruin , temple -- I think I have a clew , but I see it would carry I too far , and nothing might come of it . you may go any length in that sort of thing , and nothing may come of it , you know . " 's eye also be turn up to she husband 's face with some anxiety at the idea that those who see he afresh after absence might be aware of sign which she have not notice . " nothing to alarm you , my dear , " say , observe she expression . " a little English beef and mutton will soon make a difference . it be all very well to look pale , sit for the portrait of , you know -- we get you letter just in time . but , now -- he be a little too subtle , be not he ? do anybody read ? " " he be not indeed a author adapt to superficial mind , " say , meet these timely question with dignified patience . " you would like coffee in you own room , uncle ? " say , come to the rescue . " yes ; and you must go to : she have great news to tell you , you know . I leave it all to she . " the blue - green boudoir look much more cheerful when be seat there in a pelisse exactly like she sister 's , survey the cameo with a placid satisfaction , while the conversation pass on to other topics . " do you think it nice to go to on a wedding journey ? " say , with she ready delicate blush which be use to on the smallest occasion . " it would not suit all -- not you , dear , for example , " say , quietly . no one would ever know what she think of a wedding journey to . " Mr . Cadwallader say it be nonsense , people go a long journey when they be marry . she say they get tired to death of each other , and can not quarrel comfortably , as they would at home . and say she go to . " 's color change again and again -- seem " to come and go with tiding from the heart , as it a run messenger have be . " it must mean more than 's blushing usually do . " ! have something happen ? " say , in a tone full of sisterly feel . " have you really any great news to tell I ? " " it be because you go away , . then there be nobody but I for to talk to , " say , with a certain roguishness in she eye . " I understand . it be as I use to hope and believe , " say , take she sister 's face between she hand , and look at she half anxiously . 's marriage seem more serious than it use to do . " it be only three day ago , " say . " and be very kind . " " and you be very happy ? " " yes . we be not go to be marry yet . because every thing be to be get ready . and I do not want to be marry so very soon , because I think it be nice to be engage . and we shall be marry all we life after . " " I do believe you could not marry better , . be a good , honorable man , " say , warmly . " he have go on with the cottage , . he will tell you about they when he come . shall you be glad to see he ? " " of course I shall . how can you ask I ? " " only I be afraid you would be get so learned , " say , regard 's learn as a kind of damp which might in due time saturate a neighbor body . . " I find that no genius in another could please I . my unfortunate paradox have entirely dry up that source of comfort."--GOLDSMIth . one morning , some week after she arrival at , -- but why always ? be she point of view the only possible one with regard to this marriage ? I protest against all we interest , all we effort at understanding be give to the young skin that look blooming in spite of trouble ; for these too will get faded , and will know the older and more eat grief which we be help to neglect . in spite of the blinking eye and white mole objectionable to , and the want of muscular curve which be morally painful to , have a intense consciousness within he , and be spiritually a - hungere like the rest of we . he have do nothing exceptional in marry -- nothing but what sociey sanction , and consider a occasion for wreat and bouquet . it have occur to he that he must not any
any longer defer he intention of matrimony , and he have reflecte that in take a wife , a man of good position should expect and carefully choose a blooming young lady -- the younger the better , because more educable and submissive -- of a rank equal to he own , of religious principle , virtuous disposition , and good understanding . on such a young lady he would make handsome settlement , and he would neglect no arrangement for she happiness : in return , he should receive family pleasur and leave behind he that copy of himself which see so urgently require of a man -- to the sonneteer of the sixteenth century . have alter since then , and no sonneteer have insist on 's leave a copy of himself ; moreover , he have not yet succeed in issue copy of he mythological key ; but he have always intend to acquit himself by marriage , and the sense that he be fast leave the year behind he , that the world be get dimmer and that he feel lonely , be a reason to he for lose no more time in overtaking domestic delight before they too be leave behind by the year . and when he have see he believe that he have find even more than he demand : she might really be such a helpmate to he as would enable he to dispense with a hire secretary , a aid which have never yet employ and have a suspicious dread of . ( be nervously conscious that he be expect to manifest a powerful mind . ) , in its kindness , have supply he with the wife he need . a wife , a modest young lady , with the purely appreciative , unambitious ability of she sex , be sure to think she husband 's mind powerful . whether have take equal care of in present she with be a idea which could hardly occur to he . never make the preposterous demand that a man should think as much about he own qualifications for make a charming girl happy as he think of hers for make himself happy . as if a man could choose not only he wife hut he wife 's husband ! or as if he be bound to provide charms for he posterity in he own person !-- when accept he with effusion , that be only natural ; and believe that he happiness be go to begin . he have not have much foretaste of happiness in he previous life . to know intense joy without a strong bodily frame , one must have a enthusiastic soul . have never have a strong bodily frame , and he soul be sensitive without be enthusiastic : it be too languid to thrill out of self - consciousness into passionate delight ; it go on fluttering in the swampy ground where it be hatch , think of its wing and never fly . he experience be of that pitiable kind which shrink from pity , and fear most of all that it should be know : it be that proud narrow sensitiveness which have not mass enough to spare for transformation into sympathy , and quiver thread - like in small current of self - preoccupation or at best of a egoistic scrupulosity . and have many scruple : he be capable of a severe self - restraint ; he be resolute in be a man of honor accord to the code ; he would be unimpeachable by any recognize opinion . in conduct these end have be attain ; but the difficulty of make he to all Mythologies unimpeachable weigh like lead upon he mind ; and the pamphlet -- or " " as he call they -- by which he test he public and deposite small monumental record of he march , be far from have be see in all they significance . he suspect the of not have read they ; he be in painful doubt as to what be really think of they by the lead mind of , and bitterly convince that he old acquaintance have be the writer of that depreciatory recension which be keep lock in a small drawer of 's desk , and also in a dark closet of he verbal memory . these be heavy impression to struggle against , and bring that melancholy embitterment which be the consequence of all excessive claim : even he religious faith waver with he wavering trust in he own authorship , and the consolation of the hope in immortality seem to lean on the immortality of the still unwritten to all Mythologies . for my part I be very sorry for he . it be a uneasy lot at best , to be what we call highly teach and yet not to enjoy : to be present at this great spectacle of life and never to be liberate from a small hungry shivering self -- never to be fully possess by the glory we behold , never to have we consciousness rapturously transform into the vividness of a thought , the ardor of a passion , the energy of a action , but always to be scholarly and uninspired , ambitious and timid , scrupulous and dim-sighted . become a dean or even a bishop would make little difference , I fear , to 's uneasiness . doubtless some ancient have observ that behind the big mask and the speaking - trumpet , there must always be we poor little eye pee as usual and we timorous lip more or less under anxious control . to this mental estate map out a quarter of a century before , to sensibility thus fenced in , have think of annexing happiness with a lovely young bride ; but even before marriage , as we have see , he find himself under a
a new depression in the consciousness that the new bliss be not blissful to he . Inclination year back to its old , easier custom . and the deeper he go in domesticity the more do the sense of acquitt himself and act with propriety predominate over any other satisfaction . marriage , like religion and erudition , nay , like authorship itself , be fate to become a outward requirement , and be bent on fulfil unimpeachably all requirement . even draw into use in he study , accord to he own intention before marriage , be a effort which he be always temp to defer , and but for she pleading insistence it might never have begun . but she have succeed in make it a matter of course that she should take she place at a early hour in the library and have work either of reading aloud or copy assigne she . the work have be easier to define because have adopt a immediate intention : there be to be a new , a small monograph on some lately trace indication concern the egyptian mystery whereby certain assertion of 's could be correct . reference be extensive even here , but not altogether shoreless ; and sentence be actually to be write in the shape wherein they would be scan by and a less formidable posterity . these minor monumental productions be always exciting to ; digestion be make difficult by the interference of citation , or by the rivalry of dialectical phrasis ring against each other in he brain . and from the first there be to be a Latin dedication about which everything be uncertain except that it be not to be address to : it be a poisonous regret to that he have once address a dedication to Carp in which he have number that member of the animal kingdom among the viro nullo aevo perituro , a mistake which would infallibly lay the dedicator open to ridicule in the next age , and might even be chuckle over by and in the present . thus be in one of he busiest epoch , and as I begin to say a little while ago , join he early in the library where he have breakfast alone . at this time be on a second visit to , probably the last before she marriage , and be in the drawing - room expect . have learn to read the sign of she husband 's mood , and she see that the morning have become more foggy there during the last hour . she be go silently to she desk when he say , in that distant tone which imply that he be discharge a disagreeable duty -- " Dorothea , here be a letter for you , which be enclose in one address to I . " it be a letter of two page , and she immediately look at the signature . " ! what can he have to say to I ? " she exclaim , in a tone of pleased surprise . " but , " she add , look at , " I can imagine what he have write to you about . " " you can , if you please , read the letter , " say , severely point to it with he pen , and not look at she . " but I may as well say beforehand , that I must decline the proposal it contain to pay a visit here . I trust I may be excused for desire a interval of complete freedom from such distraction as have be hithertoo inevitable , and especially from guest whose desultory vivacity make they presence a fatigue . " there have be no clashing of temper between and she husband since that little explosion in , which have leave such strong trace in she mind that it have be easier ever since to quell emotion than to incur the consequence of vent it . but this ill - temper anticipation that she could desire visit which might be disagreeable to she husband , this gratuitous defence of himself against selfish complaint on she part , be too sharp a sting to be meditate on until after it have be resent . have think that she could have be patient with , but she have never imagine he behave in this way ; and for a moment seem to be stupidly undiscerning and odiously unjust . Pity , that " new - bear babe " which be by - and - by to rule many a storm within she , do not " stride the blast " on this occasion . with she first word , uttere in a tone that shook he , she start into look at she , and meet the flash of she eye . " why do you attribute to I a wish for anything that would annoy you ? you speak to I as if I be something you have to contend against . wait at least till I appear to consult my own pleasure apart from yours . " " Dorothea , you be hasty , " answer , nervously . Decidedly , this woman be too young to be on the formidable level of wifehood -- unless she have be pale and feature less and take everything for grant . " I think it be you who be first hasty in you false supposition about my feeling , " say , in the same tone . the fire be not dissipate yet , and she think it be ignoble in she husband not to apologize to she . " we will , if you please , say no more on this subject , . I have neither leisure nor energy for this kind of debate . " here dip he pen and make as if he would return to he writing
writing , though he hand tremble so much that the word seem to be write in a unknown character . there be answer which , in turn away wrath , only send it to the other end of the room , and to have a discussion coolly waive when you feel that justice be all on you own side be even more exasperating in marriage than in philosophy . leave 's two letter unread on she husband 's writing - table and go to she own place , the scorn and indignation within she reject the reading of these letter , just as we hurl away any trash towards which we seem to have be suspect of mean cupidity . she do not in the least divine the subtle source of she husband 's bad temper about these letter : she only know that they have cause he to offend she . she begin to work at once , and she hand do not tremble ; on the contrary , in writing out the quotation which have be give to she the day before , she feel that she be form she letter beautifully , and it seem to she that she see the construction of the Latin she be copy , and which she be begin to understand , more clearly than usual . in she indignation there be a sense of superiority , but it go out for the present in firmness of stroke , and do not compress itself into a inward articulate voice pronounce the once " affable archangel " a poor creature . there have be this apparent quiet for half a hour , and have not look away from she own table , when she hear the loud bang of a book on the floor , and turn quickly see on the library step cling forward as if he be in some bodily distress . she start up and bounde towards he in a instant : he be evidently in great strait for breath . jump on a stool she get close to he elbow and say with she whole soul melt into tender alarm -- " can you lean on I , dear ? " he be still for two or three minute , which seem endless to she , unable to speak or move , gas for breath . when at last he descend the three step and fall backward in the large chair which have draw close to the foot of the ladder , he no longer gas but seem helpless and about to faint . Dorothea ring the bell violently , and presently be help to the couch : he do not faint , and be gradually revive , when come in , have be meet in the hall with the news that have " have a fit in the library . " " ! this be just what might have be expect , " be he immediate thought . if he prophetic soul have be urge to particularize , it seem to he that " fit " would have be the definite expression alight upon . he ask he informant , the butler , whether the doctor have be send for . the butler never know he master want the doctor before ; but would it not be right to send for a physician ? when enter the library , however , could make some sign of he usual politeness , and , who in the reaction from she first terror have be knee and sobb by he side now rise and herself propose that some one should ride off for a medical man . " I recommend you to send for , " say . " my mother have call he in , and she have find he uncommonly clever . she have have a poor opinion of the physician since my father 's death . " appeal to she husband , and he make a silent sign of approval . so be send for and he come wonderfully soon , for the messenger , who be 's man and know , meet he lead he horse along the road and give he arm to . , in the drawing - room , have know nothing of the trouble till tell she of it . after 's account , he no longer consider the illness a fit , but still something " of that nature . " " poor dear -- how dreadful ! " say , feel as much grieve as she own perfect happiness would allow . she little hand be clasp , and enclose by 's as a bud be enfold by a liberal calyx . " it be very shocking that should be ill ; but I never do like he . and I think he be not half fond enough of ; and he ought to be , for I be sure no one else would have have he -- do you think they would ? " " I always think it a horrible sacrifice of you sister , " say . " yes . but poor Dodo never do do what other people do , and I think she never will . " " she be a noble creature , " say the loyal - hear . he have just have a fresh impression of this kind , as he have see stretch she tender arm under she husband 's neck and look at he with unspeakable sorrow . he do not know how much penitence there be in the sorrow . " yes , " say , think it be very well for to say so , but _he would not have be comfortable with . " shall I go to she ? could I help she , do you think ? " " I think it would be well for you just to go and see she before come , "
" say , magnanimously . " only do not stay long . " while be go he walk up and down remember what he have originally feel about 's engagement , and feel a revival of he disgust at 's indifference . if -- if every one else have regard the affair as he , , have do , the marriage might have be hinder . it be wick to let a young girl blindly decide she fate in that way , without any effort to save she . have long cease to have any regret on he own account : he heart be satisfied with he engagement to . but he have a chivalrous nature ( be not the disinterested service of woman among the ideal glory of old chivalry ? ) : he disregarded love have not turn to bitterness ; its death have make sweet odor -- float memory that cling with a consecrat effect to . he could remain she brotherly friend , interpret she action with generous trustfulness . . " Qui veut delasser hors de propo , lasse . " -- . have no second attack of equal severity with the first , and in a few day begin to recover he usual condition . but seem to think the case worth a great deal of attention . he not only use he stethoscope ( which have not become a matter of course in practice at that time ) , but sit quietly by he patient and watch he . to 's question about himself , he reply that the source of the illness be the common error of intellectual man -- a too eager and monotonous application : the remedy be , to be satisfied with moderate work , and to seek variety of relaxation . , who sit by on one occasion , suggest that should go fishing , as do , and have a turning - room , make toy , table - leg , and that kind of thing . " in short , you recommend I to anticipate the arrival of my second childhood , " say poor , with some bitterness . " these thing , " he add , look at , " would be to I such relaxation as tow - picking be to prisoner in a house of correction . " " I confess , " say , smile , " amusement be rather a unsatisfactory prescription . it be something like tell people to keep up they spirit . perhaps I have better say , that you must submit to be mildly bore rather than to go on work . " " yes , yes , " say . " get to play backgammon with you in the evening . and shuttlecock , now -- I do not know a finer game than shuttlecock for the daytime . I remember it all the fashion . to be sure , you eye might not stand that , . but you must unbend , you know . why , you might take to some light study : conchology , now : it always think that must be a light study . or get to read you light thing , --' ,' ' :' they be a little broad , but she may read anything now she be marry , you know . I remember they make I laugh uncommonly -- there be a droll bit about a postilion 's breech . we have no such humor now . I have go through all these thing , but they might be rather new to you . " " as new as eat thistle , " would have be a answer to represent 's feeling . but he only bow resignedly , with due respect to he wife 's uncle , and observe that doubtless the work he mention have " serve as a resource to a certain order of mind . " " you see , " say the able magistrate to Lydgate , when they be outside the door , " have be a little narrow : it leave he rather at a loss when you forbid he he particular work , which I believe be something very deep indeed -- in the line of research , you know . I would never give way to that ; I be always versatile . but a clergyman be tie a little tight . if they would make he a bishop , now !-- he do a very good pamphlet for . he would have more movement then , more show ; he might get a little flesh . but I recommend you to talk to . she be clever enough for anything , be my niece . tell she , she husband want liveliness , diversion : put she on amusing tactic . " without 's advice , have determine on speak to . she have not be present while she uncle be throw out he pleasant suggestion as to the mode in which life at might be enliven , but she be usually by she husband 's side , and the unaffected sign of intense anxiety in she face and voice about whatever touch he mind or health , make a drama which be inclin to watch . he say to himself that he be only do right in tell she the truth about she husband 's probable future , but he certainly think also that it would be interesting to talk confidentially with she . a medical man like to make psychological observation , and sometimes in the pursuit of such study be too easily temp into momentous prophecy which life and death easily set at nuy . Lydgate have often be satirical on this gratuitous prediction , and he mean now to be guard . he ask for , but be tell that she be out walk , he be go away , when and
and appear , both glow from they struggle with the wind . when Lydgate beg to speak with she alone , open the library door which happen to be the nearest , think of nothing at the moment but what he might have to say about . it be the first time she have enter this room since she husband have be take ill , and the servant have choose not to open the shutter . but there be light enough to read by from the narrow upper pane of the window . " you will not mind this sombre light , " say , stand in the middle of the room . " since you forbade book , the library have be out of the question . but will soon be here again , I hope . be he not make progress ? " " yes , much more rapid progress than I at first expect . indeed , he be already nearly in he usual state of health . " " you do not fear that the illness will return ? " say , whose quick ear have detect some significance in 's tone . " such case be peculiarly difficult to pronounce upon , " say . " the only point on which I can be confident be that it will be desirable to be very watchful on 's account , lest he should in any way strain he nervous power . " " I beseech you to speak quite plainly , " say , in a imploring tone . " I can not bear to think that there might be something which I do not know , and which , if I have know it , would have make I act differently . " the word come out like a cry : it be evident that they be the voice of some mental experience which lay not very far off . " sit down , " she add , place herself on the nearest chair , and throw off she bonnet and glove , with a instinctive discarding of formality where a great question of destiny be concerned . " what you say now justify my own view , " say . " I think it be one 's function as a medical man to hinder regret of that sort as far as possible . but I beg you to observe that 's case be precisely of the kind in which the issue be most difficult to pronounce upon . he may possibly live for fifteen year or more , without much worse health than he have have hitherto . " have turn very pale , and when Lydgate pause she say in a low voice , " you mean if we be very careful . " " yes -- careful against mental agitation of all kind , and against excessive application . " " he would be miserable , if he have to give up he work , " say , with a quick prevision of that wretchedness . " I be aware of that . the only course be to try by all means , direct and indirect , to moderate and vary he occupations . with a happy concurrence of circumstance , there be , as I say , no immediate danger from that affection of the heart , which I believe to have be the cause of he late attack . on the other hand , it be possible that the disease may develop itself more rapidly : it be one of those ease in which death be sometimes sudden . nothing should be neglect which might be affect by such a issue . " there be silence for a few moment , while sit as if she have be turn to marble , though the life within she be so intense that she mind have never before sweep in brief time over a equal range of scene and motive . " help I , pray , " she say , at last , in the same low voice as before . " tell I what I can do . " " what do you think of foreign travel ? you have be lately in , I think . " the memory which make this resource utterly hopeless be a new current that shook out of she pallid immobility . " oh , that would not do -- that would be worse than anything , " she say with a more childlike despondency , while the tear roll down . " nothing will be of any use that he do not enjoy . " " I wish that I could have spare you this pain , " say , deeply touch , yet wonder about she marriage . woman just like have not enter into he tradition . " it be right of you to tell I . I thank you for tell I the truth . " " I wish you to understand that I shall not say anything to enlighten himself . I think it desirable for he to know nothing more than that he must not overwork himself , and must observe certain rule . Anxiety of any kind would be precisely the most unfavorable condition for he . " Lydgate rose , and mechanically rise at the same time ? unclasp she cloak and throw it off as if it stifle she . he be bow and quit she , when a impulse which if she have be alone would have turn into a prayer , make she say with a sob in she voice -- " oh , you be a wise man , be you not ? you know all about life and death . advise I . think what I can do . he have be labore all he life and look forward . he mind about nothing else .-- and I mind about nothing else
else -- " for year after remembe the impression produce in he by this involuntary appeal -- this cry from soul to , without other consciousness than they move with kindred nature in the same embroiled medium , the same troublous fitfully illuminated life . but what could he say now except that he should see again to - morrow ? when he be gone , 's tear gush forth , and relieve she stifle oppression . then she dry she eye , remind that she distress must not be betrayed to she husband ; and look round the room think that she must order the servant to attend to it as usual , since might now at any moment wish to enter . on he writing - table there be letter which have alain untouched since the morning when he be take ill , and among they , as Dorothea well remember , there be young Ladislaw 's letter , the one address to she still unopen . the associations of these letter have be make the more painful by that sudden attack of illness which she feel that the agitation cause by she anger might have help to bring on : it would be time enough to read they when they be again thrust upon she , and she have have no inclination to fetch they from the library . but now it occur to she that they should be put out of she husband 's sight : whatever might have be the source of he annoyance about they , he must , if possible , not be annoye again ; and she run she eye first over the letter address to he to assure herself whether or not it would be necessary to write in order to hinder the offensive visit . will write from , and begin by say that he obligation to be too deep for all thanks not to seem impertinent . it be plain that if he be not grateful , he must be the poorest -spirit rascal who have ever find a generous friend . to expand in wordy thanks would be like say , " I be honest . " but will have come to perceive that he defect -- defect which have himself often point to -- need for they correction that more strenuous position which he relative 's generosity have hithertoo prevent from be inevitable . he trust that he should make the best return , if return be possible , by show the effectiveness of the education for which he be indebt , and by ceasing in future to need any diversion towards himself of fund on which other might have a better claim . he be come to , to try he fortune , as many other young man be obliged to do whose only capital be in they brain . he friend have desire he to take charge of the " dispute " -- the picture pain for , with whose permission , and 's , will would convey it to Lowick in person . a letter address to the in within the fortnight would hinder he , if necessary , from arrive at a inconvenient moment . he enclose a letter to in which he continue a discussion about art , begin with she in . open she own letter see that it be a lively continuation of he remonstrance with she fanatical sympathy and she want of sturdy neutral delight in thing as they be -- a outpouring of he young vivacity which it be impossible to read just now . she have immediately to consider what be to be do about the other letter : there be still time perhaps to prevent from come to . end by give the letter to she uncle , who be still in the house , and begge he to let will know that have be ill , and that he health would not allow the reception of any visitor . no one more ready than to write a letter : he only difficulty be to write a short one , and he idea in this case expand over the three large page and the inward folding . he have simply say to -- " to be sure , I will write , my dear . he be a very clever young fellow -- this young Ladislaw -- I dare say will be a rising young man . it be a good letter -- mark he sense of thing , you know . however , I will tell he about . " but the end of 's pen be a think organ , evolve sentence , especially of a benevolent kind , before the rest of he mind could well overtake they . it express regret and propose remedy , which , when read they , see felicitously worded -- surprisingly the right thing , and determine a sequel which he have never before think of . in this case , he pen find it such a pity young should not have come into the neighborhood just at that time , in order that might make he acquaintance more fully , and that they might go over the long -neglected italian drawing together -- it also feel such a interest in a young man who be start in life with a stock of idea -- that by the end of the second page it have persuade to invite young , since he could not be receive at , to come to . why not ? they could find a great many thing to do together , and this be a period of peculiar growth -- the political horizon be expand , and -- in short , 's pen go off into a little speech which it have lately report for that imperfectly edit organ the " . " while be seal this letter , he feel elate with
with a influx of dim project :-- a young man capable of put idea into form , the " " purchase to clear the pathway for a new candidate , document utilize -- who know what might come of it all ? since be go to marry immediately , it would be very pleasant to have a young fellow at table with he , at least for a time . but he go away without tell what he have put into the letter , for she be engage with she husband , and -- in fact , these thing be of no importance to she . . how will you know the pitch of that great bell too large for you to stir ? let but a flute play ' neath the fine - mix metal listen close till the right note flow forth , a silvery rill . then shall the huge bell tremble -- then the mass with myriad wave concurrent shall respond in low soft unison . Lydgate that evening speak to of , and lay some emphasis on the strong feeling she appear to have for that formal studious man thirty year older than herself . " of course she be devote to she husband , " say , imply a notion of necessary sequence which the scientific man regard as the prettiest possible for a woman ; but she be think at the same time that it be not so very melancholy to be mistress of with a husband likely to die soon . " do you think she very handsome ? " " she certainly be handsome , but I have not think about it , " say . " I suppose it would be unprofessional , " say , dimpl . " but how you practice be spread ! you be call in before to the , I think ; and now , the Casaubon . " " yes , " say , in a tone of compulsory admission . " but I do not really like attend such people so well as the poor . the case be more monotonous , and one have to go through more fuss and listen more deferentially to nonsense . " " not more than in , " say . " and at least you go through wide corridor and have the scent of rose - leave everywhere . " " that be true , , " say , just bend he head to the table and lifte with he fourth finger she delicate handkerchief which lay at the mouth of she reticule , as if to enjoy its scent , while he look at she with a smile . but this agreeable holiday freedom with which hover about the flower of , could not continue indefinitely . it be not more possible to find social isolation in that town than elsewhere , and two people persistently flirt could by no means escape from " the various entanglement , weight , blow , clashing , motion , by which thing severally go on . " whatever do must be remark , and she be perhaps the more conspicuous to admirer and critic because just now , after some struggle , have go with to stay a little while at , there be no other way of at once gratify old Featherstone and keep watch against , who appear a less tolerable daughter - in - law in proportion as 's illness disappear . , for example , come a little oftener into to see , now she be alone . for have a true sisterly feeling for she brother ; always think that he might have marry better , but wish well to the child . now have a long - stand intimacy with . they have nearly the same preference in silk , pattern for underclothing , china - ware , and clergyman ; they confide they little trouble of health and household management to each other , and various little point of superiority on 's side , namely , more decided seriousness , more admiration for mind , and a house outside the town , sometimes serve to give color to they conversation without divide they -- well - mean woman both , know very little of they own motive . , pay a morning visit to , happen to say that she could not stay longer , because she be go to see poor . " why do you say ' poor Rosamond ' ? " say , a round - ey sharp little woman , like a tame falcon . " she be so pretty , and have be bring up in such thoughtlessness . the mother , you know , have always that levity about she , which make I anxious for the child . " " well , , if I be to speak my mind , " say , with emphasis , " I must say , anybody would suppose you and would be delighted with what have happen , for you have do everything to put forward . " " , what do you mean ? " say , in genuine surprise . " not but what I be truly thankful for 's sake , " say . " he could certainly better afford to keep such a wife than some people can ; but I should wish he to look elsewhere . still a mother have anxiety , and some young man would take to a bad life in consequence . besides , if I be oblige to speak , I should say I be not fond of strangers come into a town . " " I do not know , , " say , with a little emphasis in she turn . " be a stranger here at one time . and be stranger in the land , and we be tell to entertain stranger . and
and especially , " she add , after a slight pause , " when they be unexceptionable . " " I be not speak in a religious sense , . I speak as a mother . " " , I be sure you have never hear I say anything against a niece of mine marry you son . " " oh , it be pride in -- I be sure it be nothing else , " say . , who have never before give all she confidence to " " on this subject . " no young man in be good enough for she : I have hear she mother say as much . that be not a spirit , I think . but now , from all I hear , she have find a man as proud as herself . " " you do not mean that there be anything between and ? " say , rather mortified at find out she own ignorance . " be it possible you do not know , ? " " oh , I go about so little ; and I be not fond of gossip ; I really never hear any . you see so many people that I do not see . you circle be rather different from ours . " " well , but you own niece and 's great favorite -- and yours too , I be sure , ! I think , at one time , you mean he for , when she be a little older . " " I do not believe there can be anything serious at present , " say . " my brother would certainly have tell I . " " well , people have different way , but I understand that nobody can see and together without take they to be engage . however , it be not my business . shall I put up the pattern of mitten ? " after this . drive to she niece with a mind newly weight . she be herself handsomely dress , but she notice with a little more regret than usual that , who be just come in and meet she in walking - dress , be almost as expensively equip . be a feminine smaller edition of she brother , and have none of she husband 's low - toned pallor . she have a good honest glance and use no circumlocution . " you be alone , I see , my dear , " she say , as they enter the drawing - room together , look round gravely . feel sure that she aunt have something particular to say , and they sit down near each other . nevertheless , the quilling inside 's bonnet be so charme that it be impossible not to desire the same kind of thing for , and 's eye , which be rather fine , roll round that ample quill circuit , while she speak . " I have just hear something about you that have surprise I very much , . " " what be that , aunt ? " 's eye also be roam over she aunt 's large embroidered collar . " I can hardly believe it -- that you should be engage without my know it -- without you father 's tell I . " here 's eye finally rest on 's , who blush deeply , and say -- " I be not engage , aunt . " " how be it that every one say so , then -- that it be the town 's talk ? " " the town 's talk be of very little consequence , I think , " say , inwardly gratify . " oh , my dear , be more thoughtful ; do not despise you neighbor so . remember you be turn twenty - two now , and you will have no fortune : you father , I be sure , will not be able to spare you anything . be very intellectual and clever ; I know there be a attraction in that . I like talk to such man myself ; and you uncle find he very useful . but the profession be a poor one here . to be sure , this life be not everything ; but it be seldom a medical man have true religious view -- there be too much pride of intellect . and you be not fit to marry a poor man . " be not a poor man , aunt . he have very high connections . " " he tell I himself he be poor . " " that be because he be use to people who have a high style " my dear Rosamond , _you must not think of live in high style . " look down and play with she reticule . she be not a fiery young lady and have no sharp answer , but she mean to live as she please . " then it be really true ? " say , look very earnestly at she niece . " you be think of -- there be some understanding between you , though you father do not know . be open , my dear Rosamond : have really make you a offer ? " 's feeling be very unpleasant . she have be quite easy as to 's feeling and intention , but now when she aunt put this question she do not like be unable to say yes . she pride be hurt , but she habitual control of manner help she . " pray excuse I , aunt . I would rather not speak on the subject . " " you would not give you heart to a man without a decided prospect , I trust , my dear . and think of the two excellent offer I know of that you have refuse !--
!-- and one still within you reach , if you will not throw it away . I know a very great beauty who marry badly at last , by do so . Plymdale be a nice young man -- some might think good - look ; and a only son ; and a large business of that kind be better than a profession . not that marry be everything . I would have you seek first the kingdom of . but a girl should keep she heart within she own power . " " I should never give it to , if it be . I have already refuse he . if I love , I should love at once and without change , " say , with a great sense of be a romantic heroine , and play the part prettily . " I see how it be , my dear , " say , in a melancholy voice , rise to go . " you have allow you affections to be engage without return . " " no , indeed , aunt , " say , with emphasis . " then you be quite confident that have a serious attachment to you ? " 's cheek by this time be persistently burn , and she feel much mortification . she choose to be silent , and she aunt go away all the more convinced . in thing worldly and indifferent be dispose to do what he wife bay he , and she now , without tell she reason , desire he on the next opportunity to find out in conversation with whether he have any intention of marry soon . the result be a decided negative . , on be cross-question , show that have speak as no man would who have any attachment that could issue in matrimony . now feel that she have a serious duty before she , and she soon manage to arrange a tete - a - tete with , in which she pass from inquirie about 's health , and expression of she sincere anxiety for she brother 's large family , to general remark on the dangers which lay before young people with regard to they settlement in life . young man be often wild and disappoint , make little return for the money spend on they , and a girl be expose to many circumstance which might interfere with she prospect . " especially when she have great attraction , and she parent see much company , " say " gentlemen pay she attention , and engross she all to themselves , for the mere pleasure of the moment , and that drive off other . I think it be a heavy responsibility , Lydgate , to interfere with the prospect of any girl . " here fix she eye on he , with a unmistakable purpose of warning , if not of rebuke . " clearly , " say , look at she -- perhaps even sta a little in return . " on the other hand , a man must be a great coxcomb to go about with a notion that he must not pay attention to a young lady lest she should fall in love with he , or lest other should think she must . " " oh , , you know well what you advantage be . you know that we young man here can not cope with you . where you frequent a house it may militate very much against a girl 's make a desirable settlement in life , and prevent she from accept offer even if they be make . " be less flatter by he advantage over the than he be annoye by the perception of 's meaning . she feel that she have speak as impressively as it be necessary to do , and that in use the superior word " militate " she have throw a noble drapery over a mass of particular which be still evident enough . be fume a little , push he hair back with one hand , feel curiously in he waistcoat - pocket with the other , and then stoop to beckon the tiny black spaniel , which have the insight to decline he hollow caress . it would not have be decent to go away , because he have be dine with other guest , and have just take tea . but , have no doubt that she have be understood , turn the conversation . 's , I think , have omit to say , that as the sore palate findeth grit , so a uneasy consciousness heareth innuendoe . the next day , part from in the street , suppose that they should meet at 's in the evening . answer curtly , no -- he have work to do -- he must give up go out in the evening . " what ! you be go to get lashed to the mast , eh , and be stop you ear ? " say the . " well , if you do not mean to be win by the siren , you be right to take precaution in time . " a few day before , would have take no notice of these word as anything more than the 's usual way of put thing . they seem now to convey a innuendo which confirm the impression that he have be make a fool of himself and behave so as to be misunderstand : not , he believe , by herself ; she , he feel sure , take everything as lightly as he intend it . she have a exquisite tact and insight in relation to all point of manners ; but the people she live among be blunderer and busybody . however , the mistake should go no farther . he resolve -- and keep he resolution -- that
that he would not go to 's except on business . become very unhappy . the uneasiness first stir by she aunt 's question grow and grow till at the end of ten day that she have not see Lydgate , it grow into terror at the blank that might possibly come -- into foreboding of that ready , fatal sponge which so cheaply wipe out the hope of mortal . the world would have a new dreariness for she , as a wilderness that a magician 's spell have turn for a little while into a garden . she feel that she be begin to know the pang of disappointed love , and that no other man could be the occasion of such delightful aerial building as she have be enjoy for the last six month . poor lose she appetite and feel as forlorn as -- as a charming stage leave behind with all she box full of costume and no hope of a coach . there be many wonderful mixture in the world which be all alike call love , and claim the privileges of a sublime rage which be a apology for everything ( in literature and the drama ) . do not think of commit any desperate act : she plait she fair hair as beautifully as usual , and keep herself proudly calm . she most cheerful supposition be that she aunt have interfere in some way to hinder 's visit : everything be better than a spontaneous indifference in he . any one who imagine ten day too short a time -- not for fall into leanness , lightness , or other measurable effect of passion , but -- for the whole spiritual circuit of alarmed conjecture and disappointment , be ignorant of what can go on in the elegant leisure of a young lady 's mind . on the eleventh day , however , Lydgate when leave be request by . Vincy to let she husband know that there be a mark change in 's health , and that she wish he to come to on that day . now Lydgate might have call at the warehouse , or might have write a message on a leaf of he pocket - book and leave it at the door . yet these simple device apparently do not occur to he , from which we may conclude that he have no strong objection to call at the house at a hour when be not at home , and leave the message with . a man may , from various motive , decline to give he company , but perhaps not even a sage would be gratify that nobody miss he . it would be a graceful , easy way of piecing on the new habits to the old , to have a few playful word with about he resistance to dissipation , and he firm resolve to take long fast even from sweet sound . it must be confess , also , that momentary speculation as to all the possible grounds for 's hint have manage to get woven like slight cling hairs into the more substantial web of he thought . be alone , and blush so deeply when come in that he feel a corresponding embarrassment , and instead of any playfulness , he begin at once to speak of he reason for call , and to beg she , almost formally , to deliver the message to she father . , who at the first moment feel as if she happiness be return , be keenly hurt by 's manner ; she blush have depart , and she assent coldly , without add a unnecessary word , some trivial chain - work which she have in she hand enable she to avoid look at higher than he ching . in all failure , the beginning be certainly the half of the whole . after sit two long moment while he move he whip and could say nothing , rose to go , and , make nervous by she struggle between mortification and the wish not to betray it , drop she chain as if start , and rise too , mechanically . instantaneously stoop to pick up the chain . when he rise he be very near to a lovely little face set on a fair long neck which he have be use to see turn about under the most perfect management of self - contente . but as he raise he eye now he see a certain helpless quivering which touch he quite newly , and make he look at with a question flash . at this moment she be as natural as she have ever be when she be five year old : she feel that she tear have risen , and it be no use to try to do anything else than let they stay like water on a blue flower or let they fall over she cheek , even as they would . that moment of naturalness be the crystallizing feather -touch : it shook flirtation into love . remember that the ambitious man who be look at those forget - I - not under the water be very warm - hear and rash . he do not know where the chain go ; a idea have thrill through the recess within he which have a miraculous effect in raise the power of passionate love lie bury there in no seal sepulchre , but under the lightest , easily pierce mould . he word be quite abrupt and awkward ; but the tone make they sound like a ardent , appeal avowal . " what be the matter ? you be distress . tell I , pray . " have never be speak to in such tones before . I be not sure that she know what the word be : but she look at and the tear
tear fell over she cheek . there could have be no more complete answer than that silence , and , forget everything else , completely mastere by the outrush of tenderness at the sudden belief that this sweet young creature depend on he for she joy , actually put he arm round she , fold she gently and protectingly -- he be use to be gentle with the weak and suffering -- and kiss each of the two large tear . this be a strange way of arrive at a understanding , but it be a short way . be not angry , but she move backward a little in timid happiness , and could now sit near she and speak less incompletely . have to make she little confession , and he pour out word of gratitude and tenderness with impulsive lavishment . in half a hour he leave the house a engage man , whose soul be not he own , but the woman 's to whom he have bound himself . he come again in the evening to speak with , who , just return from , be feel sure that it would not be long before he hear of 's demise . the felicitous word " demise , " which have seasonably occurred to he , have raise he spirits even above they usual evening pitch . the right word be always a power , and communicate its definiteness to we action . consider as a demise , old 's death assume a merely legal aspect , so that could tap he snuff - box over it and be jovial , without even a intermittent affectation of solemnity ; and hate both solemnity and affectation . who be ever awe struck about a testator , or sang a hymn on the title to real property ? be inclin to take a jovial view of all thing that even : he even observe to Lydgate that have get the family constitution after all , and would soon be as fine a fellow as ever again ; and when he approbation of 's engagement be ask for , he give it with astonishing facility , pass at once to general remark on the desirableness of matrimony for young man and maiden , and apparently deduce from the whole the appropriateness of a little more punch . . " they will take suggestion as a cat lap milk . " -- Shakespeare : . the triumphant confidence of the founde on 's insistent demand that and he mother should not leave he , be a feeble emotion compare with all that be agitat the breast of the old man 's blood - relation , who naturally manifest more they sense of the family tie and be more visibly numerous now that he have become bedridden . naturally : for when " poor " have occupy he arm -chair in the wainscote parlor , no assiduous beetle for whom the cook prepare boiling water could have be less welcome on a hearth which they have reason for preferring , than those persons whose Featherstone blood be ill - nourished , not from penuriousness on they part , but from poverty . and be rich , and the family candor and total abstinence from false politeness with which they be always receive seem to they no argument that they brother in the solemn act of make he will would overlook the superior claim of wealth . themselves at least he have never be unnatural enough to banish from he house , and it seem hardly eccentric that he should have keep away , , and the rest , who have no shadow of such claim . they know 's maxim , that money be a good egg , and should be laid in a warm nest . but , , and all the needy exile , hold a different point of view . Probability be as various as the face to be see at will in fretwork or paper - hanging : every form be there , from to , if you only look with creative inclination . to the poorer and least favore it seem likely that since have do nothing for they in he life , he would remember they at the last . argue that man like to make a surprise of they will , while say that nobody need be surprised if he leave the best part of he money to those who least expect it . also it be not to be think but that a own brother " lie there " with dropsy in he leg must come to feel that blood be thicker than water , and if he do not alter he will , he might have money by he . at any rate some blood - relation should be on the premise and on the watch against those who be hardly relation at all . such thing have be know as for will and dispute will , which seem to have the golden - hazy advantage of somehow enable non-legatee to live out of they . again , those who be no blood - relation might be catch make away with thing -- and poor " lie there " helpless ! somebody should be on the watch . but in this conclusion they be at one with and ; also , some nephew , niece , and cousin , argue with still greater subtilty as to what might be do by a man able to " will away " he property and give himself large treat of oddity , feel in a handsome sort of way that there be a family interest to be attend to , and think of as a place which it would be nothing but right for they to visit . , otherwise , live with some wheeziness in the , could not undertake the journey ; but she
she son , as be poor 's own nephew , could represent she advantageously , and watch lest he uncle should make a unfair use of the improbable thing which seem likely to happen . in fact there be a general sense run in the blood that everybody must watch everybody else , and that it would be well for everybody else to reflect that the be watch he . thus continually see one or other blood - relation alighting or departing , and have the unpleasant task of carry they message to , who would see none of they , and send she down with the still more unpleasant task of tell they so . as manager of the household she feel bound to ask they in good provincial fashion to stay and eat ; but she choose to consult Mrs . Vincy on the point of extra down - stair consumption now that be lay up . " oh , my dear , you must do thing handsomely where there be last illness and a property . know , I do not grudge they every ham in the house -- only , save the best for the funeral . have some stuffe veal always , and a fine cheese in cut . you must expect to keep open house in these last illness , " say liberal Mrs . Vincy , once more of cheerful note and bright plumage . but some of the visitor alight and do not depart after the handsome treat to veal and ham . , for example ( there be such unpleasant people in most family ; perhaps even in the highest aristocracy there be Brobdingnag specimen , gigantically in debt and bloate at greater expense ) -- , I say , have come down in the world , be mainly support by a calling which he be modest enough not to boast of , though it be much better than swindl either on exchange or turf , but which do not require he presence at Brassing so long as he have a good corner to sit in and a supply of food . he choose the kitchen - corner , partly because he like it best , and partly because he do not want to sit with , concern whom he have a strong brotherly opinion . seat in a famious arm -chair and in he best suit , constantly within sight of good cheer , he have a comfortable consciousness of be on the premise , mingl with fleeting suggestion of and the bar at the Green man ; and he inform that he should not go out of reach of he brother while that poor fellow be above ground . the troublesome one in a family be usually either the wit or the idiot . be the wit among the Featherstones , and joke with the maid - servants when they come about the hearth , but seem to consider a suspicious character , and follow she with cold eye . would have borne this one pair of eye with comparative ease , but unfortunately there be young Cranch , who , have come all the way from the to represent he mother and watch he uncle , also feel it he duty to stay and to sit chiefly in the kitchen to give he uncle company . young Cranch be not exactly the balancing point between the wit and the idiot ,-- verge slightly towards the latter type , and squint so as to leave everything in doubt about he sentiment except that they be not of a forcible character . when enter the kitchen and begin to follow she with he cold detective eye , young Cranch turn he head in the same direction seem to insist on it that she should remark how he be squint , as if he do it with design , like the gypsy when read the testament to they . this be rather too much for poor Mary ; sometimes it make she bilious , sometimes it upset she gravity . one day that she have a opportunity she could not resist describe the kitchen scene to , who would not be hinder from immediately go to see it , affect simply to pass through . but no sooner do he face the four eye than he have to rush through the nearest door which happen to lead to the dairy , and there under the high roof and among the pans he give way to laughter which make a hollow resonance perfectly audible in the kitchen . he fle by another doorway , but , who have not before see 's white complexion , long leg , and pinch delicacy of face , prepare many sarcasm in which these point of appearance be wittily combine with the lowest moral attribute . " why , , _you_ do not wear such gentlemanly trousers -- you have not get half such fine long leg , " say to he nephew , wink at the same time , to imply that there be something more in these statement than they undeniableness . look at he leg , but leave it uncertain whether he preferre he moral advantage to a more vicious length of limb and reprehensible gentility of trouser . in the large wainscote parlor too there be constantly pair of eye on the watch , and own relative eager to be " sitter - up . " many come , lunch , and depart , but and the lady who have be for twenty - five year before she be . find it good to be there every day for hour , without other calculable occupation than that of observe the cunning ( who be so deep that she could be find out in nothing ) and give occasional dry wrinkly indication of crying -- as if capable of torrent in a wetter season
season -- at the thought that they be not allow to go into 's room . for the old man be dislike of he own family seem to get stronger as he get less able to amuse himself by say bite thing to they . too languid to st , he have the more venom refluent in he blood . not fully believe the message send through , they have present themselves together within the door of the bedroom , both in black -- . Waule have a white handkerchief partially unfold in she hand -- and both with face in a sort of half - mourn purple ; while Mrs . Vincy with she pink cheek and pink ribbon fly be actually administer a cordial to they own brother , and the light - complexion , he short hair curling as might be expect in a gambler 's , be lol at he ease in a large chair . no sooner catch sight of these funereal figure appear in spite of he order than rage come to strengthen he more successfully than the cordial . he be prop up on a bed - rest , and always have he gold - head stick lie by he . he seize it now and sweep it backwards and forwards in as large a area as he could , apparently to ban these ugly spectre , cry in a hoarse sort of screech -- " back , back , ! back , ! " " oh , . , " begin -- but put he hand before she repressingly . he be a large - cheek man , nearly seventy , with small furtive eye , and be not only of much blander temper but think himself much deeper than he brother ; indeed not likely to be deceive in any of he fellow- man , inasmuch as they could not well be more greedy and deceitful than he suspect they of being . even the invisible power , he think , be likely to be soothe by a bland parenthesis here and there -- come from a man of property , who might have be as impious as other . " , " he say , in a wheedling yet gravely official tone , " it be nothing but right I should speak to you about the and the Manganese . the know what I have get on my mind -- " " then he know more than I want to know , " say , lay down he stick with a show of truce which have a threat in it too , for he reverse the stick so as to make the gold handle a club in case of closer fighting , and look hard at 's bald head . " there be thing you might repent of , , for want of speak to I , " say , not advance , however . " I could sit up with you to - night , and with I , willingly , and you might take you own time to speak , or let I speak . " " yes , I shall take my own time -- you need not offer I yours , " say . " but you can not take you own time to die in , , " begin , with she usual woolly tone . " and when you lie speechless you may be tired of have stranger about you , and you may think of I and my child " -- but here she voice break under the touching think which she be attribute to she speechless brother ; the mention of ourselves be naturally affect . " no , I sha not , " say old , contradictiously . " I sha not think of any of you . I have make my will , I tell you , I have make my will . " here he turn he head towards , and swallow some more of he cordial . " some people would be asham to fill up a place belong by rights to other , " say , turn she narrow eye in the same direction . " oh , sister , " say , with ironical softness , " you and I be not fine , and handsome , and clever enough : we must be humble and let smart people push themselves before we . " 's spirit could not bear this : rise and look at , he say , " shall my mother and I leave the room , sir , that you may be alone with you friend ? " " sit down , I tell you , " say old , snappishly . " stop where you be . good - by , , " he add , try to wield he stick again , but fail now that he have reverse the handle . " good - by , . do not you come again . " " I shall be down - stair , brother , whether or no , " say . " I shall do my duty , and it remain to be see what the will allow . " " yes , in property go out of family , " say , in continuation , -- " and where there be steady young man to carry on . but I pity they who be not such , and I pity they mother . good - by , . " " remember , I be the eldest after you , , and prosper from the first , just as you do , and have get land already by the name of , " say , rely much on that reflection , as one which might be suggest in the watch of the night . " but I bid you good - by for the present . " they exit be
be hasten by they see old pull he wig on each side and shut he eye with he mouth -widening grimace , as if he be determined to be deaf and blind . none the less they come to daily and sit below at the post of duty , sometimes carry on a slow dialogue in a undertone in which the observation and response be so far apart , that any one hear they might have imagine himself listen to speak automata , in some doubt whether the ingenious mechanism would really work , or wind itself up for a long time in order to stick and be silent . and would have be sorry to be quick : what that lead to might be see on the other side of the wall in the person of . but they watch in the wainscoted parlor be sometimes vari by the presence of other guest from far or near . now that be up - stair , he property could be discuss with all that local enlightenment to be find on the spot : some rural and Middlemarch neighbor express much agreement with the family and sympathy with they interest against the , and feminine visitor be even move to tear , in conversation with , when they recal the fact that they themselves have be disappoint in time past by codicil and marriage for spite on the part of ungrateful elderly gentleman , who , it might have be suppose , have be spare for something better . such conversation pause suddenly , like a organ when the bellow be let drop , if come into the room ; and all eye be turn on she as a possible legatee , or one who might get access to iron chest . but the younger man who be relatives or connections of the family , be dispose to admire she in this problematic light , as a girl who show much conduct , and who among all the chance that be fly might turn out to be at least a moderate prize . hence she have she share of compliment and polite attentions . especially from , a distinguished bachelor and auctioneer of those part , much concerned in the sale of land and cattle : a public character , indeed , whose name be see on widely distribute placard , and who might reasonably be sorry for those who do not know of he . he be second cousin to , and have be treat by he with more amenity than any other relative , be useful in matter of business ; and in that programme of he funeral which the old man have himself dictate , he have be name as a . there be no odious cupidity in -- nothing more than a sincere sense of he own merit , which , he be aware , in case of rivalry might tell against competitor ; so that if , who so far as he , Trumbull , be concerned , have behave like as good a soul as ever breathe , should have do anything handsome by he , all he could say be , that he have never fished and fawn , but have advise he to the best of he experience , which now extend over twenty year from the time of he apprenticeship at fifteen , and be likely to yield a knowledge of no surreptitious kind . he admiration be far from be confine to himself , but be accustom professionally as well as privately to delight in estimate thing at a high rate . he be a amateur of superior phrasis , and never use poor language without immediately correcte himself -- which be fortunate , as he be rather loud , and give to predominate , stand or walk about frequently , pull down he waistcoat with the air of a man who be very much of he own opinion , trimm himself rapidly with he fore - finger , and mark each new series in these movement by a busy play with he large seal . there be occasionally a little fierceness in he demeanor , but it be direct chiefly against false opinion , of which there be so much to correct in the world that a man of some reading and experience necessarily have he patience try . he feel that the family generally be of limited understanding , but be a man of the world and a public character , take everything as a matter of course , and even go to converse with and young Cranch in the kitchen , not doubt that he have impress the latter greatly by he lead question concern the . if anybody have observ that , be a auctioneer , be bound to know the nature of everything , he would have smile and trim himself silently with the sense that he come pretty near that . on the whole , in a auctioneer way , he be a honorable man , not asham of he business , and feel that " the celebrate peel , now , " if introduce to he , would not fail to recognize he importance . " I do not mind if I have a slice of that ham , and a glass of that ale , , if you will allow I , " he say , come into the parlor at half - past eleven , after have have the exceptional privilege of see old , and stand with he back to the fire between and . " it be not necessary for you to go out ; -- let I ring the bell . " " thank you , " say , " I have a errand . " " well , , you be highly favore , " say . " what ! see the old man ? " say the auctioneer
auctioneer , play with he seal dispassionately . " ah , you see he have rely on I considerably . " here he press he lip together , and frown meditatively . " might anybody ask what they brother have be say ? " say , in a soft tone of humility , in which he have a sense of luxurious cunning , he be a rich man and not in need of it . " oh yes , anybody may ask , " say , with loud and good - humored though cut sarcasm . " anybody may interrogate . any one may give they remark a interrogative turn , " he continue , he sonorousness rise with he style . " this be constantly do by good speaker , even when they anticipate no answer . it be what we call a figure of speech -- speech at a high figure , as one may say . " the eloquent auctioneer smile at he own ingenuity . " I should not be sorry to hear he would remember you , , " say . " I never be against the deserving . it be the undeserving I be against . " " ah , there it be , you see , there it be , " say , significantly . " it can not be deny that undeserve people have be legatee , and even residuary legatee . it be so , with testamentary disposition . " again he purse up he lip and frown a little . " do you mean to say for certain , , that my brother have leave he land away from we family ? " say , on whom , as a unhopeful woman , those long word have a depressing effect . " a man might as well turn he land into charity land at once as leave it to some people , " observe , he sister 's question have draw no answer . " what , - land ? " say , again . " oh , , you never can mean to say that . it would be fly in the face of the that be prosper he . " while be speak , walk away from the fireplace towards the window , patroll with he fore - finger round the inside of he stock , then along he whisker and the curve of he hair . he now walk to 's work - table , open a book which lay there and read the title aloud with pompous emphasis as if he be offer it for sale : " of ' ( pronounce ) or the ' of the , by the author of . ' " then turn the page , he begin sonorously -- " the course of four centurie have well - nigh elapse since the series of event which be related in the follow chapter take place on the continent . " he pronounce the last truly admirable word with the accent on the last syllable , not as unaware of vulgar usage , but feel that this novel delivery enhance the sonorous beauty which he read have give to the whole . and now the servant come in with the tray , so that the moment for answer . 's question have go by safely , while she and , watch 's movement , be think that high learn interfere sadly with serious affair . really know nothing about old 's will ; but he could hardly have be bring to declare any ignorance unless he have be arrest for misprision of treason . " I shall take a mere mouthful of ham and a glass of ale , " he say , reassuringly . " as a man with public business , I take a snack when I can . I will back this ham , " he add , after swallow some morsel with alarming haste , " against any ham in the three kingdom . in my opinion it be better than the hams at -- and I think I be a tolerable judge . " " some do not like so much sugar in they hams , " say . " but my poor brother would always have sugar . " " if any person demand better , he be at liberty to do so ; but , bless I , what a aroma ! I should be glad to buy in that quality , I know . there be some gratification to a gentleman " -- here 's convey a emotional remonstrance -- " in have this kind of ham set on he table . " he push aside he plate , pour out he glass of ale and draw he chair a little forward , profit by the occasion to look at the inner side of he leg , which he strok approvingly -- have all those less frivolous air and gesture which distinguish the predominant race of the north . " you have a interesting work there , I see , , " he observe , when re-enter . " it be by the author of ' ' : that be . I have buy one of he work myself - - a very nice thing , a very superior publication , entitle ' . ' you will not get any writer to beat he in a hurry , I think -- he will not , in my opinion , be speedily surpass . I have just be read a portion at the commencement of ' of . ' it commence well . " ( thing never begin with : they always commence , both in private life and on he handbill . ) " you be a reader , I see . do you subscribe to we Middlemarch library ? " " no , " say . " bring this book . " " I
I be a great bookman myself , " return . " I have no less than two hundred volume in calf , and I flatter myself they be well select . also picture by , , , , , and other . I shall be happy to lend you any work you like to mention , . " " I be much oblige , " say , hasten away again , " but I have little time for reading . " " I should say my brother have do something for _her_ in he will , " say , in a very low undertone , when she have shut the door behind she , point with he head towards the absent . " he first wife be a poor match for he , though , " say . " she bring he nothing : and this young woman be only she niece , -- and very proud . and my brother have always pay she wage . " " a sensible girl though , in my opinion , " say , finish he ale and start up with a emphatic adjustment of he waistcoat . " I have observ she when she have be mix medicine in drop . she mind what she be do , sir . that be a great point in a woman , and a great point for we friend up - stair , poor dear old soul . a man whose life be of any value should think of he wife as a nurse : that be what I should do , if I marry ; and I believe I have liv single long enough not to make a mistake in that line . some man must marry to elevate themselves a little , but when I be in need of that , I hope some one will tell I so -- I hope some individual will apprise I of the fact . I wish you good morning , . good morning , . I trust we shall meet under less melancholy auspices . " when have depart with a fine bow , , lean forward , observe to he sister , " you may depend , , my brother have leave that girl a lumping sum . " " anybody would think so , from the way talk , " say . then , after a pause , " he talk as if my daughter be not to be trust to give drop . " " Auctioneers talk wild , " say . " not but what have make money . " . " close up he eye and draw the curtain close ; and let we all to meditation . " -- 2 . that night after twelve o'clock relieve the watch in 's room , and sit there alone through the small hour . she often choose this task , in which she find some pleasure , notwithstand the old man 's testiness whenever he demand she attention . there be interval in which she could sit perfectly still , enjoy the outer stillness and the subdue light . the red fire with it be gently audible movement seem like a solemn existence calmly independent of the petty passion , the imbecile desire , the straining after worthless uncertainty , which be daily move she contempt . be fond of she own thought , and could amuse herself well sit in twilight with she hand in she lap ; for , have early have strong reason to believe that thing be not likely to be arrange for she peculiar satisfaction , she waste no time in astonishment and annoyance at that fact . and she have already come to take life very much as a comedy in which she have a proud , nay , a generous resolution not to act the mean or treacherous part . might have become cynical if she have not have parent whom she honor , and a well of affectionate gratitude within she , which be all the fuller because she have learn to make no unreasonable claim . she sit to - night revolving , as she be wont , the scene of the day , she lip often curl with amusement at the oddity to which she fancy add fresh drollery : people be so ridiculous with they illusion , carry they fool 's cap unaware , think they own lie opaque while everybody else 's be transparent , make themselves exceptions to everything , as if when all the world look yellow under a lamp they alone be rosy . yet there be some illusion under 's eye which be not quite comic to she . she be secretly convinced , though she have no other grounds than she close observation of old 's nature , that in spite of he fondness for have the about he , they be as likely to be disappoint as any of the relation whom he keep at a distance . she have a good deal of disdain for . 's evident alarm lest she and should be alone together , but it do not hinder she from think anxiously of the way in which would be affect , if it should turn out that he uncle have leave he as poor as ever . she could make a butt of when he be present , but she do not enjoy he folly when he be absent . yet she like she thought : a vigorous young mind not overbalance by passion , find a good in make acquaintance with life , and watch its own power with interest . have plenty of merriment within . she thought be not vein by any solemnity or patho about the old man on the bed : such sentiment be easier to affect than to feel about a aged creature whose life be not visibly anything but a remnant of vex
vex . she have always see the most disagreeable side of : he be not proud of she , and she be only useful to he . to be anxious about a soul that be always snapp at you must be leave to the saint of the earth ; and be not one of they . she have never return he a harsh word , and have wait on he faithfully : that be she utmost . himself be not in the least anxious about he soul , and have decline to see on the subject . to - night he have not snap , and for the first hour or two he lay remarkably still , until at last hear he ratt he bunch of key against the tin box which he always keep in the bed beside he . about three o'clock he say , with remarkable distinctness , " Missy , come here ! " obey , and find that he have already draw the tin box from under the clothes , though he usually ask to have this do for he ; and he have select the key . he now unlock the box , and , draw from it another key , look straight at she with eye that seem to have recover all they sharpness and say , " how many of th'ey be in the house ? " " you mean of you own relation , sir , " say , well use to the old man 's way of speech . he nod slightly and she go on . " and young Cranch be sleep here . " " oh ay , they stick , do they ? and the rest -- they come every day , I will warrant -- and , and all the young un ? they come peepe , and count and cast up ? " " not all of they every day . and be here every day , and the other come often . " the old man listen with a grimace while she speak , and then say , relax he face , " the more fools they . you hearke , missy . it be three o'clock in the morning , and I have get all my faculty as well as ever I have in my life . I know all my property , and where the money 's put out , and everything . and I have make everything ready to change my mind , and do as I like at the last . do you hear , missy ? I have get my faculty . " " well , sir ? " say , quietly . he now lowere he tone with a air of deeper cunning . " I have make two will , and I be go to burn one . now you do as I tell you . this be the key of my iron chest , in the closet there . you push well at the side of the brass plate at the top , till it go like a bolt : then you can put the key in the front lock and turn it . see and do that ; and take out the topmost paper -- last will and testament -- big print . " " no , sir , " say , in a firm voice , " I can not do that . " " not do it ? I tell you , you must , " say the old man , he voice begin to shake under the shock of this resistance . " I can not touch you iron chest or you will . I must refuse to do anything that might lay I open to suspicion . " " I tell you , I be in my right mind . not I do as I like at the last ? I make two will on purpose . take the key , I say . " " no , sir , I will not , " say , more resolutely still . she repulsion be get stronger . " I tell you , there be no time to lose . " " I can not help that , sir . I will not let the close of you life soil the beginning of mine . I will not touch you iron chest or you will . " she move to a little distance from the bedside . the old man pause with a blank stare for a little while , hold the one key erect on the ring ; then with a agitated jerk he begin to work with he bony leave hand at empty the tin box before he . " Missy , " he begin to say , hurriedly , " look here ! take the money -- the note and gold -- look here -- take it -- you shall have it all -- do as I tell you . " he make a effort to stretch out the key towards she as far as possible , and again retreate . " I will not touch you key or you money , sir . pray do not ask I to do it again . if you do , I must go and call you brother . " he let he hand fall , and for the first time in she life see old begin to cry childishly . she say , in as gentle a tone as she could command , " pray put up you money , sir ; " and then go away to she seat by the fire , hope this would help to convince he that it be useless to say more . presently he rally and say eagerly -- " look here , then . call the young chap . call . " 's heart begin to beat more quickly . various idea rush through
through she mind as to what the burning of a second will might imply . she have to make a difficult decision in a hurry . " I will call he , if you will let I call and other with he . " " nobody else , I say . the young chap . I shall do as I like . " " wait till broad daylight , sir , when every one be stirr . or let I call Simmons now , to go and fetch the lawyer ? he can be here in less than two hour . " " ? what do I want with the lawyer ? nobody shall know -- I say , nobody shall know . I shall do as I like . " " let I call some one else , sir , " say , persuasively . she do not like she position -- alone with the old man , who seem to show a strange flaring of nervous energy which enable he to speak again and again without fall into he usual cough ; yet she desire not to push unnecessarily the contradiction which agitate he . " let I , pray , call some one else . " " you let I alone , I say . look here , missy . take the money . you will never have the chance again . it be pretty nigh two hundred -- there be more in the box , and nobody know how much there be . take it and do as I tell you . " , stand by the fire , see it be red light fal on the old man , prop up on he pillow and bed - rest , with he bony hand hold out the key , and the money lie on the quilt before he . she never forget that vision of a man want to do as he like at the last . but the way in which he have put the offer of the money urge she to speak with harder resolution than ever . " it be of no use , sir . I will not do it . put up you money . I will not touch you money . I will do anything else I can to comfort you ; but I will not touch you key or you money . " " anything else anything else ! " say old , with hoarse rage , which , as if in a nightmare , try to be loud , and yet be only just audible . " I want nothing else . you come here -- you come here . " approach he cautiously , know he too well . she see he drop he key and try to grasp he stick , while he look at she like a aged hyena , the muscle of he face get distort with the effort of he hand . she pause at a safe distance . " let I give you some cordial , " she say , quietly , " and try to compose yourself . you will perhaps go to sleep . and to - morrow by daylight you can do as you like . " he lift the stick , in spite of she be beyond he reach , and throw it with a hard effort which be but impotence . it fall , slipp over the foot of the bed . let it lie , and retreat to she chair by the fire . by - and - by she would go to he with the cordial . Fatigue would make he passive . it be get towards the chillest moment of the morning , the fire have get low , and she could see through the chink between the moreen window - curtain the light whiten by the blind . have put some wood on the fire and throw a shawl over she , she sit down , hope that might now fall asleep . if she go near he the irritation might be keep up . he have say nothing after throw the stick , but she have see he take he key again and lay he right hand on the money . he do not put it up , however , and she think that he be drop off to sleep . but herself begin to be more agitated by the remembrance of what she have go through , than she have be by the reality -- question those act of hers which have come imperatively and exclude all question in the critical moment . presently the dry wood send out a flame which illuminate every crevice , and see that the old man be lie quietly with he head turn a little on one side . she go towards he with inaudible step , and think that he face look strangely motionless ; but the next moment the movement of the flame communicate itself to all object make she uncertain . the violent beating of she heart render she perceptions so doubtful that even when she touch he and listen for he breathing , she could not trust she conclusion . she go to the window and gently propp aside the curtain and blind , so that the still light of the sky fall on the bed . the next moment she run to the bell and ring it energetically . in a very little while there be no longer any doubt that be dead , with he right hand clasp the key , and he leave hand lie on the heap of note and gold . . three love problem . . 1st Gent . such man as this be feather , chip , and straw . carry no weight , no force . 2 . but levity be causal too , and make the sum of weight . for power find
find it 's place in lack of power ; advance be cession , and the driven ship may run aground because the helmsman 's think lacked force to balance opposite . " it be on a morning of that be bury . in the prosaic neighborhood of , be not always warm and sunny , and on this particular morning a chill wind be blow the blossom from the surround garden on to the green mounds of Lowick churchyard . swiftly move cloud only now and then allow a gleam to light up any object , whether ugly or beautiful , that happen to stand within it be golden shower . in the churchyard the be remarkably various , for there be a little country crowd wait to see the funeral . the news have spread that it be to be a " big bury ; " the old gentleman have leave write direction about everything and mean to have a funeral " beyond he betters . " this be true ; for old have not be a whose passion have all be devoure by the ever - lean and ever - hungry passion of save , and who would drive a bargain with he undertaker beforehand . he love money , but he also love to spend it in gratify he peculiar taste , and perhaps he love it best of all as a means of make other feel he power more or less uncomfortably . if any one will here contend that there must have be trait of goodness in old , I will not presume to deny this ; but I must observe that goodness be of a modest nature , easily discourage , and when much privacy , elbow in early life by unabashed vex , be apt to retire into extreme privacy , so that it be more easily believe in by those who construct a selfish old gentleman theoretically , than by those who form the narrower judgment base on he personal acquaintance . in any case , he have be bent on have a handsome funeral , and on have person " bid " to it who would rather have stay at home . he have even desire that female relative should follow he to the grave , and poor sister have take a difficult journey for this purpose from the . she and would have be altogether cheer ( in a tearful manner ) by this sign that a brother who dislike see they while he be liive have be prospectively fond of they presence when he should have become a testator , if the sign have not be make equivocal by be extend to . Vincy , whose expense in handsome crape seem to imply the most presumptuous hope , aggravate by a bloom of complexion which tell pretty plainly that she be not a blood - relation , but of that generally objectionable class call wife 's kin . we be all of we imaginative in some form or other , for image be the brood of desire ; and poor old , who laugh much at the way in which other cajol themselves , do not escape the fellowship of illusion . in write the programme for he burial he certainly do not make clear to himself that he pleasure in the little drama of which it form a part be confine to anticipation . in chuckling over the vexation he could inflict by the rigid clutch of he dead hand , he inevitably mingl he consciousness with that livid stagnant presence , and so far as he be preoccupy with a future life , it be with one of gratification inside he coffin . thus old be imaginative , after he fashion . however , the three mourning - coach be fill accord to the write order of the decease . there be pall - bearer on horseback , with the richest scarf and hatband , and even the under - bearer have trapping of woe which be of a good well - priced quality . the black procession , when dismount , look the larger for the smallness of the churchyard ; the heavy human face and the black drapery shivering in the wind seem to tell of a world strangely incongruous with the lightly drop blossom and the gleam of sunshine on the daisie . the clergyman who meet the procession be -- also accord to the request of , prompt as usual by peculiar reason . have a contempt for curate , whom he always call understrapper , he be resolve to be bury by a beneficed clergyman . be out of the question , not merely because he decline duty of this sort , but because have a especial dislike to he as the rector of he own parish , who have a lien on the land in the shape of tithe , also as the deliverer of morning sermon , which the old man , be in he pew and not at all sleepy , have be oblige to sit through with a inward snarl . he have a objection to a parson stick up above he head preach to he . but he relation with have be of a different kind : the trout - stream which run through 's land take its course through 's also , so that be a parson who have have to ask a favor instead of preaching . moreover , he be one of the high gentry live four mile away from , and be thus exalt to a equal sky with the heriff of the county and other dignity vaguly regard as necessary to the system of thing . there would be a satisfaction in be bury by , whose very name offer a fine opportunity for pronouncing wrongly if you like . this distinction confer on the rector of and be the reason why Cadwallader
Cadwallader make one of the group that watch old 's funeral from a upper window of the manor . she be not fond of visit that house , but she like , as she say , to see collection of strange animal such as there would be at this funeral ; and she have persuade and the young to drive the rector and herself to Lowick in order that the visit might be altogether pleasant . " I will go anywhere with you , , " have say ; " but I do not like funeral . " " oh , my dear , when you have a clergyman in you family you must accommodate you taste : I do that very early . when I marry i make up my mind to like sermon , and I set out by like the end very much . that soon spread to the middle and the beginning , because I could not have the end without they . " " no , to be sure not , " say the , with stately emphasis . the upper window from which the funeral could be well see be in the room occupy by when he have be forbidden to work ; but he have resume nearly he habitual style of life now in spite of warning and prescription , and after politely welcome have slipp again into the library to chew a cud of erudite mistake about and . but for she visitor too might have be shut up in the library , and would not have witness this scene of old 's funeral , which , aloor as it seem to be from the tenor of she life , always afterwards come back to she at the touch of certain sensitive point in memory , just as the vision of 's at be inwoven with mood of despondency . scene which make vital change in we neighbor 's lot be but the background of we own , yet , like a particular aspect of the field and tree , they become associate for we with the epoch of we own history , and make a part of that unity which lie in the selection of we keenest consciousness . the dream - like association of something alien and ill - understood with the deepest secret of she experience seem to mirror that sense of loneliness which be due to the very ardor of 's nature . the country gentry of old time live in a rarefied social air : dot apart on they station up the mountain they look down with imperfect discrimination on the belt of thicker life below . and be not at ease in the perspective and chilliness of that height . " I shall not look any more , " say , after the train have enter the church , place herself a little behind she husband 's elbow so that she could slyly touch he coat with she cheek . " I dare say like it : she be fond of melancholy thing and ugly people . " " I be fond of know something about the people I live among , " say , who have be watch everything with the interest of a monk on he holiday tour . " it seem to I we know nothing of we neighbor , unless they be cottager . one be constantly wonder what sort of life other people lead , and how they take thing . I be quite oblige to for come and call I out of the library . " " quite right to feel obliged to I , " say . " you rich Lowick farmer be as curious as any buffaloe or bison , and I dare say you do not half see they at church . they be quite different from you uncle 's tenant or 's -- monster -- farmer without landlord -- one can not tell how to class they . " " most of these follower be not Lowick people , " say ; " I suppose they be legatee from a distance , or from . Lovegood tell I the old fellow have leave a good deal of money as well as land . " " think of that now ! when so many younger son can not dine at they own expense , " say . " ah , " turn round at the sound of the opening door , " here be . I feel that we be incomplete before , and here be the explanation . you be come to see this odd funeral , of course ? " " no , I come to look after -- to see how he go on , you know . and to bring a little news -- a little news , my dear , " say , nodd at as she come towards he . " I look into the library , and I see over he book . I tell he it would not do : I say , ' this will never do , you know : think of you wife , . ' and he promise I to come up . I do not tell he my news : I say , he must come up . " " ah , now they be come out of church , " exclaim . " dear I , what a wonderfully mixed set ! as doctor , I suppose . but that be really a good look woman , and the fair young man must be she son . who be they , , do you know ? " " I see , the of ; they be probably he wife and son , " say , look interrogatively at , who nod and say -- " yes , a very decent family -- a very good fellow be ; a credit to the manufacturing interest
interest . you have see he at my house , you know . " " ah , yes : one of you secret committee , " say , provokingly . " a coursing fellow , though , " say , with a fox - hunter 's disgust . " and one of those who suck the life out of the wretch handloom weaver in and . that be how he family look so fair and sleek , " say . " those dark , purple - faced people be a excellent foil . dear I , they be like a set of jug ! do look at : one might fancy he a ugly archangel towere above they in he white surplice . " " it be a solemn thing , though , a funeral , " say , " if you take it in that light , you know . " " but I be not take it in that light . I can not wear my solemnity too often , else it will go to rag . it be time the old man die , and none of these people be sorry . " " how piteous ! " say . " this funeral seem to I the most dismal thing I ever see . it be a blot on the morning I can not bear to think that any one should die and leave no love behind . " she be go to say more , but she see she husband enter and seat himself a little in the background . the difference he presence make to she be not always a happy one : she feel that he often inwardly object to she speech . " Positively , " exclaim Cadwallader , " there be a new face come out from behind that broad man queerer than any of they : a little round head with bulging eye -- a sort of frog - face -- do look . he must be of another blood , I think . " " let I see ! " say , with awaken curiosity , stand behind and lean forward over she head . " oh , what a odd face ! " then with a quick change to another sort of surprised expression , she add , " why , , you never tell I that be come again ! " feel a shock of alarm : every one notice she sudden paleness as she look up immediately at she uncle , while look at she . " he come with I , you know ; he be my guest -- put up with I at the , " say , in he easiest tone , nodd at , as if the announcement be just what she might have expect . " and we have bring the picture at the top of the carriage . I know you would be pleased with the surprise , . there you be to the very life -- as , you know . quite the right sort of thing . and you will hear young talk about it . he talk uncommonly well -- point out this , that , and the other -- knows art and everything of that kind -- companionable , you know -- be up with you in any track -- what I have be want a long while . " bow with cold politeness , master he irritation , but only so far as to be silent . he remember 's letter quite as well as do ; he have notice that it be not among the letter which have be reserve for he on he recovery , and secretly conclude that have send word to not to come to , he have shrunk with proud sensitiveness from ever recurr to the subject . he now infer that she have ask she uncle to invite Will to the ; and she feel it impossible at that moment to enter into any explanation . 's eye , divert from the churchyard , see a good deal of dumb show which be not so intelligible to she as she could have desire , and could not repress the question , " who be ? " " a young relative of 's , " say , promptly . he good - nature often make he quick and clear - see in personal matter , and he have divine from 's glance at she husband that there be some alarm in she mind . " a very nice young fellow -- have do everything for he , " explain . " he repay you expense in he , , " he go on , nodd encouragingly . " I hope he will stay with I a long while and we shall make something of my document . I have plenty of idea and fact , you know , and I can see he be just the man to put they into shape -- remember what the right quotation be , omne tulit punctum , and that sort of thing -- give subject a kind of turn . I invite he some time ago when you be ill , ; say you could not have anybody in the house , you know , and she ask I to write . " poor feel that every word of she uncle 's be about as pleasant as a grain of sand in the eye to . it would be altogether unfitting now to explain that she have not wish she uncle to invite . she could not in the least make clear to herself the reason for she husband 's dislike to he presence -- a dislike painfully impress on she by the scene in the library ; but she feel the unbecomingness of say anything that might convey a notion of it to other . , indeed , have not thoroughly represent those mix
mix reason to himself ; irritate feel with he , as with all of we , seek rather for justification than for self - knowledge . but he wish to repress outward sign , and only Dorothea could discern the change in she husband 's face before he observe with more of dignified bending and s - song than usual -- " you be exceedingly hospitable , my dear sir ; and I owe you acknowledgment for exercise you hospitality towards a relative of mine . " the funeral be end now , and the churchyard be be cleared . " now you can see he , , " say . " he be just like a miniature of 's aunt that hang in 's boudoir -- quite nice - look . " " a very pretty sprig , " say , dryly . " what be you nephew to be , ? " " pardon I , he be not my nephew . he be my cousin . " " well , you know , " interpose , " he be try he wing . he be just the sort of young fellow to rise . I should be glad to give he a opportunity . he would make a good secretary , now , like , , -- that sort of man . " " I understand , " say . " one who can write speeches . " " I will fetch he in now , eh , ? " say . " he would not come in till I have announce he , you know . and we will go down and look at the picture . there you be to the life : a deep subtle sort of thinker with he fore - finger on the page , while or somebody else , rather fat and florid , be look up at the Trinity . everything be symbolical , you know -- the higher style of art : I like that up to a certain point , but not too far -- it be rather strain to keep up with , you know . but you be at home in that , . and you painter 's flesh be good -- solidity , transparency , everything of that sort . I go into that a great deal at one time . however , I will go and fetch . " . " non , je ne comprend pa de plus charmant plaisir voir d'heritier une troupe affligee maintien interdit , et la mine allongee , un long testament out pale , etonne on yoleu laisse un bonsoir avec un py de nez . pour voir au naturel leur tristesse profonde Je reviendrais , je crois , expre de l'autre monde . " -- Regnard : . when the animal enter the Ark in pair , one may imagine that ally species make much private remark on each other , and be temp to think that so many form feed on the same store of fodder be eminently superfluous , as tend to diminish the ration . ( I fear the part play by the vulture on that occasion would be too painful for art to represent , those bird be disadvantageously naked about the gullet , and apparently without rite and ceremony . ) the same sort of temptation befell the who form 's funeral procession ; most of they have they mind bend on a limited store which each would have like to get the most of . the long - recognize blood - relation and connection by marriage make already a goodly number , which , multiply by possibility , present a fine range for jealous conjecture and pathetic hopefulness . of the have create a fellowship in hostility among all persons of the blood , so that in the absence of any decide indication that one of themselves be to have more than the rest , the dread lest that long - leg should have the land be necessarily dominant , though it leave abundant feeling and leisure for vaguer jealousy , such as be entertaine towards . find time to reflect that be undeserve , and to abuse as ; , the elder sister , hold that 's child ought not to expect so much as the young Waule ; and , more lax on the subject of primogeniture , be sorry to think that be so " have . " these nearest of kin be naturally impressed with the unreasonableness of expectation in cousin and second cousins , and use they arithmetic in reckon the large sum that small legacy might mount to , if there be too many of they . two cousin be present to hear the will , and a second cousin besides . this second cousin be a mercer of polite manners and superfluous aspirate . the two cousin be elderly man from , one of they conscious of claim on the score of inconvenient expense sustain by he in present of oyster and other eatables to he rich cousin ; the other entirely saturnine , lean he hand and ching on a stick , and conscious of claim base on no narrow performance but on merit generally : both blameless citizen of , who wish that do not live there . the wit of a family be usually best receive among strangers . " why , Trumbull himself be pretty sure of five hundred --_ that you may depend , -- I should not wonder if my brother promise he , " say , muse aloud with he sister , the evening before the funeral . " dear , dear ! " say poor sister , whose imagination of hundred have be habitually narrow to the amount of she unpaid rent . but in the morning all the ordinary current of conjecture be disturb by the presence of a strange mourner who have plash among they
they as if from the moon . this be the stranger describe by as frog - face : a man perhaps about two or three and thirty , whose prominent eye , thing - lip , downward - curve mouth , and hair sleekly brush away from a forehead that sank suddenly above the ridge of the eyebrow , certainly give he face a batrachian unchangeableness of expression . here , clearly , be a new legatee ; else why be he bide as a mourner ? here be new possibility , raise a new uncertainty , which almost check remark in the mourning - coach . we be all humiliat by the sudden discovery of a fact which have exist very comfortably and perhaps be star at we in private while we have be make up we world entirely without it . no one have see this questionable stranger before except , and she know nothing more of he than that he have twice be to when be down - stair , and have sit alone with he for several hour . she have find a opportunity of mention this to she father , and perhaps 's be the only eye , except the lawyer 's , which examine the stranger with more of inquiry than of disgust or suspicion . , have little expectation and less cupidity , be interested in the verification of he own guess , and the calmness with which he half smilingly rub he ching and shot intelligent glance much as if he be value a tree , make a fine contrast with the alarm or scorn visible in other face when the unknown mourner , whose name be understand to be , enter the wainscote parlor and take he seat near the door to make part of the audience when the will should be read . just then and be go up - stair with the lawyer to search for the will ; and , see two vacant seat between herself and , have the spirit to move next to that great authority , who be handle he watch - seal and trimm he outline with a determination not to show anything so compromise to a man of ability as wonder or surprise . " I suppose you know everything about what my poor brother 's do , , " say , in the lowest of she woolly tone , while she turn she crape- shadow bonnet towards 's ear . " my good lady , whatever be tell I be tell in confidence , " say the auctioneer , put he hand up to screen that secret . " they who have make sure of they good - luck may be disappoint yet , " . continue , finde some relief in this communication . " hope be often delusive , " say , still in confidence . " ah ! " say , look across at the , and then move back to the side of she sister . " it be wonderful how close poor be , " she say , in the same undertone . " we none of we know what he might have have on he mind . I only hope and trust he be not a worse liver than we think of , . " poor be bulky , and , breathe asthmatically , have the additional motive for make she remark unexceptionable and give they a general bearing , that even she whisper be loud and liable to sudden burst like those of a derange barrel - organ . " I never _was_ covetous , , " she reply ; " but I have six child and have bury three , and I do not marry into money . the eldest , that sit there , be but nineteen -- so I leave you to guess . and stock always short , and land most awkward . but if ever I have beg and pray ; it be be to above ; though where there be one brother a bachelor and the other childless after twice marry -- anybody might think ! " meanwhile , have glance at the passive face of , and have take out he snuff - box and tap it , but have put it again unopen as a indulgence which , however clarify to the judgment , be unsuited to the occasion . " I should not wonder if Featherstone have better feeling than any of we give he credit for , " he observe , in the ear of he wife . " this funeral show a thought about everybody : it look well when a man want to be follow by he friend , and if they be humble , not to be asham of they . I should be all the better please if he would leave lot of small legacy . they may be uncommonly useful to fellow in a small way . " " everything be as handsome as could be , crape and silk and everything , " say , contentedly . but I be sorry to say that be under some difficulty in repress a laugh , which would have be more unsuitable than he father 's snuff - box . have overhear suggest something about a " love - child , " and with this thought in he mind , the stranger 's face , which happen to be opposite he , affect he too ludicrously . , discern he distress in the twitching of he mouth , and he recourse to a cough , come cleverly to he rescue by ask he to change seat with she , so that he get into a shadowy corner . be feel as good - naturedly as possible towards everybody , include ; and have some relent towards all these people who be less lucky than he be aware of be himself , he would
would not for the world have behave amiss ; still , it be particularly easy to laugh . but the entrance of the lawyer and the two brother draw every one 's attention . the lawyer be , and he have come to this morning believe that he know thoroughly well who would be pleased and who disappoint before the day be over . they will he expect to read be the last of three which he have draw up for . be not a man who vari he manners : he behave with the same deep - voice , off - hand civility to everybody , as if he see no difference in they , and talk chiefly of the hay - crop , which would be " very fine , by ! " of the last bulletin concern the King , and of the of , who be a sailor every inch of he , and just the man to rule over a island like . Featherstone have often reflect as he sit look at the fire that would be surprise some day : it be true that if he have do as he like at the last , and bur not the will draw up by another lawyer , he would not have secure that minor end ; still he have have he pleasure in ruminating on it . and certainly be surprised , but not at all sorry ; on the contrary , he rather enjoy the zest of a little curiosity in he own mind , which the discovery of a second will add to the prospective amazement on the part of the family . as to the sentiment of and , they be hold in utter suspense : it seem to they that the old will would have a certain validity , and that there might be such a interlacement of poor 's former and latter intention as to create endless " lawing " before anybody come by they own -- a inconvenience which would have at least the advantage of go all round . hence the brother show a thoroughly neutral gravity as they re-enter with ; but take out he white handkerchief again with a sense that in any case there would be affect passage , and cry at funeral , however dry , be customarily serve up in lawn . perhaps the person who feel the most throbb excitement at this moment be , in the consciousness that it be she who have virtually determine the production of this second will , which might have momentous effect on the lot of some persons present . no soul except herself know what have pass on that final night . " they will I hold in my hand , " say , who , seat at the table in the middle of the room , take he time about everything , include the cough with which he show a disposition to clear he voice , " be draw up by myself and execute by we deceased friend on the 9th of , 1825 . but I find that there be a subsequent instrument hitherto unknown to I , bear date the 20th of , 1826 , hardly a year later than the previous one . and there be farther , I see " -- be cautiously travel over the document with he spectacle -- " a codicil to this latter will , bear date 1 , 1828 . " " dear , dear ! " say sister , not meane to be audible , but drive to some articulation under this pressure of date . " I shall begin by read the earlier will , " continue , " since such , as appear by he not have destroy the document , be the intention of decease . " the preamble be feel to be rather long , and several besides shake they head pathetically , look on the ground : all eye avoid meet other eye , and be chiefly fix either on the spot in the table - cloth or on 's bald head ; except 's . when all the rest be try to look nowhere in particular , it be safe for she to look at they . and at the sound of the first " give and bequeath " she could see all complexion change subtly , as if some faint vibration be pass through they , save that of . he sit in unaltered calm , and , in fact , the company , preoccupy with more important problem , and with the complication of listen to bequest which might or might not be revoke , have cease to think of he . blush , and find it impossible to do without he snuff - box in he hand , though he keep it close . the small bequest come first , and even the recollection that there be another will and that poor might have think better of it , could not quell the rising disgust and indignation . one like to be do well by in every tense , past , present , and future . and here be capable five year ago of leave only two hundred apiece to he own brothers and sister , and only a hundred apiece to he own nephew and niece : the Garth be not mention , but and be each to have a hundred . be to have the gold - head cane and fifty pound ; the other second cousins and the cousin present be each to have the like handsome sum , which , as the saturnine cousin observe , be a sort of legacy that leave a man nowhere ; and there be much more of such offensive dribbling in favor of person not present -- problematical , and , it be to be fear , low connection . altogether , reckon hastily , here
here be about three thousand dispose of . where then have mean the rest of the money to go -- and where the land ? and what be revoke and what not revoke -- and be the revocation for better or for worse ? all emotion must be conditional , and might turn out to be the wrong thing . the man be strong enough to bear up and keep quiet under this confused suspense ; some let they lower lip fall , other purse it up , accord to the habit of they muscle . but and sank under the rush of question , and begin to cry ; poor Mr. Cranch be half move with the consolation of get any hundred at all without work for they , and half aware that she share be scanty ; whereas 's mind be entirely flood with the sense of be a own sister and get little , while somebody else be to have much . the general expectation now be that the " much " would fall to , but the Vincys themselves be surprise when ten thousand pound in specified investment be declare to be bequeath to he :-- be the land come too ? Fred bit he lip : it be difficult to help smile , and . feel herself the happiest of women-- possible revocation shrinke out of sight in this dazzling vision . there be still a residue of personal property as well as the land , but the whole be leave to one person , and that person be -- of possibility ! of expectation founde on the favor of " close " old gentleman ! of endless vocative that would still leave expression slip helpless from the measurement of mortal folly !-- that residuary legatee be , who be also sole executor , and who be to take thenceforth the name of Featherstone . there be a rustling which see like a shudder run round the room . every one star afresh at , who apparently experience no surprise . " a most singular testamentary disposition ! " exclaim , prefer for once that he should be consider ignorant in the past . " but there be a second will -- there be a further document . we have not yet hear the final wish of the decease . " be feel that what they have yet to hear be not the final wish . the second will revoke everything except the legacy to the low person before mention ( some alteration in these be the occasion of the codicil ) , and the bequest of all the land lie in parish with all the stock and household furniture , to . the residue of the property be to be devote to the erection and endowment of almshouse for old man , to be call 's - , and to be build on a piece of land near already buy for the purpose by the testator , he wish -- so the document declare -- to please . nobody present have a farthing ; but have the gold - head cane . it take some time for the company to recover the power of expression . da not look at . be the first to speak -- after use he snuff - box energetically -- and he speak with loud indignation . " the most unaccountable will I ever hear ! I should say he be not in he right mind when he make it . I should say this last will be void , " add , feel that this expression put the thing in the true light . " ? " " we decease friend always know what he be about , I think , " say . " everything be quite regular . here be a letter from of tie with the will . he draw it up . a very respectable solicitor . " " I never notice any alienation of mind -- any aberration of intellect in the late , " say , " but I call this will eccentric . I be always willingly of service to the old soul ; and he intimate pretty plainly a sense of obligation which would show itself in he will . the gold - headed cane be farcical consider as a acknowledgment to I ; but happily I be above mercenary consideration . " " there be nothing very surprise in the matter that I can see , " say . " anybody might have have more reason for wonder if they will have be what you might expect from a open - minded straightforward man . for my part , I wish there be no such thing as a will . " " that be a strange sentiment to come from a man , by ! " say the lawyer . " I should like to know how you will back that up , ! " " oh , " say , lean forward , adjust he finger - tip with nicety and look meditatively on the ground . it always seem to he that word be the hardest part of " business . " but here make himself hear . " well , he always be a fine hypocrite , be my brother . but this will cut out everything . if I would know , a wagon and six horse should not have draw I from . I will put a white hat and drab coat on to - morrow . " " dear , dear , " weep , " and we have be at the expense of travelling , and that poor lad sit idle here so long ! it be the first time I ever hear my brother be so wishful to please ; but if I be to be strike helpless I must say it be hard -- I can think no other . "
" " it will do he no good where he be gone , that be my belief , " say , with a bitterness which be remarkably genuine , though he tone could not help be sly . " be a bad liver , and almshouse will not cover it , when he be have the impudence to show it at the last . " " and all the while have get he own lawful family -- brother and sister and nephew and niece -- and have sit in church with 'em whenever he think well to come , " say . " and might have leave he property so respectable , to they that be never be use to extravagance or unsteadiness in no manner of way -- and not so poor but what they could have save every penny and make more of it . and I -- the trouble I have be at , time and time , to come here and be sisterly -- and he with thing on he mind all the while that might make anybody 's flesh creep . but if the 's allow it , he mean to punish he for it . , I shall be go , if you will drive I . " " I have no desire to put my foot on the premise again , " say . " I have get land of my own and property of my own to will away . " " it be a poor tale how luck go in the world , " say . " it never answer to have a bit of spirit in you . you would better be a dog in the manger . but those above ground might learn a lesson . one fool 's will be enough in a family . " " there be more way than one of be a fool , " say . " I sha not leave my money to be pour down the sink , and I sha not leave it to foundling from . I like feather , stone that be brew such , and not turn Featherstones with stick the name on th'ey . " address these remark in a loud aside to as he rise to accompany she . feel himself capable of much more stinge wit than this , but he reflect that there be no use in offend the new proprietor of , until you be certain that he be quite without intention of hospitality towards witty man whose name he be about to bear . , in fact , appear to trouble himself little about any innuendoe , but show a notable change of manner , walk coolly up to and put business question with much coolness . he have a high chirping voice and a vile accent . , whom he no longer move to laughter , think he the lowest monster he have ever see . but be feel rather sick . the mercer wait for a opportunity of engage in conversation : there be no know how many pair of leg the new proprietor might require hose for , and profit be more to be rely on than legacy . also , the mercer , as a second cousin , be dispassionate enough to feel curiosity . , after he one outburst , have remain proudly silent , though too much preoccupy with unpleasant feeling to think of move , till he observe that he wife have go to 's side and be cry silently while she hold she darling 's hand . he rise immediately , and turn he back on the company while he say to she in a undertone , -- " do not give way , Lucy ; do not make a fool of yourself , my dear , before these people , " he add in he usual loud voice -- " and order the phaeton , ; I have no time to waste . " have before this be get ready to go home with she father . she meet in the hall , and now for the first time have the courage to look at he . he have that withered sort of paleness which will sometimes come on young face , and he hand be very cold when she shook it . too be agitate ; she be conscious that fatally , without will of she own , she have perhaps make a great difference to 's lot . " good - by , " she say , with affectionate sadness . " be brave , . I do believe you be better without the money . what be the good of it to ? " " that be all very fine , " say , pettishly . " what be a fellow to do ? I must go into the now . " ( he know that this would vex : very well ; then she must tell he what else he could do . ) " and I think I should be able to pay you father at once and make everything right . and you have not even a hundred pound leave you . what shall you do now , ? " " take another situation , of course , as soon as I can get one . my father have enough to do to keep the rest , without I . good - by . " in a very short time be cleared of well - brew Featherstones and other long -accustom visitor . another stranger have be bring to settle in the neighborhood of , but in the case of there be more discontent with immediate visible consequence than speculation as to the effect which he presence might have in the future . no soul be prophetic enough to have any foreboding as to what might appear on the trial of . and here I be naturally
naturally lead to reflect on the means of elevate a low subject . historical parallel be remarkably efficient in this way . the chief objection to they be , that the diligent narrator may lack space , or ( what be often the same thing ) may not be able to think of they with any degree of particularity , though he may have a philosophical confidence that if know they would be illustrative . it seem a easier and shorter way to dignity , to observe that -- since there never be a true story which could not be tell in parable , where you might put a monkey for a margrave , and vice versa --whatever have be or be to be narrate by I about low people , may be ennoble by be consider a parable ; so that if any bad habit and ugly consequence be bring into view , the reader may have the relief of regard they as not more than figuratively ungenteel , and may feel himself virtually in company with person of some style . thus while I tell the truth about looby , my reader 's imagination need not be entirely exclude from a occupation with lord ; and the petty sums which any bankrupt of high standing would be sorry to retire upon , may be lift to the level of high commercial transaction by the inexpensive addition of proportional cipher . as to any provincial history in which the agent be all of high moral rank , that must be of a date long posterior to the first Reform , and , you perceive , be dead and bury some month before come into office . . " t'Tis strange to see the humor of these man , these great aspiring spirit , that should be wise : . . . . . . . . for be the nature of great spirit to love to be where they may be most eminent ; they , rating of themselves so farre above we in conceit , with whom they do frequent , imagine how we wonder and esteeme all that they do or say ; which make they strive to make we admiration more extreme , which they suppose they cannot , ' less they give notice of they extreme and highest thought . -- daniel : tragedy of . go home from the reading of the will with he point of view considerably change in relation to many subject . he be a open - minded man , but give to indirect mode of expressing himself : when he be disappointed in a market for he silk braid , he swore at the groom ; when he brother - in - law Bulstrode have vex he , he make cut remark on ; and it be now apparent that he regard 's idleness with a sudden increase of severity , by he throw a embroidered cap out of the smoking - room on to the hall - floor . " well , sir , " he observ , when that young gentleman be move off to bed , " I hope you have make up you mind now to go up next term and pass you examination . I have take my resolution , so I advise you to lose no time in take yours . " make no answer : he be too utterly depresse . twenty - four hour ago he have think that instead of need to know what he should do , he should by this time know that he need to do nothing : that he should hunt in pink , have a first - rate hunter , ride to cover on a fine hack , and be generally respecte for do so ; moreover , that he should be able at once to pay , and that could no longer have any reason for not marry he . and all this be to have come without study or other inconvenience , purely by the favor of providence in the shape of a old gentleman 's caprice . but now , at the end of the twenty - four hour , all those firm expectation be upset . it be " rather hard line " that while he be smart under this disappointment he should be treat as if he could have help it . but he go away silently and he mother plead for he . " do not be hard on the poor boy , . he will turn out well yet , though that wick man have deceive he . I feel as sure as I sit here , will turn out well -- else why be he bring back from the brink of the grave ? and I call it a robbery : it be like give he the land , to promise it ; and what be promise , if make everybody believe be not promise ? and you see he do leave he ten thousand pound , and then take it away again . " " take it away again ! " say Vincy , pettishly . " I tell you the lad 's a unlucky lad , . and you have always spoilead he . " " well , , he be my first , and you make a fine fuss with he when he come . you be as proud as proud , " say . Vincy , easily recover she cheerful smile . " who know what baby will turn to ? I be fool enough , I dare say , " say the husband -- more mildly , however . " but who have handsomer , better child than ours ? be far beyond other people 's son : you may hear it in he speech , that he have keep college company . and -- where be there a girl like she ?
? she might stand beside any lady in the land , and only look the better for it . you see -- . have keep the highest company and be everywhere , and he fall in love with she at once . not but what I could have wish have not engage herself . she might have meet somebody on a visit who would have be a far better match ; I mean at she schoolfellow 's . there be relation in that family quite as high as 's . " " damn relation ! " say ; " I have have enough of they . I do not want a son - in - law who have get nothing but he relation to recommend he . " " why , my dear , " say . , " you see as pleased as could be about it . it be true , I be not at home ; but tell I you have not a word to say against the engagement . and she have begin to buy in the best linen and cambric for she underclothing . " " not by my will , " say . " I shall have enough to do this year , with a idle scamp of a son , without pay for wedding - clothes . the time be as tight as can be ; everybody be be ruin ; and I do not believe have get a farthing . I sha not give my consent to they marrying . let them wait , as they elder have do before th'ey . " " will take it hard , , and you know you never could bear to cross she . " " yes , I could . the sooner the engagement 's off , the better . I do not believe he will ever make a income , the way he go on . he make enemy ; that be all I hear of he making . " " but he stand very high with , my dear . the marriage would please _him_, I should think . " " please the deuce ! " say . " will not pay for they keep . and if think I be go to give money for they to set up housekeeping , he be mistaken , that be all . I expect I shall have to put down my horse soon . you would better tell what I say . " this be a not infrequent procedure with -- to be rash in jovial assent , and on become subsequently conscious that he have be rash , to employ other in make the offensive retractation . however , , who never willingly oppose she husband , lose no time the next morning in letting know what he have say . , examine some muslin-work , listen in silence , and at the end give a certain turn of she graceful neck , of which only long experience could teach you that it mean perfect obstinacy . " what do you say , my dear ? " say she mother , with affectionate deference . " do not mean anything of the kind , " say , quite calmly . " he have always say that he wish I to marry the man I love . and I shall marry . it be seven week now since give he consent . and I hope we shall have 's house . " " well , my dear , I shall leave you to manage you papa . you always do manage everybody . but if we ever do go and get damask , 's be the place -- far better than 's . 's be very large , though : I should love you to have such a house ; but it will take a great deal of furniture -- carpeting and everything , besides plate and glass . and you hear , you papa say he will give no money . do you think expect it ? " " you can not imagine that I should ask he , mamma . of course he understand he own affair . " " but he may have be look for money , my dear , and we all thought of you have a pretty legacy as well as ; -- and now everything be so dreadful -- there be no pleasure in think of anything , with that poor boy disappoint as he be . " " that have nothing to do with my marriage , mamma . must leave off be idle . I be go up - stair to take this work to : she do the open hemming very well . might do some work for I now , I should think . she sew be exquisite ; it be the nicest thing I know about . I should so like to have all my cambric frill double - hem . and it take a long time . " 's belief that could manage she papa be well foun . apart from he dinner and he coursing , , bluster as he be , have as little of he own way as if he have be a prime minister : the force of circumstance be easily too much for he , as it be for most pleasure - loving florid man ; and the circumstance call be particularly forcible by means of that mild persistence which , as we know , enable a white soft liive substance to make its way in spite of opposing rock . be not a rock : he have no other fixity than that fixity of alternating impulse sometimes call habit , and this be altogether unfavorable to he take the only decisive line of conduct in relation to he daughter 's engagement -- namely , to inquire thoroughly into 's circumstance , declare he own inability to
to furnish money , and forbid alike either a speedy marriage or a engagement which must be too lengthy . that seem very simple and easy in the statement ; but a disagreeable resolve form in the chill hour of the morning have as many condition against it as the early frost , and rarely persist under the warming influence of the day . the indirect though emphatic expression of opinion to which be prone suffer much restraint in this case : be a proud man towards whom innuendo be obviously unsafe , and throw he hat on the floor be out of the question . be a little in awe of he , a little vain that he want to marry , a little indispose to raise a question of money in which he own position be not advantageous , a little afraid of be worst in dialogue with a man better educated and more highly breed than himself , and a little afraid of do what he daughter would not like . the part prefer play be that of the generous host whom nobody criticise . in the earlier half of the day there be business to hinder any formal communication of a adverse resolve ; in the later there be dinner , wine , whist , and general satisfaction . and in the mean while the hour be each leave they little deposit and gradually form the final reason for inaction , namely , that action be too late . the accept lover spend most of he evening in , and a love -mak not at all dependent on money - advance from fathers - in - law , or prospective income from a profession , go on flourishingly under 's own eye . young love -mak -- that gossamer web ! even the point it cling to -- the thing whence its subtle interlacing be swing -- be scarcely perceptible : momentary touch of fingertip , meeting of ray from blue and dark orb , unfinished phrasis , lightest change of cheek and lip , faintest tremor . the web itself be make of spontaneous belief and indefinable joy , yearning of one life towards another , vision of completeness , indefinite trust . and fall to spinn that web from he inward self with wonderful rapidity , in spite of experience suppose to be finish off with the drama of -- in spite too of medicine and biology ; for the inspection of macerated muscle or of eye present in a dish ( like 's ) , and other incidents of scientific inquiry , be observe to be less incompatible with poetic love than a native dulness or a lively addiction to the lowest prose . as for , she be in the water - lily 's expand wonderment at its own fuller life , and she too be spinn industriously at the mutual web . all this go on in the corner of the drawing - room where the piano stood , and subtle as it be , the light make it a sort of rainbow visible to many observer besides . the certainty that and be engage become general in without the aid of formal announcement . be again stir to anxiety ; but this time she address herself to she brother , go to the warehouse expressly to avoid 's volatility . he reply be not satisfactory . " Walter , you never mean to tell I that you have allow all this to go on without inquiry into 's prospect ? " say , open she eye with wider gravity at she brother , who be in he peevish warehouse humor . " think of this girl bring up in luxury -- in too worldly a way , I be sorry to say -- what will she do on a small income ? " " oh , confound it , ! what can I do when man come into the town without any asking of mine ? do you shut you house up against ? have push he forward more than anybody . I never make any fuss about the young fellow . you should go and talk to you husband about it , not I . " " well , really , , how can be to blame ? I be sure he do not wish for the engagement . " " oh , if have not take he by the hand , I should never have invite he . " " but you call he in to attend on , and I be sure that be a mercy , " say , lose she clew in the intricacy of the subject . " I do not know about mercy , " say , testily . " I know I be worry more than I like with my family . I be a good brother to you , , before you marry , and I must say he do not always show that friendly spirit towards you family that might have be expect of he . " be very little like a , but no accomplished could have turn a question more adroitly . have to defend she husband instead of blame she brother , and the conversation end at a point as far from the beginning as some recent sparring between the brother - in - law at a vestry meeting . do not repeat she brother 's complaint to she husband , but in the evening she speak to he of and . he do not share she warm interest , however ; and only speak with resignation of the risk attendant on the beginning of medical practice and the desirability of prudence . " I be sure we be bound to pray for that thoughtless girl -- bring up as she have be , " say , wish to rouse she husband 's feeling . " truly ,
, my dear , " say , assentingly . " those who be not of this world can do little else to arrest the error of the obstinately worldly . that be what we must accustom ourselves to recognize with regard to you brother 's family . I could have wish that have not enter into such a union ; but my relation with he be limit to that use of he gift for 's purpose which be teach we by the divine government under each dispensation . " say no more , attribute some dissatisfaction which she feel to she own want of spirituality . she believe that she husband be one of those man whose memoir should be write when they die . as to Lydgate himself , have be accept , he be prepare to accept all the consequence which he believe himself to foresee with perfect clearness . of course he must be marry in a year -- perhaps even in half a year . this be not what he have intend ; but other scheme would not be hinder : they would simply adjust themselves anew . marriage , of course , must be prepare for in the usual way . a house must be take instead of the room he at present occupy ; and , have hear speak with admiration of old 's house ( situate in ) , take notice when it fall vacant after the old lady 's death , and immediately enter into treaty for it . he do this in a episodic way , very much as he give order to he tailor for every requisite of perfect dress , without any notion of be extravagant . on the contrary , he would have despise any ostentation of expense ; he profession have familiarize he with all grade of poverty , and he car much for those who suffer hardship . he would have behave perfectly at a table where the sauce be serve in a jug with the handle off , and he would have remember nothing about a grand dinner except that a man be there who talk well . but it have never occur to he that he should live in any other than what he would have call a ordinary way , with green glassis for hock , and excellent waiting at table . in warming himself at french social theory he have bring away no smell of scorching . we may handle even extreme opinion with impunity while we furniture , we dinner - give , and preference for armorial bearing in we own case , link we indissolubly with the establish order . and 's tendency be not towards extreme opinion : he would have like no barefooted doctrine , be particular about he boot : he be no radical in relation to anything but medical reform and the prosecution of discovery . in the rest of practical life he walk by hereditary habit ; half from that personal pride and unreflecting egoism which I have already call commonness , and half from that naivete which belong to preoccupation with favorite idea . any inward debate have as to the consequence of this engagement which have steal upon he , turn on the paucity of time rather than of money . certainly , be in love and be expect continually by some one who always turn out to be prettier than memory could represent she to be , do interfere with the diligent use of spare hour which might serve some " plodding fellow of a german " to make the great , imminent discovery . this be really a argument for not deferr the marriage too long , as he imply to , one day that the come to he room with some pond-product which he want to examine under a better microscope than he own , and , find 's tableful of apparatus and specimen in confusion , say sarcastically -- " have degenerat ; he begin by introducing order and harmony , and now he bring back chaos . " " yes , at some stage , " say , lift he brows and smile , while he begin to arrange he microscope . " but a better order will begin after . " " ? " say the . " I hope so , really . this unsettled state of affair use up the time , and when one have notion in science , every moment be a opportunity . I feel sure that marriage must be the best thing for a man who want to work steadily . he have everything at home then -- no teasing with personal speculation -- he can get calmness and freedom . " " you be a enviable dog , " say the , " to have such a prospect -- , calmness and freedom , all to you share . here be I with nothing but my pipe and pond-animalcule . now , be you ready ? " do not mention to the Vicar another reason he have for wishing to shorten the period of courtship . it be rather irritat to he , even with the wine of love in he vein , to be oblige to mingle so often with the family party at the ' , and to enter so much into gossip , protract good cheer , whist - play , and general futility . he have to be deferential when decide question with trenchant ignorance , especially as to those liquor which be the best inward pickle , preserve you from the effect of bad air . 's openness and simplicity be quite unstreaked with suspicion as to the subtle offence she might give to the taste of she intend son - in - law ; and altogether have to confess to himself that he be descende a little in relation to 's family . but that
that exquisite creature herself suffer in the same sort of way :-- it be at least one delightful thought that in marry she , he could give she a much - need transplantation . " dear ! " he say to she one evening , in he gentlest tone , as he sit down by she and look closely at she face -- but I must first say that he have find she alone in the drawing - room , where the great old - fashioned window , almost as large as the side of the room , be open to the summer scent of the garden at the back of the house . she father and mother be go to a party , and the rest be all out with the butterfly . " dear ! you eyelid be red . " " be they ? " say . " I wonder why . " it be not in she nature to pour forth wish or grievance . they only come forth gracefully on solicitation . " as if you could hide it from I ! " ? say Lydgate , lay he hand tenderly on both of hers . " do not I see a tiny drop on one of the lash ? thing trouble you , and you do not tell I . that be unloving . " " why should I tell you what you can not alter ? they be every - day thing :-- perhaps they have be a little worse lately . " " family annoyance . do not fear speaking . I guess they . " " have be more irritable lately . make he angry , and this morning there be a fresh quarrel because threatens to throw he whole education away , and do something quite beneath he . and besides -- " hesitate , and she cheek be gather a slight flush . Lydgate have never see she in trouble since the morning of they engagement , and he have never feel so passionately towards she as at this moment . he kiss the hesitating lip gently , as if to encourage they . " I feel that papa be not quite pleased about we engagement , " continue , almost in a whisper ; " and he say last night that he should certainly speak to you and say it must be give up . " " will you give it up ? " say , with quick energy -- almost angrily . " I never give up anything that I choose to do , " say , recover she calmness at the touching of this chord . " bless you ! " say , kiss she again . this constancy of purpose in the right place be adorable . he go on :-- " it be too late now for you father to say that we engagement must be give up . you be of age , and I claim you as mine . if anything be do to make you unhappy , -- that be a reason for hasten we marriage . " a unmistakable delight shone forth from the blue eye that meet he , and the radiance seem to light up all he future with mild sunshine . ideal happiness ( of the kind know in the , in which you be invite to step from the labor and discord of the street into a paradise where everything be give to you and nothing claim ) seem to be a affair of a few week ' wait , more or less . " why should we defer it ? " he say , with ardent insistence . " I have take the house now : everything else can soon be get ready -- can it not ? you will not mind about new clothes . those can be buy afterwards . " " what original notions you clever man have ! " say , dimpl with more thorough laughter than usual at this humorous incongruity . " this be the first time I ever hear of wedding - clothes be buy after marriage . " " but you do not mean to say you would insist on my waiting month for the sake of clothes ? " say , half think that be torment he prettily , and half fear that she really shrank from speedy marriage . " remember , we be look forward to a better sort of happiness even than this -- be continually together , independent of other , and order we life as we will . come , dear , tell I how soon you can be altogether mine . " there be a serious pleading in 's tone , as if he feel that she would be injure he by any fantastic delay . become serious too , and slightly meditative ; in fact , she be go through many intricacy of lace - edging and hosiery and petticoat-tuck , in order to give a answer that would at least be approximative . " six week would be ample -- say so , , " insist , release she hand to put he arm gently round she . one little hand immediately go to pat she hair , while she give she neck a meditative turn , and then say seriously -- " there would be the house - linen and the furniture to be prepare . , could see to those while we be away . " " yes , to be sure . we must be away a week or so . " " oh , more than that ! " say , earnestly . she be think of she evening dress for the visit to 's , which she have long be secretly hope for as a delightful employment of at least one quarter of the honeymoon , even if she defer she introduction to the
the uncle who be a doctor of divinity ( also a pleasing though sober kind of rank , when sustain by blood ) . she look at she lover with some wonder remonstrance as she speak , and he readily understand that she might wish to lengthen the sweet time of double solitude . " whatever you wish , my darl , when the day be fix . but let we take a decided course , and put a end to any discomfort you may be suffer . six week !-- I be sure they would be ample . " " I could certainly hasten the work , " say . " will you , then , mention it to papa ?-- I think it would be better to write to he . " she blush and look at he as the garden flower look at we when we walk forth happily among they in the transcendent evening light : be there not a soul beyond utterance , half nymph , half child , in those delicate petal which glow and breathe about the centr of deep color ? he touch she ear and a little bit of neck under it with he lip , and they sit quite still for many minute which flow by they like a small gurgling brook with the kiss of the sun upon it . think that no one could be more in love than she be ; and think that after all he wild mistake and absurd credulity , he have find perfect womanhood -- feel as if already breathe upon by exquisite wedded affection such as would be bestow by a accomplished creature who venerate he high musing and momentous labors and would never interfere with they ; who would create order in the home and account with still magic , yet keep she finger ready to touch the lute and transform life into romance at any moment ; who be instruct to the true womanly limit and not a hair 's - breadth beyond -- docile , therefore , and ready to carry out behest which come from that limit . it be plainer now than ever that he notion of remain much longer a bachelor have be a mistake : marriage would not be a obstruction but a furtherance . and happen the next day to accompany a patient to , he see a dinner - service there which strike he as so exactly the right thing that he buy it at once . it save time to do these thing just when you think of they , and hate ugly crockery . the dinner - service in question be expensive , but that might be in the nature of dinner - service . Furnishing be necessarily expensive ; but then it have to be do only once . " it must be lovely , " say , when Lydgate mention he purchase with some descriptive touch . " just what ought to have . I trust in heaven it will not be break ! " " one must hire servants who will not break thing , " say . ( certainly , this be reason with a imperfect vision of sequence . but at that period there be no sort of reasoning which be not more or less sanction by man of science . ) of course it be unnecessary to defer the mention of anything to mamma , who do not readily take view that be not cheerful , and be a happy wife herself , have hardly any feeling but pride in she daughter 's marriage . but have good reason for suggest to Lydgate that papa should be appeal to in writing . she prepare for the arrival of the letter by walk with she papa to the warehouse the next morning , and tell he on the way that wish to be marry soon . " Nonsense , my dear ! " say . " what have he get to marry on ? you would much better give up the engagement . I have tell you so pretty plainly before this . what have you have such a education for , if you be to go and marry a poor man ? it be a cruel thing for a father to see . " " be not poor , papa . he buy 's practice , which , they say , be worth eight or nine hundr a - year . " " stuff and nonsense ! what be buy a practice ? he might as well buy next year 's swallow . it will all slip through he finger . " " on the contrary , papa , he will increase the practice . see how he have be call in by the Chettams and Casaubons . " " I hope he know I sha not give anything -- with this disappointment about , and parliament go to be dissolve , and machine - break everywhere , and a election come on -- " " dear papa ! what can that have to do with my marriage ? " " a pretty deal to do with it ! we may all be ruin for what I know -- the country 's in that state ! some say it be the end of the world , and be hang if I do not think it look like it ! anyhow , it be not a time for I to be draw money out of my business , and I should wish to know that . " " I be sure he expect nothing , papa . and he have such very high connections : he be sure to rise in one way or another . he be engage in make scientific discoveries . " be silent . " I can not give up my only prospect of happiness , papa be a gentleman . I could
could never love any one who be not a perfect gentleman . you would not like I to go into a consumption , as do . and you know that I never change my mind . " again papa be silent . " promise I , papa , that you will consent to what we wish . we shall never give each other up ; and you know that you have always object to long courtship and late marriage . " there be a little more urgency of this kind , till say , " well , well , child , he must write to I first before I can answer he , " -- and be certain that she have gain she point . 's answer consist chiefly in a demand that should insure he life -- a demand immediately conced . this be a delightfully reassuring idea suppose that die , but in the mean time not a self - support idea . however , it seem to make everything comfortable about 's marriage ; and the necessary purchase go on with much spirit . not without prudential consideration , however . a bride ( who be go to visit at a baronet 's ) must have a few first - rate pocket - handkerchief ; but beyond the absolutely necessary half - dozen , contente herself without the very highest style of embroidery and Valenciennes . Lydgate also , find that he sum of eight hundred pound have be considerably reduce since he have come to , restrain he inclination for some plate of a old pattern which be show to he when he go into 's establishment at to buy fork and spoon . he be too proud to act as if he presuppose that would advance money to provide furniture - ; and though , since it would not be necessary to pay for everything at once , some bill would be leave stand over , he do not waste time in conjecturing how much he father - in - law would give in the form of dowry , to make payment easy . he be not go to do anything extravagant , but the requisite thing must be buy , and it would be bad economy to buy they of a poor quality . all these matter be by the bye . foresee that science and he profession be the object he should alone pursue enthusiastically ; but he could not imagine himself pursue they in such a home as -- the door all open , the oil - cloth worn , the child in soiled pinafore , and lunch lingering in the form of bone , black - handled knife , and willow - pattern . but have a wretched lymphatic wife who make a mummy of herself indoors in a large shawl ; and he must have altogether begin with a ill - choose domestic apparatus . , however , be on she side much occupy with conjecture , though she quick imitative perception warn she against betraie they too crudely . " I shall like so much to know you family , " she say one day , when the wedding journey be be discuss . " we might perhaps take a direction that would allow we to see they as we return . which of you uncle do you like best ? " " oh ,-- my uncle , I think . he be a good - nature old fellow . " " you be constantly at he house at , when you be a boy , be you not ? I should so like to see the old spot and everything you be use to . do he know you be go to be marry ? " " no , " say , carelessly , turn in he chair and rub he hair up . " do send he word of it , you naughty undutiful nephew . he will perhaps ask you to take I to Quallingham ; and then you could show I about the grounds , and I could imagine you there when you be a boy . remember , you see I in my home , just as it have be since I be a child . it be not fair that I should be so ignorant of yours . but perhaps you would be a little asham of I . I forget that . " smile at she tenderly , and really accept the suggestion that the proud pleasure of show so charme a bride be worth some trouble . and now he come to think of it , he would like to see the old spot with . " I will write to he , then . but my cousin be bore . " it seem magnificent to Rosamond to be able to speak so slightingly of a baronet 's family , and she feel much contentment in the prospect of be able to estimate they contemptuously on she own account . but mamma be near spoiling all , a day or two later , by say -- " I hope you uncle will not look down on , . I should think he would do something handsome . a thousand or two can be nothing to a baronet . " " ! " say , blush deeply ; and pitie she so much that he remain silent and go to the other end of the room to examine a print curiously , as if he have be absent- minded . have a little filial lecture afterwards , and be docile as usual . but reflect that if any of those high - breed cousin who be bore , should be induce to visit , they would see many thing in she own family which might shock they . hence it seem desirable that should by - and - by get some first -
- rate position elsewhere than in ; and this could hardly be difficult in the case of a man who have a titled uncle and could make discoveries . Lydgate , you perceive , have talk fervidly to of he hope as to the highest use of he life , and have find it delightful to be listen to by a creature who would bring he the sweet furtherance of satisfye affection -- beauty -- repose -- such help as we thought get from the summer sky and the flower- fringed meadow . rely much on the psychological difference between what for the sake of variety I will call goose and gander : especially on the innate submissiveness of the goose as beautifully correspond to the strength of the gander . . " Thrice happy she that be so well assure herself and settle so in heart that neither will for better be allure Ne fear to worse with any chance to start , but like a steddy ship doth strongly part the rage wave and keep she course aright ; ne atch for tempest doth from it depart , ne atch for fairer weather 's false delight . such self - assurance need not fear the spight of grudge foe ; ne favou seek of friend ; but in the stay of she own stedfast might neither to one herself nor other bend . most happy she that must assure doth rest , but he most happy who such one love best . " -- . the doubt hint by whether it be only the general election or the end of the world that be come on , now that the be dead , parliament dissolve , and generally depreciate and the new King apologetic , be a feeble type of the uncertainty in provincial opinion at that time . with the glow - worm light of country place , how could man see which be they own thought in the confusion of a pass liberal measure , of Tory nobles and elector be anxious to return liberals rather than friend of the recreant ministers , and of outcry for remedy which seem to have a mysteriously remote bearing on private interest , and be make suspicious by the advocacy of disagreeable neighbor ? buyer of the newspaper find themselves in a anomalous position : during the agitation on the question many have give up the " " -- which have a motto from and be in the van of progress -- because it have take 's side about the Papist , and have thus blot its with a toleration of and ; but they be ill - satisfied with the " Trumpet , " which -- since its blast against , and in the general flaccidity of the public mind ( nobody know who would support whom ) -- have become feeble in its blowing . it be a time , accord to a noticeable article in the " , " when the crying need of the country might well counteract a reluctance to public action on the part of man whose mind have from long experience acquire breadth as well as concentration , decision of judgment as well as tolerance , dispassionateness as well as energy -- in fact , all those quality which in the melancholy experience of mankind have be the least dispose to share lodging . , whose fluent speech be at that time float more widely than usual , and leave much uncertainty as to its ultimate channel , be hear to say in 's office that the article in question " emanate " from of , and that have secretly buy the " pioneer " some month ago . " that mean mischief , eh ? " say . " he have get the freak of be a popular man now , after dangl about like a stray tortoise . so much the worse for he . I have have my eye on he for some time . he shall be prettily pump upon . he be a damned bad landlord . what business have a old county man to come curry favor with a low set of dark - blue freeman ? as to he paper , I only hope he may do the writing himself . it would be worth we pay for . " " I understand he have get a very brilliant young fellow to edit it , who can write the highest style of lead article , quite equal to anything in the papers . and he mean to take very high ground on Reform . " " let reform he rent -roll . he be a curse old screw , and the building all over he estate be go to rack . I suppose this young fellow be some loose fish from . " " he name be . he be say to be of foreign extraction . " " I know the sort , " say ; " some emissary . he will begin with flourish about the rights of man and end with murder a wench . that be the style . " " you must concede that there be abuse , , " say , foresee some political disagreement with he family lawyer . " I myself should never favor immoderate view -- in fact I take my stand with -- but I can not blind myself to the consideration that the non-representation of large town -- " " large town be damne ! " say , impatient of exposition . " I know a little too much about election . let them quash every pocket borough to - morrow , and bring in every mushroom town in the kingdom -- they will only increase the expense of get into parliament . I go upon fact . " 's disgust at the notion of the " pioneer " be edit by a emissary ,
, and of Brooke become actively political -- as if a tortoise of desultory pursuit should protrude it be small head ambitiously and become rampant -- be hardly equal to the annoyance feel by some member of 's own family . the result have ooze forth gradually , like the discovery that you neighbor have set up a unpleasant kind of manufacture which will be permanently under you nostril without legal remedy . the " " have be secretly buy even before 's arrival , the expect opportunity have offer itself in the readiness of the proprietor to part with a valuable property which do not pay ; and in the interval since have write he invitation , those germinal idea of make he mind tell upon the world at large which have be present in he from he younger year , but have hithertoo alain in some obstruction , have be sprout under cover . the development be much further by a delight in he guest which prove greater even than he have anticipate . for it seem that be not only at home in all those artistic and literary subject which have go into at one time , but that he be strikingly ready at seize the point of the political situation , and deal with they in that large spirit which , aid by adequate memory , lend itself to quotation and general effectiveness of treatment . " he seem to I a kind of , you know , " take a opportunity of say , for the gratification of . " I do not mean as to anything objectionable -- laxity or atheism , or anything of that kind , you know -- 's sentiment in every way I be sure be good -- indeed , we be talk a great deal together last night . but he have the same sort of enthusiasm for liberty , freedom , emancipation -- a fine thing under guidance -- under guidance , you know . I think I shall be able to put he on the right tack ; and I be the more pleased because he be a relation of yours , . " if the right tack imply anything more precise than the rest of 's speech , silently hope that it refer to some occupation at a great distance from . he have dislike while while he help he , but he have begin to dislike he still more now that have decline he help . that be the way with we when we have any uneasy jealousy in we disposition : if we talents be chiefly of the burrow kind , we honey - sipping cousin ( whom we have grave reason for objecting to ) be likely to have a secret contempt for we , and any one who admire he pass a oblique criticism on ourselves . have the scruple of rectitude in we soul , we be above the meanness of injure he -- rather we meet all he claim on we by active benefit ; and the drawing of cheque for he , be a superiority which he must recognize , give we bitterness a milder infusion . now have be deprive of that superiority ( as anything more than a remembrance ) in a sudden , capricious manner . he antipathy to do not spre from the common jealousy of a winter - worn husband : it be something deeper , breed by he lifelong claim and discontent ; but , now that she be present -- , as a young wife who herself have show a offensive capability of criticism , necessarily give concentration to the uneasiness which have before be vague . will Ladislee on he side feel that he dislike be flourish at the expense of he gratitude , and spend much inward discourse in justify the dislike . hate he -- he know that very well ; on he first entrance he could discern a bitterness in the mouth and a venom in the glance which would almost justify declare war in spite of past benefit . he be much oblige to in the past , but really the act of marry this wife be a set - off against the obligation . it be a question whether gratitude which refer to what be do for one 's self ought not to give way to indignation at what be do against another . and have do a wrong to in marry she . a man be bound to know himself better than that , and if he choose to grow gray crunching bone in a cavern , he have no business to be lur a girl into he companionship . " it be the most horrible of virgin - sacrifice , " say ; and he pain to himself what be 's inward sorrows as if he have be write a choric wail . but he would never lose sight of she : he would watch over she -- if he give up everything else in life he would watch over she , and she should know that she have one slave in the world , will have -- to use 's phrase -- a " passionate prodigality " of statement both to himself and other . the simple truth be that nothing then invite he so strongly as the presence of . invitation of the formal kind have be want , however , for will have never be ask to go to . , indeed , confident of do everything agreeable which , poor fellow , be too much absorb to think of , have arrange to bring to Lowick several time ( not neglect meanwhile to introduce he elsewhere on every opportunity as " a young relative of 's " ) . and though will have not see alone , they interview have be enough to restore she former sense of young companionship with
with one who be cleverer than herself , yet seem ready to be sway by she . poor Dorothea before she marriage have never find much room in other mind for what she care most to say ; and she have not , as we know , enjoy she husband 's superior instruction so much as she have expect . if she speak with any keenness of interest to , he hear she with a air of patience as if she have give a quotation from the familiar to he from he tender year , and sometimes mention curtly what ancient sect or personage have hold similar idea , as if there be too much of that sort in stock already ; at other time he would inform she that she be mistaken , and reassert what she remark have question . but always seem to see more in what she say than she herself see . have little vanity , but she have the ardent woman 's need to rule beneficently by make the joy of another soul . hence the mere chance of see will occasionally be like a lunette open in the wall of she prison , give she a glimpse of the sunny air ; and this pleasure begin to nullify she original alarm at what she husband might think about the introduction of as she uncle 's guest . on this subject have remain dumb . but will want to talk with alone , and be impatient of slow circumstance . however slight the terrestrial intercourse between and or and , time change the proportion of thing , and in later day it be preferable to have fewer sonnet and more conversation . necessity excuse stratagem , but thstratagey be limit by the dread of offending . he find out at last that he want to take a particular sketch at ; and one morning when have to drive along the road on he way to the county town , will ask to be set down with he sketch - book and camp - stool at , and without announce himself at the settle himself to sketch in a position where he must see if she come out to walk -- and he know that she usually walk a hour in the morning . but the stratagem be defeat by the weather . Cloud gather with treacherous quickness , the rain come down , and be obliged to take shelter in the house . he intend , on the strength of relationship , to go into the drawing - room and wait there without be announce ; and see he old acquaintance the butler in the hall , he say , " do not mention that I be here , ; I will wait till luncheon ; I know do not like to be disturb when he be in the library . " " master be out , sir ; there be only in the library . I would better tell she you be here , sir , " say , a red - cheek man give to lively converse with , and often agree with she that it must be dull for Madam . " oh , very well ; this confounded rain have hinder I from sketching , " say , feel so happy that he affect indifference with delightful ease . in another minute he be in the library , and be meet he with she sweet unconstrained smile . " have go to the 's , " she say , at once . " I do not know whether he will be at home again long before dinner . he be uncertain how long he should be . do you want to say anything particular to he ? " " no ; I come to sketch , but the rain drive I in . else I would not have disturb you yet . I suppose that be here , and I know he dislike interruption at this hour . " " I be indebt to the rain , then . I be so glad to see you . " utter these common word with the simple sincerity of a unhappy child , visit at school . " I really come for the chance of see you alone , " say , mysteriously force to be just as simple as she be . he could not stay to ask himself , why not ? " I want to talk about thing , as we do in . it always make a difference when other people be present . " " yes , " say , in she clear full tone of assent . " sit down . " she seat herself on a dark ottoman with the brown book behind she , look in she plain dress of some thin woollen - white material , without a single ornament on she besides she wedding - ring , as if she be under a vow to be different from all other woman ; and will sit down opposite she at two yard ' distance , the light fal on he bright curl and delicate but rather petulant profile , with its defiant curve of lip and ching . look at the other as if they have be two flower which have open then and there . Dorothea for the moment forget she husband 's mysterious irritation against : it seem fresh water at she thirsty lip to speak without fear to the one person whom she have find receptive ; for in look backward through sadness she exaggerate a past solace . " I have often think that I should like to talk to you again , " she say , immediately . " it seem strange to I how many thing I say to you . " " I remember they all , " say , with the unspeakable content in he soul
soul of feeling that he be in the presence of a creature worthy to be perfectly love . I think he own feeling at that moment be perfect , for we mortal have we divine moment , when love be satisfied in the completeness of the beloved object . " I have try to learn a great deal since we be in , " say . " I can read a little , and I be begin to understand just a little . I can help better now . I can find out reference for he and save he eye in many way . but it be very difficult to be learn ; it seem as if people be wear out on the way to great thought , and can never enjoy they because they be too tired . " " if a man have a capacity for great thought , he be likely to overtake they before he be decrepit , " say , with irrepressible quickness . but through certain sensibility be as quick as he , and see she face change , he add , immediately , " but it be quite true that the best mind have be sometimes overstrain in work out they idea . " " you correct I , " say . " I express myself ill . I should have say that those who have great thought get too much worn in work they out . I use to feel about that , even when I be a little girl ; and it always see to I that the use I should like to make of my life would be to help some one who do great work , so that he burthen might be lighter . " be lead on to this bit of autobiography without any sense of make a revelation . but she have never before say anything to which throw so strong a light on she marriage . he do not shrug he shoulder ; and for want of that muscular outlet he think the more irritably of beautiful lip kiss holy skull and other emptiness ecclesiastically enshrin . also he have to take care that he speech should not betray that thought . " but you may easily carry the help too far , " he say , " and get over-wrotch yourself . be you not too much shut up ? you already look paler . it would be better for to have a secretary ; he could easily get a man who would do half he work for he . it would save he more effectually , and you need only help he in lighter way . " " how can you think of that ? " say , in a tone of earnest remonstrance . " I should have no happiness if I do not help he in he work . what could I do ? there be no good to be do in . the only thing I desire be to help he more . and he object to a secretary : please not to mention that again . " " certainly not , now I know you feeling . but I have hear both and express the same wish . " " yes ? " say , " but they do not understand -- they want I to be a great deal on horseback , and have the garden altered and new conservatory , to fill up my day . I think you could understand that one 's mind have other want , " she add , rather impatiently -- " besides , can not bear to hear of a secretary . " " my mistake be excusable , " say . " in old day I use to hear speak as if he look forward to have a secretary . indeed he hold out the prospect of that office to I . but I turn out to be -- not good enough for it . " be try to extract out of this a excuse for she husband 's evident repulsion , as she say , with a playful smile , " you be not a steady worker enough . " " no , " say , shak he head backward somewhat after the manner of a spirited horse . and then , the old irritable demon prompt he to give another good pinch at the moth - wing of poor 's glory , he go on , " and I have see since that do not like any one to overlook he work and know thoroughly what he be do . he be too doubtful -- too uncertain of himself . I may not be good for much , but he dislike I because I disagree with he . " will be not without he intentions to be always generous , but we tongue be little trigger which have usually be pull before general intention can be bring to bear . and it be too intolerable that 's dislike of he should not be fairly account for to . yet when he have speak he be rather uneasy as to the effect on she . but be strangely quiet -- not immediately indignant , as she have be on a like occasion in . and the cause lay deep . she be no longer struggle against the perception of fact , but adjust herself to they clearest perception ; and now when she look steadily at she husband 's failure , still more at he possible consciousness of failure , she seem to be look along the one track where duty become tenderness . will 's want of reticence might have be meet with more severity , if he have not already be recommend to she mercy by she husband 's dislike , which must seem hard to she till she see better reason for it . she do not answer
answer at once , but after look down ruminatingly she say , with some earnestness , " must have overcome he dislike of you so far as he action be concerned : and that be admirable . " " yes ; he have show a sense of justice in family matter . it be a abominable thing that my grandmother should have be disinherit because she make what they call a mesalliance , though there be nothing to be say against she husband except that he be a polish refugee who give lesson for he bread . " " I wish I know all about she ! " say . " I wonder how she bear the change from wealth to poverty : I wonder whether she be happy with she husband ! do you know much about they ? " " no ; only that my grandfather be a patriot -- a bright fellow -- could speak many language -- musical -- get he bread by teach all sort of thing . they both die rather early . and I never know much of my father , beyond what my mother tell I ; but he inherit the musical talents . I remember he slow walk and he long thing hand ; and one day remain with I when he be lie ill , and I be very hungry , and have only a little bit of bread . " " ah , what a different life from mine ! " say , with keen interest , clasp she hand on she lap . " I have always have too much of everything . but tell I how it be -- could not have know about you then . " " no ; but my father have make himself know to , and that be my last hungry day . my father die soon after , and my mother and I be well take care of . always expressly recognize it as he duty to take care of we because of the harsh injustice which have be show to he mother 's sister . but now I be tell you what be not new to you . " in he inmost soul will be conscious of wishing to tell what be rather new even in he own construction of thing -- namely , that have never do more than pay a debt towards he . will be much too good a fellow to be easy under the sense of be ungrateful . and when gratitude have become a matter of reasoning there be many way of escape from its bond . " no , " answer ; " have always avoid dwelling on he own honorable action . " she do not feel that she husband 's conduct be depreciate ; but this notion of what justice have require in he relation with take strong hold on she mind . after a moment 's pause , she add , " he have never tell I that he support you mother . be she still live ? " " no ; she die by a accident -- a fall -- four year ago . it be curious that my mother , too , run away from she family , but not for the sake of she husband . she never would tell I anything about she family , except that she forsook they to get she own living -- go on the stage , in fact . she be a dark - ey creature , with crisp ringlet , and never seem to be get old . you see I come of rebellious blood on both side , " will end , smile brightly at , while she be still look with serious intentness before she , like a child see a drama for the first time . but she face , too , break into a smile as she say , " that be you apology , I suppose , for have yourself be rather rebellious ; I mean , to 's wish . you must remember that you have not do what he think best for you . and if he dislike you -- you be speak of dislike a little while ago -- but I should rather say , if he have show any painful feeling towards you , you must consider how sensitive he have become from the wear effect of study . perhaps , " she continue , get into a pleading tone , " my uncle have not tell you how serious 's illness be . it would be very petty of we who be well and can bear thing , to think much of small offence from those who carry a weight of trial . " " you teach I better , " say . " I will never grumble on that subject again . " there be a gentleness in he tone which come from the unutterable contentment of perceiving -- what be hardly conscious of -- that she be travel into the remoteness of pure pity and loyalty towards she husband . will be ready to adore she pity and loyalty , if she would associate himself with she in manifest they . " I have really sometimes be a perverse fellow , " he go on , " but I will never again , if I can help it , do or say what you would disapprove . " " that be very good of you , " say , with another open smile . " I shall have a little kingdom then , where I shall give law . but you will soon go away , out of my rule , I imagine . you will soon be tired of stay at the . " " that be a point I want to mention to you -- one of the reason why I wish to speak to you alone .
. propose that I should stay in this neighborhood . he have buy one of the newspaper , and he wish I to conduct that , and also to help he in other way . " " would not that be a sacrifice of higher prospect for you ? " say . " perhaps ; but I have always be blame for thinking of prospect , and not settle to anything . and here be something offer to I . if you would not like I to accept it , I will give it up . otherwise I would rather stay in this part of the country than go away . I belong to nobody anywhere else . " " I should like you to stay very much , " say , at once , as simply and readily as she have speak at . there be not the shadow of a reason in she mind at the moment why she should not say so . " then I _will stay , " say , shak he head backward , rise and go towards the window , as if to see whether the rain have cease . but the next moment , Dorothea , accord to a habit which be get continually stronger , begin to reflect that she husband feel differently from herself , and she colore deeply under the double embarrassment of have express what might be in opposition to she husband 's feeling , and of have to suggest this opposition to . if be face be not turn towards she , and this make it easier to say -- " but my opinion be of little consequence on such a subject . I think you should be guide by . I speak without think of anything else than my own feel , which have nothing to do with the real question . but it now occur to I -- perhaps might see that the proposal be not wise . can you not wait now and mention it to he ? " " I can not wait to - day , " say , inwardly sear by the possibility that would enter . " the rain be quite over now . I tell not to call for I : I would rather walk the five mile . I shall strike across , and see the gleam on the wet grass . I like that . " he approach she to shake hand quite hurriedly , long but not da to say , " do not mention the subject to . " no , he da not , could not say it . to ask she to be less simple and direct would be like breathing on the crystal that you want to see the light through . and there be always the other great dread -- of himself become dimmed and forever ray - shorn in she eye . " I wish you could have stay , " say , with a touch of mournfulness , as she rise and put out she hand . she also have she thought which she do not like to express :-- will certainly ought to lose no time in consulting 's wish , but for she to urge this might seem a undue dictation . so they only say " good - by , " and quit the house , strike across the field so as not to run any risk of encounter 's carriage , which , however , do not appear at the gate until four o'clock . that be a unpropitious hour for come home : it be too early to gain the moral support under ennui of dress he person for dinner , and too late to undress he mind of the day 's frivolous ceremony and affair , so as to be prepare for a good plunge into the serious business of study . on such occasion he usually throw into a easy - chair in the library , and allow to read the papers to he , close he eye the while . to -day , however , he decline that relief , observe that he have already have too many public detail urge upon he ; but he speak more cheerfully than usual , when ask about he fatigue , and add with that air of formal effort which never forsook he even when he speak without he waistcoat and cravat -- " I have have the gratification of meet my former acquaintance , , to - day , and of be praise by one who be himself a worthy recipient of praise . he speak very handsomely of my late tractate on the egyptian , -- use , in fact , term which it would not become I to repeat . " in uttering the last clause , lean over the elbow of he chair , and sway he head up and down , apparently as a muscular outlet instead of that recapitulation which would not have be become . " I be very glad you have have that pleasure , " say , delighte to see she husband less weary than usual at this hour . " before you come I have be regret that you happen to be out to - day . " " why so , my dear ? " say , throw himself backward again . " because have be here ; and he have mention a proposal of my uncle 's which I should like to know you opinion of . " she husband she felt be really concerned in this question . even with she ignorance of the world she have a vague impression that the position offer to will be out of keep with he family connection , and certainly have a claim to be consult . he do not speak , but merely bow . " dear uncle , you know , have many
many project . it appear that he have buy one of the newspaper , and he have ask to stay in this neighborhood and conduct the paper for he , besides help he in other way . " look at she husband while she speak , but he have at first blinked and finally close he eye , as if to save they ; while he lip become more tense . " what be you opinion ? " she add , rather timidly , after a slight pause . " do come on purpose to ask my opinion ? " say , open he eye narrowly with a knife - ed look at . she be really uncomfortable on the point he inquire about , but she only become a little more serious , and she eye do not swerve . " no , " she answer immediately , " he do not say that he come to ask you opinion . but when he mention the proposal , he of course expect I to tell you of it . " be silent . " I fear that you might feel some objection . but certainly a young man with so much talent might be very useful to my uncle -- might help he to do good in a better way . and wish to have some fix occupation . he have be blame , he say , for not seek something of that kind , and he would like to stay in this neighborhood because no one care for he elsewhere . " feel that this be a consideration to soften she husband . however , he do not speak , and she presently recur to and the 's breakfast . but there be no longer sunshine on these subject . the next morning , without 's knowledge , despatch the follow letter , begin " dear " ( he have always before address he as " " ) :-- " . inform I that a proposal have be make to you , and ( accord to a inference by no means stretch ) have on you part be in some degree entertained , which involve you residence in this neighborhood in a capacity which I be justifi in say touch my own position in such a way as render it not only natural and warrantable in I when that effect be view under the influence of legitimate feeling , but incumbend on I when the same effect be consider in the light of my responsibility , to state at once that you acceptance of the proposal above indicate would be highly offensive to I . that I have some claim to the exercise of a veto here , would not , I believe , be deny by any reasonable person cognizant of the relation between we : relation which , though throw into the past by you recent procedure , be not thereby annull in they character of determining antecedent . I will not here make reflection on any person 's judgment . it be enough for I to point out to yourself that there be certain social fitnesse and propriety which should hinder a somewhat near relative of mine from become any wise conspicuous in this vicinity in a status not only much beneath my own , but associate at best with the sciolism of literary or political adventurer . at any rate , the contrary issue must exclude you from further reception at my house . yours faithfully , " . " meanwhile 's mind be innocently at work towards the further embitterment of she husband ; dwell , with a sympathy that grow to agitation , on what will have tell she about he parent and grandparent . any private hour in she day be usually spend in she blue - green boudoir , and she have come to be very fond of its pallid quaintness . nothing have be outwardly alter there ; but while the summer have gradually advanced over the western field beyond the avenue of elm , the bare room have gather within it those memory of a inward life which fill the air as with a cloud of good or bad angels , the invisible yet active form of we spiritual triumph or we spiritual fall . she have be so use to struggle for and to find resolve in look along the avenue towards the arch of western light that the vision itself have gain a communicating power . even the pale stag seem to have remind glance and to mean mutely , " yes , we know . " and the group of delicately touched miniature have make a audience as of being no longer disturb about they own earthly lot , but still humanly interested . especially the mysterious " " about whom have never find it easy to question she husband . and now , since she conversation with , many fresh image have gather round that who be 's grandmother ; the presence of that delicate miniature , so like a liive face that she know , help to concentrate she feeling . what a wrong , to cut off the girl from the family protection and inheritance only because she have choose a man who be poor ! , early troubl she elder with question about the fact around she , have wrotch herself into some independent clearness as to the historical , political reason why eldest son have superior rights , and why land should be entail : those reason , impress she with a certain awe , might be weightier than she know , but here be a question of tie which leave they uninfringed . here be a daughter whose child -- even accord to the ordinary aping of aristocratic institution by people who be no more aristocratic than retire grocer , and who have no more land to " keep together
together " than a lawn and a paddock -- would have a prior claim . be inheritance a question of liking or of responsibility ? all the energy of 's nature go on the side of responsibility -- the fulfilment of claim found on we own deed , such as marriage and parentage . it be true , she say to herself , that have a debt to the Ladislaw -- that he have to pay back what the Ladislaw have be wrong of . and now she begin to think of she husband 's will , which have be make at the time of they marriage , leave the bulk of he property to she , with proviso in case of she have child . that ought to be alter ; and no time ought to be lose . this very question which have just arisen about 's occupation , be the occasion for placing thing on a new , right footing . she husband , she feel sure , accord to all he previous conduct , would be ready to take the just view , if she propose it -- she , in whose interest a unfair concentration of the property have be urge . he sense of right have surmount and would continue to surmount anything that might be call antipathy . she suspect that she uncle 's scheme be disapprove by , and this make it seem all the more opportune that a fresh understanding should be begin , so that instead of 's start penniless and accept the first function that offer itself , he should find himself in possession of a rightful income which should be pay by she husband during he life , and , by a immediate alteration of the will , should be secure at he death . the vision of all this as what ought to be do seem to like a sudden letting in of daylight , wake she from she previous stupidity and incurious self - absorb ignorance about she husband 's relation to other . will have refuse 's future aid on a ground that no longer appear right to she ; and have never himself see fully what be the claim upon he . " but he will ! " say . " the great strength of he character lie here . and what be we do with we money ? we make no use of half of we income . my own money buy I nothing but a uneasy conscience . " there be a peculiar fascination for in this division of property intend for herself , and always regard by she as excessive . she be blind , you see , to many thing obvious to other -- likely to tread in the wrong place , as have warn she ; yet she blindness to whatever do not lie in she own pure purpose carry she safely by the side of precipice where vision would have be perilous with fear . the thought which have gather vividness in the solitude of she boudoir occupy she incessantly through the day on which have send he letter to . everything seem hindrance to she till she could find a opportunity of open she heart to she husband . to he preoccupied mind all subjects be to be approach gently , and she have never since he illness lose from she consciousness the dread of agitat he . when young ardor be set brooding over the conception of a prompt deed , the deed itself seem to start forth with independent life , master ideal obstacle . the day pass in a sombre fashion , not unusual , though be perhaps unusually silent ; but there be hour of the night which might be count on as opportunity of conversation ; for , when aware of she husband 's sleeplessness , have establish a habit of rising , light a candle , and read he to sleep again . and this night she be from the begin sleepless , excit by resolve . he sleep as usual for a few hour , but she have risen softly and have sit in the darkness for nearly a hour before he say -- " Dorothea , since you be up , will you light a candle ? " " do you feel ill , dear ? " be she first question , as she obey he . " no , not at all ; but I shall be oblige , since you be up , if you will read I a few page of . " " may I talk to you a little instead ? " say . " certainly . " " I have be think about money all day -- that I have always have too much , and especially the prospect of too much . " " these , my dear Dorothea , be providential arrangement . " " but if one have too much in consequence of other be wronged , it seem to I that the divine voice which tell we to set that wrong right must be obey . " " what , my love , be the bearing of you remark ? " " that you have be too liberal in arrangement for I -- I mean , with regard to property ; and that make I unhappy . " " how so ? I have none but comparatively distant connection . " " I have be lead to think about you aunt , and how she be leave in poverty only because she marry a poor man , a act which be not disgraceful , since he be not unworthy . it be on that ground , I know , that you educate and provide for he mother . " wait a few moment for some answer that would help she onward . none come , and she next word seem
seem the more forcible to she , fall clear upon the dark silence . " but surely we should regard he claim as a much greater one , even to the half of that property which I know that you have destin for I . and I think he ought at once to be provide for on that understanding . it be not right that he should be in the dependence of poverty while we be rich . and if there be any objection to the proposal he mention , the give he he true place and he true share would set aside any motive for he accept it . " " Ladislaw have probably be speak to you on this subject ? " say , with a certain biting quickness not habitual to he . " indeed , no ! " say , earnestly . " how can you imagine it , since he have so lately decline everything from you ? I fear you think too hardly of he , dear . he only tell I a little about he parent and grandparent , and almost all in answer to my question . you be so good , so just -- you have do everything you think to be right . but it seem to I clear that more than that be right ; and I must speak about it , since I be the person who would get what be call benefin by that ' more ' not be do . " there be a perceptible pause before reply , not quickly as before , but with a still more biting emphasis . " Dorothea , my love , this be not the first occasion , but it be well that it should be the last , on which you have assume a judgment on subject beyond you scope . into the question how far conduct , especially in the matter of alliances , constitute a forfeiture of family claim , I do not now enter . Suffice it , that you be not here qualified to discriminate . what I now wish you to understand be , that I accept no revision , still less dictation within that range of affair which I have deliberat upon as distinctly and properly mine . it be not for you to interfere between I and , and still less to encourage communication from he to you which constitute a criticism on my procedure . " poor Dorothea , shroude in the darkness , be in a tumult of conflict emotions . alarm at the possible effect on himself of she husband 's strongly manifested anger , would have check any expression of she own resentment , even if she have be quite free from doubt and compunction under the consciousness that there might be some justice in he last insinuation . hear he breathe quickly after he have speak , she sit listen , frightene , wretch -- with a dumb inward cry for help to bear this nightmare of a life in which every energy be arrest by dread . but nothing else happen , except that they both remain a long while sleepless , without speak again . the next day , receive the follow answer from :-- " ,-- I have give all due consideration to you letter of yesterday , but I be unable to take precisely you view of we mutual position . with the fullest acknowledgment of you generous conduct to I in the past , I must still maintain that a obligation of this kind can not fairly fetter I as you appear to expect that it should . grant that a benefactor 's wish may constitute a claim ; there must always be a reservation as to the quality of those wish . they may possibly clash with more imperative consideration . or a benefactor 's veto might impose such a negation on a man 's life that the consequent blank might be more cruel than the benefaction be generous . I be merely use strong illustration . in the present case I be unable to take you view of the bearing which my acceptance of occupation -- not enrich certainly , but not dishonorable -- will have on you own position which seem to I too substantial to be affect in that shadowy manner . and though I do not believe that any change in we relation will occur ( certainly none have yet occur ) which can nullify the obligation impos on I by the past , pardon I for not see that those obligation should restrain I from use the ordinary freedom of live where I choose , and maintain myself by any lawful occupation I may choose . Regrett that there exist this difference between we as to a relation in which the conferring of benefit have be entirely on you side -- I remain , yours with persistent obligation , . " poor felt ( and must not we , be impartial , feel with he a little ? ) that no man have juster cause for disgust and suspicion than he . yong , he be sure , mean to defy and annoy he , mean to win 's confidence and sow she mind with disrespect , and perhaps aversion , towards she husband . some motive beneath the surface have be need to account for 's sudden change of in reject 's aid and quit he travels ; and this defiant determination to fix himself in the neighborhood by take up something so much at variance with he former choice as 's project , reveal clearly enough that the undeclared motive have relation to . not for one moment do suspect Dorothea of any doubleness : he have no suspicions of she , but he have ( what be little less uncomfortable ) the positive knowledge that she tendency to form opinion about she husband
husband 's conduct be accompany with a disposition to regard will Ladislee favorably and be influence by what he say . he own proud reticence have prevent he from ever be undeceive in the supposition that have originally ask she uncle to invite Will to he house . and now , on receive 's letter , have to consider he duty . he would never have be easy to call he action anything else than duty ; but in this case , contending motives thrust he back into negation . should he apply directly to , and demand of that troublesome gentleman to revoke he proposal ? or should he consult , and get he to concur in remonstrance against a step which touch the whole family ? in either case be aware that failure be just as probable as success . it be impossible for he to mention 's name in the matter , and without some alarming urgency be as likely as not , after meet all representation with apparent assent , to wind up by say , " Never fear , ! Depend upon it , young Ladislaw will do you credit . Depend upon it , I have put my finger on the right thing . " and shrank nervously from communicate on the subject with , between whom and himself there have never be any cordiality , and who would immediately think of Dorothea without any mention of she . poor be distrustful of everybody be feel towards he , especially as a husband . to let any one suppose that he be jealous would be to admit they ( suspect ) view of he disadvantage : to let they know that he do not find marriage particularly blissful would imply he conversion to they ( probably ) earlier disapproval . it would be as bad as lette , and generally , know how backward he be in organize the matter for he " Key to all Mythology . " all through he life have be try not to admit even to himself the inward sore of self - doubt and jealousy . and on the most delicate of all personal subject , the habit of proud suspicious reticence tell doubly . thus remain proudly , bitterly silent . but he have forbidden Will to come to , and he be mentally prepare other measure of frustration . . " C' est beaucoup que le jugement de hommes yosu le action humaine ; tot out tard il devient efficace . " --guizot . could not look with any satisfaction on 's new course ; but it be easier to object than to hinder . account for he have come in alone one day to lunch with the Cadwallader by say -- " I can not talk to you as I want , before : it might hurt she . indeed , it would not be right . " " I know what you mean -- the ' pioneer ' at the ! " dart in , almost before the last word be off she friend 's tongue . " it be frightful -- this take to buy whistle and blow they in everybody 's hearing . lie in bed all day and play at dominoe , like poor , would be more private and bearable . " " I see they be begin to attack we friend Brooke in the ' Trumpet , ' " say the rector , lounge back and smile easily , as he would have do if he have be attack himself . " there be tremendous sarcasm against a landlord not a hundred mile from , who receive he own rent , and make no return . " " I do wish would leave that off , " say , with he little frown of annoyance . " be he really go to be put in nomination , though ? " say . " I see Farebrother yesterday -- he be Whiggish himself , and ; that be the worst I know of he ; -- and he say that be get up a pretty strong party . , the banker , be he foremost man . but he think would come off badly at a nomination . " " exactly , " say , with earnestness . " I have be inquire into the thing , for I have never know anything about politics before -- the county be my business . what trust to , be that they be go to turn out Oliver because he be a Peelite . but tell I that if they send up a Whig at all it be sure to be , one of those candidate who come from heaven know where , but dead against , and a experienced Parliamentary man . 's rather rough : he forget that he be speak to I . he say if want a pelting , he could get it cheaper than by go to the husting . " " I warn you all of it , " say , wave she hand outward . " I say to Humphrey long ago , be go to make a splash in the mud . and now he have do it . " " well , he might have take it into he head to marry , " say the rector . " that would have be a graver mess than a little flirtation with politics . " " he may do that afterwards , " say --" when he have come out on the other side of the mud with a ague . " " what I care for most be he own dignity , " say . " of course I care the more because of the family . but he be get on in life now , and I do not like to think of he expose himself . they will be rak up everything
everything against he . " " I suppose it be no use try any persuasion , " say the rector . " there be such a odd mixture of obstinacy and changeableness in . have you try he on the subject ? " " well , no , " say ; " I feel a delicacy in appear to dictate . but I have be talk to this young Ladislaw that be make a factotum of . Ladislaw seem clever enough for anything . I think it as well to hear what he have to say ; and he be against 's stand this time . I think he will turn he round : I think the nomination may be stave off . " " I know , " say , nodding . " the independent member have not get he speech well enough by heart . " " but this Ladislaw -- there again be a vexatious business , " say . " we have have he two or three time to dine at the hall ( you have meet he , by the bye ) as 's guest and a relation of 's , think he be only on a fly visit . and now I find he be in everybody 's mouth in as the editor of the ' . ' there be story go about he as a quill - drive alien , a foreign emissary , and what not . " " will not like that , " say the rector . " there _is_ some foreign blood in , " return . " I hope he will not go into extreme opinion and carry on . " " oh , he be a dangerous young sprig , that , " say , " with he opera song and he ready tongue . a sort of Byronic hero -- a amorous conspirator , it strike I . and be not fond of he . I could see that , the day the picture be bring . " " I do not like to begin on the subject with , " say . " he have more right to interfere than I . but it be a disagreeable affair all round . what a character for anybody with decent connections to show himself in !-- one of those newspaper fellows ! you have only to look at , who manage the ' Trumpet . ' I see he the other day with . he write be sound enough , I believe , but he be such a low fellow , that I wish he have be on the wrong side . " " what can you expect with these peddling papers ? " say the rector . " I do not suppose you could get a high style of man anywhere to be write up interest he do not really care about , and for pay that hardly keep he in at elbow . " " exactly : that make it so annoy that should have put a man who have a sort of connection with the family in a position of that kind . for my part , I think be rather a fool for accepting . " " it be 's fault , " say . " why do not he use he interest to get make a attache or send to ? that be how family get rid of troublesome sprig . " " there be no knowing to what length the mischief may go , " say , anxiously . " but if say nothing , what can I do ? " " oh my dear , " say the rector , " do not let we make too much of all this . it be likely enough to end in mere smoke . after a month or two and this master Ladislaw will get tired of each other ; Ladislaw will take wing ; Brooke will sell the ' pioneer , ' and everything will settle down again as usual . " " there be one good chance -- that he will not like to feel he money ooze away , " say . " if I know the item of election expense I could scare he . it be no use ply he with wide word like Expenditure : I would not talk of phlebotomy , I would empty a pot of leech upon he . what we good stingy people do not like , be have we sixpence suck away from we . " " and he will not like have thing rak up against he , " say . " there be the management of he estate . they have begin upon that already . and it really be painful for I to see . it be a nuisance under one be very nose . I do think one be bound to do the best for one 's land and tenant , especially in these hard time . " " perhaps the ' Trumpet ' may rouse he to make a change , and some good may come of it all , " say the rector . " I know I should be glad . I should hear less grumbling when my tithe be pay . I do not know what I should do if there be not a modus in . " " I want he to have a proper man to look after thing -- I want he to take on again , " say . " he get rid of twelve year ago , and everything have be go wrong since . I think of get to manage for I -- he have make such a capital plan for my building ; and be hardly up to the mark . but would not undertake the estate again unless leave it entirely to he . " " in the right of it too , " say the
the rector . " be a independent fellow : a original , simple - minded fellow . one day , when he be do some valuation for I , he tell I point - blank that clergyman seldom understand anything about business , and do mischief when they meddle ; but he say it as quietly and respectfully as if he have be talk to I about sailor . he would make a different parish of , if would let he manage . I wish , by the help of the ' Trumpet , ' you could bring that round . " " if have keep near she uncle , there would have be some chance , " say . " she might have get some power over he in time , and she be always uneasy about the estate . she have wonderfully good notion about such thing . but now take she up entirely . complain a good deal . we can hardly get she to dine with we , since he have that fit . " end with a look of pitying disgust , and shrug she shoulders as much as to say that _she_ be not likely to see anything new in that direction . " poor Casaubon ! " the rector say . " that be a nasty attack . I think he look shatte the other day at the 's . " " in point of fact , " resume , not choose to dwell on " fit , " " do not mean badly by he tenant or any one else , but he have get that way of paring and clipping at expense . " " come , that be a blessing , " say . " that help he to find himself in a morning . he may not know he own opinion , but he do know he own pocket . " " I do not believe a man be in pocket by stinginess on he land , " say . " oh , stinginess may be abuse like other virtue : it will not do to keep one 's own pig lean , " say , who have risen to look out of the window . " but talk of a independent politician and he will appear . " " what ! Brooke ? " say she husband . " yes . now , you ply he with the ' Trumpet , ' Humphrey ; and I will put the leech on he . what will you do , ? " " the fact be , I do not like to begin about it with , in we mutual position ; the whole thing be so unpleasant . I do wish people would behave like gentleman , " say the good baronet , feel that this be a simple and comprehensive programme for social well - being . " here you all be , eh ? " say , shuffl round and shak hand . " I be go up to the by - and - by , . but it be pleasant to find everybody , you know . well , what do you think of thing ?-- go on a little fast ! it be true enough , what say --' since yesterday , a century have pass away :' -- they be in the next century , you know , on the other side of the water . go on faster than we be . " " why , yes , " say the rector , take up the newspaper . " here be the ' Trumpet ' accuse you of lagge behind -- do you see ? " " Eh ? no , " say , drop he glove into he hat and hastily adjust he eye - glass . but keep the paper in he hand , say , with a smile in he eye -- " look here ! all this be about a landlord not a hundr mile from , who receive he own rent . they say he be the most retrogressive man in the county . I think you must have teach they that word in the ' . ' " " oh , that be -- a illiterate fellow , you know . Retrogressive , now ! come , that be capital . he think it mean destructive : they want to make I out a destructive , you know , " say , with that cheerfulness which be usually sustain by a adversary 's ignorance . " I think he know the meaning of the word . here be a sharp stroke or two . if we have to describe a man who be retrogressive in the most evil sense of the word -- we should say , he be one who would dub himself a reformer of we constitution , while every interest for which he be immediately responsible be go to decay : a philanthropist who can not bear one rogue to be hang , but do not mind five honest tenant be half - starve : a man who shriek at corruption , and keep he farm at rack - rent : who roar himself red at rotten borough , and do not mind if every field on he farm have a rotten gate : a man very open - hear to Leeds and Manchester , no doubt ; he would give any number of representative who will pay for they seat out of they own pocket : what he object to give , be a little return on rent - day to help a tenant to buy stock , or a outlay on repair to keep the weather out at a tenant 's barn - door or make he house look a little less like a irish cottier 's . but we all know the wag 's definition of a philanthropist : a man whose
whose charity increase directly as the square of the distance . and so on . all the rest be to show what sort of legislator a philanthropist be likely to make , " end the rector , throw down the paper , and clasp he hand at the back of he head , while he look at with a air of amused neutrality . " come , that be rather good , you know , " say , take up the paper and try to bear the attack as easily as he neighbor do , but coloring and smile rather nervously ; " that about roaring himself red at rotten borough -- I never make a speech about rotten borough in my life . and as to roar myself red and that kind of thing -- these man never understand what be good satire . , you know , should be true up to a certain point . I recollect they say that in ' the ' somewhere -- it must be true up to a certain point . " " well , that be really a hit about the gate , " say , anxious to tread carefully . " complain to I the other day that he have not get a decent gate on he farm . have invent a new pattern of gate -- I wish you would try it . one ought to use some of one 's timber in that way . " " you go in for fancy farming , you know , , " say , appear to glance over the column of the " . " " that be you hobby , and you do not mind the expense . " " I think the most expensive hobby in the world be stand for parliament , " say . " they say the last unsuccessful candidate at -- , be not he name ?-- spend ten thousand pound and fail because he do not bribe enough . what a bitter reflection for a man ! " " somebody be say , " say the rector , laughingly , " that be nothing to , for bribery . " " nothing of the kind , " say . " the bribe , you know : and he set bribe with treating , hot codling , and that sort of thing ; and they bring the voter drink to the poll . but they be not go to have it they own way in future -- not in future , you know . be a little backward , I admit -- the freeman be a little backward . but we shall educate they -- we shall bring they on , you know . the best people there be on we side . " " Hawley say you have man on you side who will do you harm , " remark . " he say Bulstrode the banker will do you harm . " " and that if you get pelt , " interpose , " half the rotten egg would mean hatred of you committee -man . good heaven ! think what it must be to be pelt for wrong opinion . and I seem to remember a story of a man they pretend to chair and let he fall into a dust - heap on purpose ! " " Pelting be nothing to they find hole in one 's coat , " say the rector . " I confess that be what I should be afraid of , if we parson have to stand at the husting for preferment . I should be afraid of they reckon up all my fishing day . upon my word , I think the truth be the hardest missile one can be pelt with . " " the fact be , " say , " if a man go into public life he must be prepare for the consequence . he must make himself proof against calumny . " " my dear Chettam , that be all very fine , you know , " say . " but how will you make yourself proof against calumny ? you should read history -- look at ostracism , persecution , martyrdom , and that kind of thing . they always happen to the best man , you know . but what be that in ? --' fiat justitia , ruat . . . something or other . " " exactly , " say , with a little more heat than usual . " what I mean by be proof against calumny be be able to point to the fact as a contradiction . " " and it be not martyrdom to pay bill that one have run into one 's self , " say . but it be 's evident annoyance that must stir . " well , you know , , " he say , rise , take up he hat and lean on he stick , " you and I have a different system . you be all for outlay with you farm . I do not want to make out that my system be good under all circumstance -- under all circumstance , you know . " " there ink to be a new valuation make from time to time , " say . " return be very well occasionally , but I like a fair valuation . what do you say , ? " " I agree with you . if I be , I would choke the ' Trumpet ' at once by get to make a new valuation of the farms , and give he carte blanche about gate and repair : that be my view of the political situation , " say the rector , broaden himself by stick he thumb in he armhole , and laugh towards . " that be a showy sort of thing to do , you know ,
, " say . " but I should like you to tell I of another landlord who have distress he tenant for arrear as little as I have . I let the old tenant stay on . I be uncommonly easy , let I tell you , uncommonly easy . I have my own idea , and I take my stand on they , you know . a man who do that be always charge with eccentricity , inconsistency , and that kind of thing . when I change my line of action , I shall follow my own idea . " after that , remember that there be a packet which he have omit to send off from the , and he bay everybody hurriedly good - by . " I do not want to take a liberty with , " say ; " I see he be nettle . but as to what he say about old tenant , in point of fact no new tenant would take the farm on the present term . " " I have a notion that he will be bring round in time , " say the rector . " but you be pull one way , , and we be pull another . you want to frighten he away from expense , and we want to frighten he into it . better let he try to be popular and see that he character as a landlord stand in he way . I do not think it signify two straw about the ' pioneer , ' or , or 's speechify to the Middlemarcher . but it do signify about the parishioner in be comfortable . " " excuse I , it be you two who be on the wrong tack , " say . " you should have prove to he that he lose money by bad management , and then we should all have pull together . if you put he a - horseback on politics , I warn you of the consequence . it be all very well to ride on stick at home and call they idea . " . " if , as I have , you also doe , attire in woman see , and dare love that , and say so too , and forget the he and she ; and if this love , though place so , from prophane man you hide , which will no faith on this bestow , or , if they doe , deride : then you have do a braver thing Than all the Worthies do , and a braver thence will spre , which be , to keep that hid . " -- . . 's mind be not fruitful in device , but he grow anxiety to " act on , " once bring close to he constant belief in 's capacity for influence , become formative , and issue in a little plan ; namely , to plead 's indisposition as a reason for fetch by herself to the hall , and to leave she at the with the carriage on the way , after make she fully aware of the situation concern the management of the estate . in this way it happen that one day near four o'clock , when and be seat in the library , the door open and be announce . , the moment before , have be low in the depth of boredom , and , oblige to help in arrange " document " about hang sheep - stealer , be exemplify the power we minds have of ride several horse at once by inwardly arrange measure towards get a lodging for himself in and cutting short he constant residence at the ; while there flit through all these steadier image a tickling vision of a sheep - steal epic write with Homeric particularity . when be announce he start up as from a electric shock , and feel a tingling at he finger - end . any one obserive he would have see a change in he complexion , in the adjustment of he facial muscle , in the vividness of he glance , which might have make they imagine that every molecule in he body have pass the message of a magic touch . and so it have . for effective magic be transcendent nature ; and who shall measure the subtlety of those touch which convey the quality of soul as well as body , and make a man 's passion for one woman differ from he passion for another a joy in the morning light over valley and river and white mountain - top differ from joy among chinese lantern and glass panel ? will , too , be make of very impressible stuff . the bow of a violin draw near he cleverly , would at one stroke change the aspect of the world for he , and he point of view shift -- as easily as he mood . 's entrance be the freshness of morning . " well , my dear , this be pleasant , now , " say , meet and kiss she . " you have leave with he book , I suppose . that be right . we must not have you get too learned for a woman , you know . " " there be no fear of that , uncle , " say , turn to and shake hand with open cheerfulness , while she make no other form of greeting , but go on answer she uncle . " I be very slow . when I want to be busy with book , I be often play truant among my thought . I find it be not so easy to be learn as to plan cottage . " she seat herself beside she uncle opposite to , and be evidently preoccupied with something that make she
she almost unmindful of he . he be ridiculously disappointed , as if he have imagine that she come have anything to do with he . " why , yes , my dear , it be quite you hobby to draw plan . but it be good to break that off a little . Hobby be apt to run away with we , you know ; it do not do to be run away with . we must keep the rein . I have never let myself be run away with ; I always pull up . that be what I tell . he and I be alike , you know : he like to go into everything . we be work at capital punishment . we shall do a great deal together , and I . " " yes , " say , with characteristic directness , " have be tell I that he be in hope of see a great change make soon in you management of the estate -- that you be think of have the farm value , and repair make , and the cottage improve , so that may look quite another place . oh , how happy ! " -- she go on , clasp she hand , with a return to that more childlike impetuous manner , which have be subdue since she marriage . " if I be at home still , I should take to ride again , that I might go about with you and see all that ! and you be go to engage , who praise my cottage , say . " " be a little hasty , my dear , " say , color slightly ; " a little hasty , you know . I never say I should do anything of the kind . I never say I should _not do it , you know . " " he only feel confident that you will do it , " say , in a voice as clear and unhesitating as that of a young chorister chant a credo , " because you mean to enter parliament as a member who care for the improvement of the people , and one of the first thing to be make better be the state of the land and the laborer . think of Kit Downes , uncle , who live with he wife and seven child in a house with one sitting room and one bedroom hardly larger than this table !-- and those poor Dagley , in they tumble - down farmhouse , where they live in the back kitchen and leave the other room to the rat ! that be one reason why I do not like the picture here , dear uncle -- which you think I stupid about . I use to come from the village with all that dirt and coarse ugliness like a pain within I , and the simpering picture in the drawing - room seem to I like a wicked attempt to find delight in what be false , while we do not mind how hard the truth be for the neighbor outside we wall . I think we have no right to come forward and urge wider change for good , until we have try to alter the evils which lie under we own hand . " have gather emotion as she go on , and have forget everything except the relief of pour forth she feeling , uncheck : a experience once habitual with she , but hardly ever present since she marriage , which have be a perpetual struggle of energy with fear . for the moment , 's admiration be accompany with a chilling sense of remoteness . a man be seldom asham of feeling that he can not love a woman so well when he see a certain greatness in she : nature have intend greatness for man . but nature have sometimes make sad oversight in carry out she intention ; as in the case of good , whose masculine consciousness be at this moment in rather a stammering condition under the eloquence of he niece . he could not immediately find any other mode of express himself than that of rising , fix he eye - glass , and finger the papers before he . at last he say -- " there be something in what you say , my dear , something in what you say -- but not everything -- eh , Ladislaw ? you and I do not like we picture and statue be find fault with . young lady be a little ardent , you know -- a little one - sided , my dear . art , poetry , that kind of thing , elevate a nation -- emollit more -- you understand a little now . but --eh ? what ? " these interrogative be address to the footman who have come in to say that the keeper have find one of 's boy with a leveret in he hand just kill . " I will come , I will come . I shall let he off easily , you know , " say aside to , shuffl away very cheerfully . " I hope you feel how right this change be that I -- that wish for , " say to , as soon as she uncle be gone . " I do , now I have hear you speak about it . I shall not forget what you have say . but can you think of something else at this moment ? I may not have another opportunity of speak to you about what have occur , " say , rise with a movement of impatience , and hold the back of he chair with both hand . " pray tell I what it be , " say , anxiously , also rise and go to the open
open window , where be look in , pante and wag he tail . she lean she back against the window - frame , and lay she hand on the dog 's head ; for though , as we know , she be not fond of pet that must be hold in the hand or trodden on , she be always attentive to the feeling of dog , and very polite if she have to decline they advance . will follow she only with he eye and say , " I presume you know that have forbide I to go to he house . " " no , I do not , " say , after a moment 's pause . she be evidently much move . " I be very , very sorry , " she add , mournfully . she be think of what will have no knowledge of -- the conversation between she and she husband in the darkness ; and she be anew smitten with hopelessness that she could influence 's action . but the mark expression of she sorrow convinced while that it be not all give to he personally , and that have not be visit by the idea that 's dislike and jealousy of he turn upon herself . he feel a odd mixture of delight and vexation : of delight that he could dwell and be cherish in she think as in a pure home , without suspicion and without stint -- of vexation because he be of too little account with she , be not formidable enough , be treat with a unhesitating benevolence which do not flatter he . but he dread of any change in be stronger than he discontent , and he begin to speak again in a tone of mere explanation . " 's reason be , he displeasure at my take a position here which he consider unsuited to my rank as he cousin . I have tell he that I can not give way on this point . it be a little too hard on I to expect that my course in life be to be hamper by prejudice which I think ridiculous . Obligation may be stretch till it be no better than a brand of slavery stamp on we when we be too young to know its meaning . I would not have accept the position if I have not mean to make it useful and honorable . I be not bound to regard family dignity in any other light . " felt wretch . she think she husband altogether in the wrong , on more grounds than have mention . " it be better for we not to speak on the subject , " she say , with a tremulousness not common in she voice , " since you and disagree . you intend to remain ? " she be look out on the lawn , with melancholy meditation . " yes ; but I shall hardly ever see you now , " say , in a tone of almost boyish complaint . " no , " say , turn she eye full upon he , " hardly ever . but I shall hear of you . I shall know what you be do for my uncle . " " I shall know hardly anything about you , " say . " no one will tell I anything . " " oh , my life be very simple , " say , she lip curl with a exquisite smile , which irradiate she melancholy . " I be always at . " " that be a dreadful imprisonment , " say , impetuously . " no , do not think that , " say . " I have no longing . " he do not speak , but she reply to some change in he expression . " I mean , for myself . except that I should like not to have so much more than my share without do anything for other . but I have a belief of my own , and it comfort I . " " what be that ? " say , rather jealous of the belief . " that by desire what be perfectly good , even when we do not quite know what it be and can not do what we would , we be part of the divine power against evil -- wide the skirt of light and make the struggle with darkness narrower . " " that be a beautiful mysticism -- it be a -- " " please not to call it by any name , " say , put out she hand entreatingly . " you will say it be , or something else geographical . it be my life . I have find it out , and can not part with it . I have always be find out my religion since I be a little girl . I use to pray so much -- now I hardly ever pray . I try not to have desire merely for myself , because they may not be good for other , and I have too much already . I only tell you , that you might know quite well how my day go at . " " bless you for tell I ! " say , ardently , and rather wonder at himself . they be look at each other like two fond child who be talk confidentially of bird . " what be _you religion ? " say . " I mean -- not what you know about religion , but the belief that help you most ? " " to love what be good and beautiful when I see it , " say . " but I be a rebel : I do not feel bound , as you do , to submit to what I do not like .
. " " but if you like what be good , that come to the same thing , " say , smile . " now you be subtle , " say . " yes ; often say I be too subtle . I do not feel as if I be subtle , " say , playfully . " but how long my uncle be ! I must go and look for he . I must really go on to the Hall . be expect I . " will offer to tell , who presently come and say that he would step into the carriage and go with as far as 's , to speak about the small delinquent who have be catch with the leveret . renew the subject of the estate as they drive along , but , not be take unawar , get the talk under he own control . " Chettam , now , " he reply ; " he find fault with I , my dear ; but I should not preserve my game if it be not for , and he can not say that that expense be for the sake of the tenant , you know . it be a little against my feeling :-- poaching , now , if you come to look into it -- I have often think of get up the subject . not long ago , , the preacher , be brotch up for knocke down a hare that come across he path when he and he wife be walk out together . he be pretty quick , and knock it on the neck . " " that be very brutal , I think , " say " well , now , it seem rather black to I , I confess , in a preacher , you know . and say , ' you may judge what a _hypocrite_ he be . ' and upon my word , I think look very little like ' the highest style of man ' -- as somebody call the -- young , the poet young , I think -- you know yong ? well , now , in he shabby black gaiter , plead that he think the have send he and he wife a good dinner , and he have a right to knock it down , though not a mighty hunter before the , as be -- I assure you it be rather comic : Fielding would have make something of it -- or , now -- might have work it up . but really , when I come to think of it , I could not help like that the fellow should have a bit of hare to say over . it be all a matter of prejudice -- prejudice with the law on its side , you know -- about the stick and the gaiter , and so on . however , it do not do to reason about thing ; and law be law . but I get to be quiet , and I hush the matter up . I doubt whether would not have be more severe , and yet he come down on I as if I be the hardest man in the county . but here we be at 's . " get down at a farmyard - gate , and drive on . it be wonderful how much uglier thing will look when we only suspect that we be blame for they . even we own person in the glass be apt to change they aspect for we after we have hear some frank remark on they less admirable point ; and on the other hand it be astonish how pleasantly conscience take we encroachment on those who never complain or have nobody to complain for they . 's homestead never before look so dismal to as it do today , with he mind thus sore about the fault - finding of the " Trumpet , " echo by . it be true that a observer , under that softening influence of the fine art which make other people 's hardship picturesque , might have be deligh with this homestead call 's : the old house have dormer - window in the dark red roof , two of the chimney be chok with ivy , the large porch be block up with bundle of stick , and half the window be close with gray worm -eaten shutter about which the jasmine - bough grew in wild luxuriance ; the mouldering garden wall with hollyhock peeping over it be a perfect study of highly mingl subdue color , and there be a aged goat ( keep doubtless on interesting superstitious grounds ) lie against the open back - kitchen door . the mossy thatch of the cow - shed , the broken gray barn - door , the pauper laborer in ragged breech who have nearly finish unload a wagon of corn into the barn ready for early thrashing ; the scanty dairy of cow be tether for milking and leave one half of the shed in brown emptiness ; the very pig and white duck seem to wander about the uneven neglect yard as if in low spirit from feeding on a too meagre quality of rinsing , -- all these object under the quiet light of a sky marble with high cloud would have make a sort of picture which we have all pause over as a " charming bit , " touch other sensibility than those which be stir by the depression of the agricultural interest , with the sad lack of farming capital , as see constantly in the newspaper of that time . but these troublesome associations be just now strongly present to , and spoilead the scene for he . himself make a figure in the landscape , carry a pitchfork and wear he milking - hat -- a
a very old beaver flatten in front . he coat and breech be the best he have , and he would not have be wear they on this weekday occasion if he have not be to market and return later than usual , have give himself the rare treat of dining at the public table of the . how he come to fall into this extravagance would perhaps be matter of wonderment to himself on the morrow ; but before dinner something in the state of the country , a slight pause in the harvest before the Far Dips be cut , the story about the new king and the numerous handbill on the wall , have seem to warrant a little recklessness . it be a maxim about , and regard as self -evident , that good meat should have good drink , which last Dagley interpret as plenty of table ale well follow up by rum-and - water . these liquor have so far truth in they that they be not false enough to make poor seem merry : they only make he discontent less tongue - tie than usual . he have also take too much in the shape of muddy political talk , a stimulant dangerously disturb to he farming conservatism , which consiste in holding that whatever be , be bad , and any change be likely to be worse . he be flush , and he eye have a decidedly quarrelsome stare as he stand still grasp he pitchfork , while the landlord approach with he easy shuffling walk , one hand in he trouser - pocket and the other swing round a thin walking - stick . " , my good fellow , " begin , conscious that he be go to be very friendly about the boy . " oh , ay , I be a good feller , be I ? thank ye , sir , thank ye , " say , with a loud snarling irony which make Fag the sheep - dog stir from he seat and prick he ear ; but see enter the yard after some outside loitering , Fag seate himself again in a attitude of observation . " I be glad to hear I be a good feller . " reflecte that it be market - day , and that he worthy tenant have probably be dine , but see no reason why he should not go on , since he could take the precaution of repea what he have to say to . " you little lad have be catch kill a leveret , : I have tell to lock he up in the empty stable a hour or two , just to frighten he , you know . but he will be bring home by - and - by , before night : and you will just look after he , will you , and give he a reprimand , you know ? " " no , I woo not : I will be dee have if I will leather my boy to please you or anybody else , not if you be twenty landlord istid of ' one , and that a bad un . " 's word be loud enough to summon he wife to the back -kitchan door -- the only entrance ever use , and one always open except in bad weather -- and , say soothingly , " well , well , I will speak to you wife -- I do not mean beat , you know , " turn to walk to the house . but , only the more inclin to " have he say " with a gentleman who walk away from he , follow at once , with slouch at he heel and sullenly evad some small and probably charitable advances on the part of . " how do you do , ? " say , make some haste . " I come to tell you about you boy : I do not want you to give he the stick , you know . " he be careful to speak quite plainly this time . Overwork -- a thing , worn woman , from whose life pleasure have so entirely vanish that she have not even any clothes which could give she satisfaction in prepare for church -- have already have a misunderstanding with she husband since he have come home , and be in low spirit , expect the worst . but she husband be beforehand in answering . " no , nor he woo not haheve the stick , whether you want it or no , " pursue , throw out he voice , as if he want it to hit hard . " you have get no call to come a ' talk about stick o' these primise , as you woo not give a stick tow 'rt mende . go to Middlemarch to ax for _your_ charrickter . " " you would far better hold you tongue , , " say the wife , " and not kick you own trough over . when a man as be father of a family have be a ' spend money at market and make himself the worse for liquor , he be done enough mischief for one day . but I should like to know what my boy 's do , sir . " " Niver do you mind what he be do , " say , more fiercely , " it be my business to speak , a ' not yourn . An' I wull speak , too . I will haheve my say -- supper or no . a ' what I say be , as I have liv upo ' you ground from my father and grandfather afore I , a ' hev drop we money int oot , a ' I a ' my child might lie a '
' rot on the ground for top-dressin ' as we can not find the money to buy , if the be not to put a stop . " " my good fellow , you be drink , you know , " say , confidentially but not judiciously . " another day , another day , " he add , turn as if to go . but immediately fronte he , and at he heel grow low , as he master 's voice grow louder and more insulting , while also draw close in silent dignified watch . the laborer on the wagon be pause to listen , and it seem wiser to be quite passive than to attempt a ridiculous flight pursue by a bawling man . " I be no more drunk nor you be , nor so much , " say . " I can carry my liquor , an' I know what I meean . An' I meean as the 's ull put a stop to 't , for they say it as know it , as there be to be a , and they landlord as never do the right thing by they tenant 's ull be treat I ' that way as they will hev to scuttle off . a ' there be they I ' Middlemarch know what the Rinform be -- a ' as know who will hev to scuttle . say they , 'I know who _your_ landlord be . ' a ' say I , ' I hope you be the better for knowin ' he , I be not . ' say they , 'he be a close - fist un . ' ' ay ay , ' say I . 'he be a man for the , ' say they . that be what they say . An' I make out what the be -- a ' it be to send you a ' you like a -scuttlin ' a ' wi' pretty strong - smellin ' thing too . a ' you may do as you like now , for I be no afeard on you . a ' you would better let my boy aloan , a ' look to , afore the have get upo ' you back . that be what I and get to say , " conclude , strike he fork into the ground with a firmness which prove inconvenient as he try to draw it up again . at this last action begin to bark loudly , and it be a moment for to escape . he walk out of the yard as quickly as he could , in some amazement at the novelty of he situation . he have never be insult on he own land before , and have be inclin to regard himself as a general favorite ( we be all apt to do so , when we think of we own amiability more than of what other people be likely to want off we ) . when he have quarrell with twelve year before he have think that the tenant would be pleased at the landlord 's take everything into he own hand . some who follow the narrative of he experience may wonder at the midnight darkness of ; but nothing be easier in those time than for a hereditary farmer of he grade to be ignorant , in spite somehow of have a rector in the twin parish who be a gentleman to the backbone , a curate nearer at hand who preach more learnedly than the rector , a landlord who have go into everything , especially fine art and social improvement , and all the light of only three mile off . as to the facility with which mortal escape knowledge , try a average acquaintance in the intellectual blaze of , and consider what that eligible person for a dinner - party would have be if he have learn scant skill in " summing " from the parish - clerk of , and read a chapter in the with immense difficulty , because such name as or remain unmanageable after twice spell . poor read a few verse sometimes on a evening , and the world be at least not darker to he than it have be before . some thing he know thoroughly , namely , the slovenly habits of farming , and the awkwardness of weather , stock and crop , at 's -- so call apparently by way of sarcasm , to imply that a man be free to quit it if he choose , but that there be no earthly " beyond " open to he . . wise in he daily work be he : to fruit of diligence , and not to fait or polity , he ply he utmost sense . these perfect in they little part , whose work be all they prize -- without they how could law , or arts , or towere city rise ? in watch effect , if only of a electric battery , it be often necessary to change we place and examine a particular mixture or group at some distance from the point where the movement we be interested in be set up . the group I be move towards be at 's breakfast - table in the large parlor where the map and desk be : father , mother , and five of the child . be just now at home wait for a situation , while , the boy next to she , be get cheap learning and cheap fare in , have to he father 's disappointment take to book instead of that sacred call " business . " the letter have come -- nine costly letter , for which the postman have be pay three and twopence , and be forget he tea and toast while he read he letter and lay they open one
one above the other , sometimes sway he head slowly , sometimes screw up he mouth in inward debate , but not forget to cut off a large red seal unbroken , which snatch up like a eager terrier . the talk among the rest go on unrestrainedly , for nothing disturb 's absorption except shak the table when he be write . two letter of the nine have be for . after read they , she have pass they to she mother , and sit play with she tea - spoon absently , till with a sudden recollection she return to she sew , which she have keep on she lap during breakfast . " oh , do not sow , ! " say , pull she arm down . " make I a peacock with this bread-crumb . " he have be knead a small mass for the purpose . " no , no , ! " say , good - humoredly , while she prick he hand lightly with she needle . " try and mould it yourself : you have see I do it often enough . I must get this sewing do . it be for : she be to be marry next week , and she can not be marry without this handkerchief . " end merrily , amuse with the last notion . " why can not she , ? " say , seriously interested in this mystery , and push she head so close to she sister that now turn the threatening needle towards 's nose . " because this be one of a dozen , and without it there would only be eleven , " say , with a grave air of explanation , so that sank back with a sense of knowledge . " have you make up you mind , my dear ? " say , lay the letter down . " I shall go to the school at , " say . " I be less unfit to teach in a school than in a family . I like to teach class best . and , you see , I must teach : there be nothing else to be do . " " teaching seem to I the most delightful work in the world , " say , with a touch of rebuke in she tone . " I could understand you objection to it if you have not knowledge enough , , or if you dislike child . " " I suppose we never quite understand why another dislike what we like , mother , " say , rather curtly . " I be not fond of a schoolroom : I like the outside world better . it be a very inconvenient fault of mine . " " it must be very stupid to be always in a girl ' school , " say . " such a set of nincompoops , like 's pupil walk two and two . " " and they have no game worth play at , " say . " they can neither throw nor leap . I do not wonder at be not like it . " " what be that do not like , eh ? " say the father , look over he spectacle and pause before he open he next letter . " be among a lot of nincompoop girl , " say . " be it the situation you have hear of , ? " say , gently , look at he daughter . " yes , father : the school at . I have determi to take it . it be quite the best . thirty - five pound a - year , and extra pay for teach the smallest strummer at the piano . " " poor child ! I wish she could stay at home with we , , " say , look plaintively at he wife . " would not be happy without do she duty , " say , magisterially , conscious of have do she own . " it would not make I happy to do such a nasty duty as that , " say -- at which and she father laugh silently , but say , gravely -- " do find a fitter word than nasty , my dear Alfred , for everything that you think disagreeable . and suppose that could help you to go to 's with the money she get ? " " that seem to I a great shame . but she be a old brick , " say Alfred , rise from he chair , and pull 's head backward to kiss she . colore and laugh , but could not conceal that the tear be come . , look on over he spectacle , with the angles of he eyebrow fall , have a expression of mingled delight and sorrow as he return to the opening of he letter ; and even , she lip curl with a calm contentment , allow that inappropriate language to pass without correction , although immediately take it up , and sang , " she be a old brick , old brick , old brick ! " to a cantering measure , which he beat out with he fist on 's arm . but 's eye be now draw towards she husband , who be already deep in the letter he be read . he face have a expression of grave surprise , which alarme she a little , but he do not like to be question while he be read , and she remain anxiously watch till she see he suddenly shake by a little joyous laugh as he turn back to the beginning of the letter , and look at she above he spectacle , say , in a low tone , " what do you think , ? " she go and stand behind he ,
, put she hand on he shoulder , while they read the letter together . it be from , offer to the management of the family estate at and elsewhere , and add that have be request by of to ascertain whether would be dispose at the same time to resume the agency of the property . the add in very obliging word that he himself be particularly desirous of see the and estate under the same management , and he hope to be able to show that the double agency might be hold on term agreeable to , whom he would be glad to see at the at twelve o'clock on the follow day . " he write handsomely , do not he , ? " say , turn he eye upward to he wife , who raise she hand from he shoulder to he ear , while she rest she ching on he head . " do not like to ask I himself , I can see , " he continue , laugh silently . " here be a honor to you father , child , " say , look round at the five pair of eye , all fix on the parent . " he be ask to take a post again by those who dismiss he long ago . that show that he do he work well , so that they feel the want of he . " " like -- hooray ! " say , ride on he chair , with a pleasant confidence that discipline be relaxed . " will they come to fetch he , mother ? " say , think of the and in they rob . patt 's head and smile , but see that she husband be gather up he letter and likely soon to be out of reach in that sanctuary " business , " she press he shoulder and say emphatically -- " now , mind you ask fair pay , . " " oh yes , " say , in a deep voice of assent , as if it would be unreasonable to suppose anything else of he . " it will come to between four and five hundr , the two together . " then with a little start of remembrance he say , " , write and give up that school . stay and help you mother . I be as pleased as , now I have think of that . " no manner could have be less like that of punch triumphant than 's , but he talents do not lie in finding phrase , though he be very particular about he letter- write , and regard he wife as a treasury of correct language . there be almost a uproar among the child now , and hold up the cambric embroidery towards she mother entreatingly , that it might be put out of reach while the boy drag she into a dance . , in placid joy , begin to put the cup and plate together , while push he chair from the table , as if he be go to move to the desk , still sit hold he letter in he hand and look on the ground meditatively , stretch out the finger of he left hand , accord to a mute language of he own . at last he say -- " it be a thousand pity do not take to business , . I shall want help by - and - by . and must go off to the engineering -- I have make up my mind to that . " he fall into meditation and finger - rhetoric again for a little while , and then continue : " I shall make have new agreement with the tenant , and I shall draw up a rotation of crop . and I will lay a wager we can get fine brick out of the clay at 's corner . I must look into that : it would cheapen the repair . it be a fine bit of work , ! a man without a family would be glad to do it for nothing . " " mind you do not , though , " say he wife , lifte up she finger . " no , no ; but it be a fine thing to come to a man when he be see into the nature of business : to have the chance of get a bit of the country into good fettle , as they say , and put man into the right way with they farming , and get a bit of good contriving and solid building do -- that those who be liive and those who come after will be the better for . I would sooner have it than a fortune . I hold it the most honorable work that be . " here lay down he letter , thrust he finger between the buttons of he waistcoat , and sit upright , but presently proceed with some awe in he voice and move he head slowly aside -- " it be a great gift of , . " " that it be , , " say he wife , with answer fervor . " and it will be a blessing to you child to have have a father who do such work : a father whose good work remain though he name may be forget . " she could not say any more to he then about the pay . in the evening , when , rather tired with he day 's work , be seat in silence with he pocket - book open on he knee , while and be at they sewing , and in a corner be whisper a dialogue with she doll , come up the orchard walk , divide the bright light and shadows with the tufted grass and the
the apple - tree bough . we know that he be fond of he parishioner the Garths , and have think worth mention to Lydgate . he use to the full the clergyman 's privilege of disregard the discrimination of rank , and always tell he mother that be more of a lady than any matron in the town . still , you see , he spend he evening at the ' , where the matron , though less of a lady , preside over a well - light drawing - room and whist . in those day human intercourse be not determine solely by respect . but the do heartily respect the Garth , and a visit from he be no surprise to that family . nevertheless he account for it even while he be shak hand , by say , " I come as a envoy , : I have something to say to you and on behalf of . the fact be , poor fellow , " he continue , as he seat himself and look round with he bright glance at the three who be listen to he , " he have take I into he confidence . " 's heart beat rather quickly : she wonder how far 's confidence have go . " we have not see the lad for month , " say . " I could not think what be become of he . " " he have be away on a visit , " say the , " because home be a little too hot for he , and tell he mother that the poor fellow must not begin to study yet . but yesterday he come and pour himself out to I . I be very glad he do , because I have see he grow up from a youngster of fourteen , and I be so much at home in the house that the child be like nephew and niece to I . but it be a difficult case to advise upon . however , he have ask I to come and tell you that he be go away , and that he be so miserable about he debt to you , and he inability to pay , that he can not bear to come himself even to bid you good by . " " tell he it do not signify a farthing , " say , wave he hand . " we have have the pinch and have get over it . and now I be go to be as rich as a . " " which mean , " say , smile at the , " that we be go to have enough to bring up the boy well and to keep at home . " " what be the treasure - trove ? " say . " I be go to be agent for two estate , and ; and perhaps for a pretty little bit of land in besides : it be all the same family connection , and employment spread like water if it be once set go . it make I very happy , " -- here throw back he head a little , and spread he arm on the elbow of he chair -- " that I have get a opportunity again with the letting of the land , and carry out a notion or two with improvement . it be a most uncommonly cramping thing , as I have often tell , to sit on horseback and look over the hedge at the wrong thing , and not be able to put you hand to it to make it right . what people do who go into politics I can not think : it drive I almost mad to see mismanagement over only a few hundred acre . " it be seldom that volunteer so long a speech , but he happiness have the effect of mountain air : he eye be bright , and the word come without effort . " I congratulate you heartily , , " say the . " this be the best sort of news I could have have to carry to , for he dwelt a good deal on the injury he have do you in cause you to part with money -- rob you of it , he say -- which you want for other purpose . I wish be not such a idle dog ; he have some very good point , and he father be a little hard upon he . " " where be he go ? " say , rather coldly . " he mean to try again for he degree , and he be go up to study before term . I have advise he to do that . I do not urge he to enter the Church -- on the contrary . but if he will go and work so as to pass , that will be some guarantee that he have energy and a will ; and he be quite at sea ; he do not know what else to do . so far he will please he father , and I have promise in the mean time to try and reconcile to he son 's adopt some other line of life . say frankly he be not fit for a clergyman , and I would do anything I could to hinder a man from the fatal step of choose the wrong profession . he quote to I what you say , -- do you remember it ? " ( use to say " " instead of " , " but it be part of he delicacy to treat she with the more deference because , accord to 's phrase , she work for she bread . ) feel uncomfortable , but , determine to take the matter lightly , answer at once , " I have say
say so many impertinent thing to -- we be such old playfellow . " " you say , accord to he , that he would be one of those ridiculous clergyman who help to make the whole clergy ridiculous . really , that be so cut that I feel a little cut myself . " laugh . " she get she tongue from you , , " he say , with some enjoyment . " not its flippancy , father , " say , quickly , fear that she mother would be displease . " it be rather too bad of to repeat my flippant speech to Farebrother . " " it be certainly a hasty speech , my dear , " say , with whom speak evil of dignity be a high misdemeanor . " we should not value we Vicar the less because there be a ridiculous curate in the next parish . " " there be something in what she say , though , " say , not dispose to have 's sharpness undervalue . " a bad workman of any sort make he fellow mistrust . thing hang together , " he add , look on the floor and move he foot uneasily with a sense that word be scantier than thought . " clearly , " say the , amuse . " by be contemptible we set man 's mind , to the tune of contempt . I certainly agree with 's view of the matter , whether I be condemn by it or not . but as to , it be only fair he should be excuse a little : old 's delusive behavior do help to spoil he . there be something quite diabolical in not leave he a farthing after all . but have the good taste not to dwell on that . and what he care most about be have offend you , . ; he suppose you will never think well of he again . " " I have be disappoint in , " say , with decision . " but I shall be ready to think well of he again when he give I good reason to do so . " at this point go out of the room , take with she . " oh , we must forgive young people when they be sorry , " say , watch close the door . " and as you say , , there be the very devil in that old man . " now 's go out , I must tell you a thing -- it be only know to and I , and you will not tell it again . the old scoundrel want to burn one of the will the very night he die , when she be sit up with he by herself , and he offer she a sum of money that he have in the box by he if she would do it . but , you understand , could do no such thing -- would not be handle he iron chest , and so on . now , you see , the will he want burnt be this last , so that if have do what he want , would have have ten thousand pound . the old man do turn to he at the last . that touch poor close ; she could not help it -- she be in the right to do what she do , but she feel , as she say , much as if she have knock down somebody 's property and break it against she will , when she be rightfully defend herself . I feel with she , somehow , and if I could make any amend to the poor lad , instead of bear he a grudge for the harm he do we , I should be glad to do it . now , what be you opinion , sir ? do not agree with I . she say -- tell what you say , . " " could not have act otherwise , even if she have know what would be the effect on , " say , pause from she work , and look at . " and she be quite ignorant of it . it seem to I , a loss which fall on another because we have do right be not to lie upon we conscience . " the do not answer immediately , and say , " it be the feeling . the child feel in that way , and I feel with she . you do not mean you horse to tread on a dog when you be back out of the way ; but it go through you , when it be done . " " I be sure would agree with you there , " say , who for some reason seem more inclined to ruminate than to speak . " one could hardly say that the feeling you mention about be wrong -- or rather , mistaken -- though no man ought to make a claim on such feeling . " " well , well , " say , " it be a secret . you will not tell . " " certainly not . but I shall carry the other good news -- that you can afford the loss he cause you . " leave the house soon after , and see in the orchard with , go to say good - by to she . they make a pretty picture in the western light which bring out the brightness of the apple on the old scant - leave bough -- in she lavender gingham and black ribbon hold a basket , while in she well - worn nankin pick up the fallen apple . if you want to know more particularly how look , ten to one you will see a face like hers
hers in the crowded street to - morrow , if you be there on the watch : she will not be among those daughter of who be haughty , and walk with stretch - out neck and wanton eye , mince as they go : let all those pass , and fix you eye on some small plump brownish person of firm but quiet carriage , who look about she , but do not suppose that anybody be look at she . if she have a broad face and square brow , well - mark eyebrow and curly dark hair , a certain expression of amusement in she glance which she mouth keep the secret of , and for the rest feature entirely insignificant -- take that ordinary but not disagreeable person for a portrait of . if you make she smile , she would show you perfect little tooth ; if you make she angry , she would not raise she voice , but would probably say one of the bitterest thing you have ever taste the flavor of ; if you do she a kindness , she would never forget it . admire the keen - face handsome little in he well - brush threadbare clothes more than any man she have have the opportunity of knowing . she have never hear he say a foolish thing , though she know that he do unwise one ; and perhaps foolish saying be more objectionable to she than any of 's unwise doings . at least , it be remarkable that the actual imperfection of the 's clerical character never seem to call forth the same scorn and dislike which she show beforehand for the predict imperfection of the clerical character sustain by . these irregularity of judgament , I imagine , be find even in riper minds than 's : we impartiality be keep for abstract merit and demerit , which none of we ever see . will any one guess towards which of those widly different man have the peculiar woman 's tenderness ?-- the one she be most inclin to be severe on , or the contrary ? " have you any message for you old playfellow , ? " say the , as he take a fragrant apple from the basket which she hold towards he , and put it in he pocket . " something to soften down that harsh judgment ? I be go straight to see he . " " no , " say , shak she head , and smile . " if I be to say that he would not be ridiculous as a clergyman , I must say that he would be something worse than ridiculous . but I be very glad to hear that he be go away to work . " " on the other hand , I be very glad to hear that _you_ be not go away to work . my mother , I be sure , will be all the happier if you will come to see she at the vicarage : you know she be fond of have young people to talk to , and she have a great deal to tell about old time . you will really be do a kindness . " " I should like it very much , if I may , " say . " everything seem too happy for I all at once . I think it would always be part of my life to long for home , and lose that grievance make I feel rather empty : I suppose it serve instead of sense to fill up my mind ? " " may I go with you , ? " whisper -- a most inconvenient child , who listen to everything . but she be make exultant by have she ching pinch and she cheek kiss by -- a incident which she narrate to she mother and father . as the walk to , any one watch he closely might have see he twice shrug he shoulders . I think that the rare who have this gesture be never of the heavy type -- for fear of any lumbering instance to the contrary , I will say , hardly ever ; they have usually a fine temperament and much tolerance towards the smaller error of man ( themselves inclusive ) . the be hold a inward dialogue in which he tell himself that there be probably something more between and than the regard of old playfellow , and reply with a question whether that bit of womanhood be not a great deal to choice for that crude young gentleman . the rejoinder to this be the first shrug . then he laugh at himself for be likely to have felt jealous , as if he have be a man able to marry , which , add he , it be as clear as any balance - sheet that I be not . follow the second shrug . what could two man , so different from each other , see in this " brown patch , " as call herself ? it be certainly not she plainness that attract they ( and let all plain young lady be warn against the dangerous encouragement give they by to confide in they want of beauty ) . a human be in this aged nation of ours be a very wonderful whole , the slow creation of long interchanging influence : and charm be a result of two such whole , the one loving and the one love . when and be sit alone , say , " , guess what I be think of . " " the rotation of crop , " say , smile at he , above she knitt , " or else the back - door of the cottage . " " no , " say , gravely ; " I be think that
that I could do a great turn for . 's , will be go soon , and it will be five year before be ready to take to business . I shall want help , and might come in and learn the nature of thing and act under I , and it might be the making of he into a useful man , if he give up be a parson . what do you think ? " " I think , there be hardly anything honest that he family would object to more , " say , decidedly . " what care I about they object ? " say , with a sturdiness which he be apt to show when he have a opinion . " the lad be of age and must get he bread . he have sense enough and quickness enough ; he like be on the land , and it be my belief that he could learn business well if he give he mind to it . " " but would he ? he father and mother want he to be a fine gentleman , and I think he have the same sort of feeling himself . they all think we beneath they . and if the proposal come from you , I be sure . Vincy would say that we want for . " " life be a poor tale , if it be to be settle by nonsense of that sort , " say , with disgust . " yes , but there be a certain pride which be proper , . " " I call it improper pride to let fool ' notion hinder you from do a good action . there be no sort of work , " say , with fervor , put out he hand and move it up and down to mark he emphasis , " that could ever be do well , if you mind what fools say . you must have it inside you that you plan be right , and that plan you must follow . " " I will not oppose any plan you have set you mind on , , " say , who be a firm woman , but know that there be some point on which she mild husband be yet firmer . " , it seem to be fix that be to go back to college : will it not be better to wait and see what he will choose to do after that ? it be not easy to keep people against they will . and you be not yet quite sure enough of you own position , or what you will want . " " well , it may be better to wait a bit . but as to my get plenty of work for two , I be pretty sure of that . I have always have my hand full with scattered thing , and there be always something fresh turn up . why , only yesterday -- bless I , I do not think I tell you !-- it be rather odd that two man should have be at I on different side to do the same bit of valuing . and who do you think they be ? " say , take a pinch of snuff and hold it up between he finger , as if it be a part of he exposition . he be fond of a pinch when it occur to he , but he usually forgot that this indulgence be at he command . he wife hold down she knitting and look attentive . " why , that , or , be one . but be before he , so I be go to do it for . whether it be mortgage or purchase they be go for , I can not tell yet . " " can that man be go to sell the land just leave he -- which he have take the name for ? " say . " Deuce know , " say , who never refer the knowledge of discreditable doings to any higher power than the deuce . " but have long be want to get a handsome bit of land under he finger -- that I know . and it be a difficult matter to get , in this part of the country . " scatter he snuff carefully instead of take it , and then add , " the in and out of thing be curiious . here be the land they have be all along expect for , which it seem the old man never mean to leave he a foot of , but leave it to this side - slip of a son that he keep in the dark , and think of he sticking there and vex everybody as well as he could have vex them himself if he could have keep alive . I say , it would be curiious if it get into 's hand after all . the old man hate he , and never would bank with he . " " what reason could the miserable creature have for hate a man whom he have nothing to do with ? " say . " Pooh ! where be the use of ask for such fellows ' reason ? the soul of man , " say , with the deep tone and grave shake of the head which always come when he use this phrase -- " the soul of man , when it get fairly rotten , will bear you all sort of poisonous toad - stool , and no eye can see whence come the seed thereof . " it be one of 's quaintness , that in he difficulty of find speech for he thought , he catch , as it be , snatch of diction which he associate with various point of view or state
state of mind ; and whenever he have a feeling of awe , he be haunt by a sense of Biblical phraseology , though he could hardly have give a strict quotation . . " by swagger could I never thrive , for the rain it raineth every day . -- Twelfth night the transaction refer to by as have go forward between and concern the land attach to , have occasion the interchange of a letter or two between these personage . who shall tell what may be the effect of writing ? if it happen to have be cut in stone , though it lie face down - most for age on a forsaken beach , or " rest quietly under the drum and trampling of many conquest , " it may end by let we into the secret of usurpation and other scandal gossip about long empire ago :-- this world be apparently a huge whispering - gallery . such condition be often minutely represent in we petty lifetime . as the stone which have be kick by generation of clown may come by curiious little link of effect under the eyes of a scholar , through whose labors it may at last fix the date of invasion and unlock religion , so a bit of ink and paper which have long be a innocent wrapping or stop - gap may at last be laid open under the one pair of eye which have knowledge enough to turn it into the opening of a catastrophe . to watch the progress of planetary history from the sun , the one result would be just as much of a coincidence as the other . have make this rather lofy comparison I be less uneasy in call attention to the existence of low people by whose interference , however little we may like it , the course of the world be very much determined . it would be well , certainly , if we could help to reduce they number , and something might perhaps be do by not lightly give occasion to they existence . socially speak , Rigg would have be generally pronounce a superfluity . but those who like never have a copy of themselves demand , be the very last to wait for such a request either in prose or verse . the copy in this case bear more of outside resemblance to the mother , in whose sex frog - feature , accompany with fresh - colored cheek and a well - round figure , be compatible with much charm for a certain order of admirer . the result be sometimes a frog - faced male , desirable , surely , to no order of intelligent being . especially when he be suddenly bring into evidence to frustrate other people 's expectation -- the very lowest aspect in which a social superfluity can present himself . but 's low characteristic be all of the sober , water - drink kind . from the earliest to the latest hour of the day he be always as sleek , neat , and cool as the frog he resemble , and old have secretly chuckle over a offshoot almost more calculating , and far more imperturbable , than himself . I will add that he finger - nail be scrupulously attend to , and that he mean to marry a well - educated young lady ( as yet unspecified ) whose person be good , and whose connection , in a solid middle - class way , be undeniable . thus he nails and modesty be comparable to those of most gentleman ; though he ambition have be educate only by the opportunity of a clerk and accountant in the smaller commercial house of a seaport . he think the rural Featherstone very simple absurd people , and they in they turn regard he " bring up " in a seaport town as a exaggeration of the monstrosity that they brother , and still more 's property , should have have such belonging . the garden and gravel approach , as see from the two window of the wainscote parlor at , be never in better trim than now , when stood , with he hand behind he , look out on these grounds as they master . but it seem doubtful whether he look out for the sake of contemplation or of turn he back to a person who stand in the middle of the room , with he leg considerably apart and he hand in he trouser - pocket : a person in all respect a contrast to the sleek and cool . he be a man obviously on the way towards sixty , very florid and hairy , with much gray in he bushy whisker and thick curly hair , a stoutish body which show to disadvantage the somewhat worn joinings of he clothes , and the air of a swaggerer , who would aim at be noticeable even at a show of firework , regard he own remark on any other person 's performance as likely to be more interesting than the performance itself . he name be , and he sometimes write jocosely W.A.G . after he signature , observe when he do so , that he be once teach by of who write . after he name , and that he , , originate the witticism of call that celebrate principal - . such be the appearance and mental flavor of , both of which seem to have a stale odor of traveller 's room in the commercial hotel of that period . " come , now , , " he be say , in a full rumbling tone , " look at it in this light : here be you poor mother go into the vale of year , and you could afford something handsome now to make she comfortable . "
" " not while you live . nothing would make she comfortable while you live , " return , in he cool high voice . " what I give she , you will take . " " you bear I a grudge , , that I know . but come , now -- as between man and man --without humbug -- a little capital might enable I to make a first - rate thing of the shop . the tobacco trade be grow . I should cut my own nose off in not do the best I could at it . I should stick to it like a flea to a fleece for my own sake . I should always be on the spot . and nothing would make you poor mother so happy . I have pretty well do with my wild oat -- turn fifty - five . I want to settle down in my chimney - corner . and if I once buckle to the tobacco trade , I could bring a amount of brain and experience to bear on it that would not be find elsewhere in a hurry . I do not want to be bother you one time after another , but to get thing once for all into the right channel . consider that , Josh -- as between man and man -- and with you poor mother to be make easy for she life . I be always fond of the old woman , by ! " " have you do ? " say , quietly , without look away from the window . " yes , I have do , " say Raffles , take hold of he hat which stand before he on the table , and give it a sort of oratorical push . " then just listen to I . the more you say anything , the less I shall believe it . the more you want I to do a thing , the more reason I shall have for never do it . do you think I mean to forget you kick I when I be a lad , and eat all the best victual away from I and my mother ? do you think I forget you always come home to sell and pocket everything , and go off again leave we in the lurch ? I should be glad to see you whip at the cart - tail . my mother be a fool to you : she would know right to give I a father - in - law , and she be be punish for it . she shall have she weekly allowance paid and no more : and that shall be stop if you dare to come on to these premise again , or to come into this country after I again . the next time you show yourself inside the gate here , you shall be drive off with the dog and the wagoner 's whip . " as pronounce the last word he turn round and look at Raffles with he prominent freeze eye . the contrast be as striking as it could have be eighteen year before , when be a most unengaging kickable boy , and be the rather thick - set Adonis of bar- room and back - parlor . but the advantage now be on the side of , and auditor of this conversation might probably have expect that Raffles would retire with the air of a defeat dog . not at all . he make a grimace which be habitual with he whenever he be " out " in a game ; then subsid into a laugh , and draw a brandy - flask from he pocket . " come , , " he say , in a cajoling tone , " give we a spoonful of brandy , and a sovereign to pay the way back , and I will go . honor bright ! I will go like a bullet , _by ! " " mind , " say , draw out a bunch of key , " if I ever see you again , I sha not speak to you . I do not own you any more than if I see a crow ; and if you want to own I you will get nothing by it but a character for be what you be -- a spiteful , brassy , bullying rogue . " " that be a pity , now , , " say Raffles , affect to scratch he head and wrinkle he brows upward as if he be nonpluss . " I be very fond of you ; _by , I be ! there be nothing I like better than plague you -- you be so like you mother , and I must do without it . but the brandy and the sovereign be a bargain . " he jerke forward the flask and go to a fine old oaken bureau with he key . but have remind himself by he movement with the flask that it have become dangerously loose from its leather cover , and catche sight of a fold paper which have fall within the fender , he take it up and shove it under the leather so as to make the glass firm . by that time come forward with a brandy - bottle , fill the flask , and hand a sovereign , neither look at he nor speak to he . after lock up the bureau again , he walk to the window and gaze out as impassibly as he have do at the beginning of the interview , while Raffles take a small allowance from the flask , screw it up , and deposit it in he side - pocket , with provoke slowness , make a grimace at he stepson 's back . " farewell , -- and if forever
forever ! " say Raffles , turn back he head as he open the door . see he leave the grounds and enter the lane . the gray day have turn to a light drizzl rain , which freshen the hedgerow and the grassy border of the by - roads , and hasten the laborers who be load the last shocks of corn . Raffle , walk with the uneasy gait of a town loiterer oblige to do a bit of country journey on foot , look as incongruous amid this moist rural quiet and industry as if he have be a baboon escape from a menagerie . but there be none to stare at he except the long - wean calf , and none to show dislike of he appearance except the little water - rats which rust away at he approach . he be fortunate enough when he get on to the highroad to be overtake by the stage - coach , which carry he to ; and there he take the new - make railway , observe to he fellow- passenger that he consider it pretty well season now it have do for . on most occasion keep up the sense of have be educate at a academy , and be able , if he choose , to pass well everywhere ; indeed , there be not one of he fellow - man whom he do not feel himself in a position to ridicule and torment , confident of the entertainment which he thus give to all the rest of the company . he play this part now with as much spirit as if he journey have be entirely successful , resorte at frequent interval to he flask . the paper with which he have wedge it be a letter sign , but be not likely to disturb it from its present useful position . . " how much , methink , I could despise this man be I not bound in charity against it ! -- Shakespeare : . one of the professional call make by soon after he return from he wedding - journey be to , in consequence of a letter which have request he to fix a time for he visit . have never put any question concern the nature of he illness to , nor have he even to betraye any anxiety as to how far it might be likely to cut short he labors or he life . on this point , as on all other , he shrank from pity ; and if the suspicion of be pitie for anything in he lot surmise or know in spite of himself be embitter , the idea of call forth a show of compassion by frankly admit a alarm or a sorrow be necessarily intolerable to he . every proud mind know something of this experience , and perhaps it be only to be overcome by a sense of fellowship deep enough to make all effort at isolation thseey mean and petty instead of exalting . but be now brood over something through which the question of he health and life haunt he silence with a more harassing importunity even than through the autumnal unripeness of he authorship . it be true that this last might be call he central ambition ; but there be some kind of authorship in which by far the largest result be the uneasy susceptibility accumulate in the consciousness of the author -- one know of the river by a few streak amid a long - gather deposit of uncomfortable mud . that be the way with 's hard intellectual labors . they most characteristic result be not the " key to all , " but a morbid consciousness that other do not give he the place which he have not demonstrably merit -- a perpetual suspicious conjecture that the views entertaine of he be not to he advantage -- a melancholy absence of passion in he effort at achievement , and a passionate resistance to the confession that he have achieve nothing . thus he intellectual ambition which seem to other to have absorb and dry he , be really no security against wound , least of all against those which come from . and he have begin now to frame possibility for the future which be somehow more embittering to he than anything he mind have dwelt on before . against certain facts he be helpless : against 's existence , he defiant stay in the neighborhood of , and he flippant state of mind with regard to the possessor of authentic , well - stampe erudition : against 's nature , always take on some new shape of ardent activity , and even in submission and silence cover fervid reason which it be a irritation to think of : against certain notion and liking which have take possession of she mind in relation to subject that he could not possibly discuss with she . there be no denying that be as virtuous and lovely a young lady as he could have obtain for a wife ; but a young lady turn out to be something more troublesome than he have conceive . she nurse he , she read to he , she anticipat he want , and be solicitous about he feeling ; but there have enter into the husband 's mind the certainty that she judge he , and that she wifely devotedness be like a penitential expiation of unbelieving thought -- be accompany with a power of comparison by which himself and he doings be see too luminously as a part of thing in general . he discontent pass vapor - like through all she gentle loving manifestation , and clung to that inappreciative world which she have only bring nearer to he . poor ! this suffering be the harder to bear because it see like a betrayal : the young creature
creature who have worship he with perfect trust have quickly turn into the critical wife ; and early instance of criticism and resentment have make a impression which no tenderness and submission afterwards could remove . to he suspicious interpretation 's silence now be a suppress rebellion ; a remark from she which he have not in any way anticipat be a assertion of conscious superiority ; she gentle answer have a irritating cautiousness in they ; and when she acquiesce it be a self - approve effort of forbearance . the tenacity with which he strove to hide this inward drama make it the more vivid for he ; as we hear with the more keenness what we wish other not to hear . instead of wonder at this result of misery in , I think it quite ordinary . will not a tiny speck very close to we vision blot out the glory of the world , and leave only a margin by which we see the blot ? I know no speck so troublesome as self . and who , if have choose to expound he discontent -- he suspicion that he be not any longer adore without criticism -- could have deny that they be found on good reason ? on the contrary , there be a strong reason to be add , which he have not himself take explicitly into account -- namely , that he be not unmixedly adorable . he suspect this , however , as he suspect other thing , without confess it , and like the rest of we , feel how soothing it would have be to have a companion who would never find it out . this sore susceptibility in relation to be thoroughly prepar before have return to , and what have occur since then have bring 's power of suspicious construction into exasperated activity . to all the fact which he know , he add imaginary fact both present and future which become more real to he than those because they call up a stronger dislike , a more predominating bitterness . suspicion and jealousy of 's intentions , suspicion and jealousy of 's impression , be constantly at they weaving work . it would be quite unjust to he to suppose that he could have enter into any coarse misinterpretation of : he own habits of mind and conduct , quite as much as the open elevation of she nature , save he from any such mistake . what he be jealous of be she opinion , the sway that might be give to she ardent mind in its judgment , and the future possibility to which these might lead she . as to , though until he last defiant letter he have nothing definite which he would choose formally to allege against he , he feel himself warrant in believe that he be capable of any design which could fascinate a rebellious temper and a undisciplined impulsiveness . he be quite sure that be the cause of will have return from , and he determination to settle in the neighborhood ; and he be penetrat enough to imagine that have innocently encourage this course . it be as clear as possible that she be ready to be attach to and to be pliant to he suggestion : they have never have a tete - a - tete without she bring away from it some new troublesome impression , and the last interview that be aware of ( , on return from , have for the first time be silent about have see ) have lead to a scene which rouse a angrier feeling against they both than he have ever know before . 's outpouring of she notions about money , in the darkness of the night , have do nothing but bring a mixture of more odious forebod into she husband 's mind . and there be the shock lately give to he health always sadly present with he . he be certainly much revive ; he have recover all he usual power of work : the illness might have be mere fatigue , and there might still be twenty year of achievement before he , which would justify the thirty year of preparation . that prospect be make the sweeter by a flavor of vengeance against the hasty sneer of & ; for even when be carry he taper among the tomb of the past , those modern figure come athwart the dim light , and interrupt he diligent exploration . to convince of he mistake , so that he would have to eat he own word with a good deal of indigestion , would be a agreeable accident of triumphant authorship , which the prospect of live to future ag on earth and to all eternity in heaven could not exclude from contemplation . , thus , the prevision of he own unending bliss could not nullify the bitter savor of irritated jealousy and vindictiveness , it be the less surprising that the probability of a transient earthly bliss for other person , when he himself should have enter into glory , have not a potently sweetening effect . if the truth should be that some undermining disease be at work within he , there might be large opportunity for some people to be the happier when he be go ; and if one of those people should be , object so strongly that it see as if the annoyance would make part of he disembody existence . this be a very bare and therefore a very incomplete way of put the case . the human soul move in many channel , and , we know , have a sense of rectitude and a honorable pride in satisfy the requirement of honor , which compelle he to find other reason for he conduct than those of jealousy and vindictiveness . the way in
in which put the case be this :--" in marry I have to care for she well - be in case of my death . but well - being be not to be secure by ample , independent possession of property ; on the contrary , occasion might arise in which such possession might expose she to the more danger . she be ready prey to any man who know how to play adroitly either on she affectionate ardor or she quixotic enthusiasm ; and a man stand by with that very intention in he mind -- a man with no other principle than transient caprice , and who have a personal animosity towards I -- I be sure of it -- a animosity which be feed by the consciousness of he ingratitude , and which he have constantly vent in ridicule of which I be as well assure as if I have hear it . even if I live I shall not be without uneasiness as to what he may attempt through indirect influence . this man have gain 's ear : he have fascinate she attention ; he have evidently try to impress she mind with the notion that he have claim beyond anything I have do for he . if I die -- and he be wait here on the watch for that -- he will persuade she to marry he . that would be calamity for she and success for he . She_ would not think it calamity : he would make she believe anything ; she have a tendency to immoderate attachment which she inwardly reproach I for not respond to , and already she mind be occupy with he fortune . he think of a easy conquest and of enter into my nest . that I will hinder ! such a marriage would be fatal to . have he ever persist in anything except from contradiction ? in knowledge he have always try to be showy at small cost . in religion he could be , as long as it suite he , the facile echo of 's vagary . when be sciolism ever dissociate from laxity ? I utterly distrust he moral , and it be my duty to hinder to the utmost the fulfilment of he design . " the arrangement make by on he marriage leave strong measure open to he , but in ruminat on they he mind inevitably dwelt so much on the probability of he own life that the longing to get the nearest possible calculation have at last overcome he proud reticence , and have determine he to ask 's opinion as to the nature of he illness . he have mention to that be come by appointment at half - past three , and in answer to she anxious question , whether he have feel ill , reply , -- " no , I merely wish to have he opinion concern some habitual symptom . you need not see he , my dear . I shall give order that he may be send to I in the Yew - tree walk , where I shall be take my usual exercise . " when Lydgate enter the Yew - tree Walk he see slowly reced with he hand behind he accord to he habit , and he head bend forward . it be a lovely afternoon ; the leave from the lofty lime be fall silently across the sombre evergreens , while the light and shadows sleep side by side : there be no sound but the cawing of the rook , which to the accustom ear be a lullaby , or that last solemn lullaby , a dirge . Lydgate , conscious of a energetic frame in its prime , feel some compassion when the figure which he be likely soon to overtake turn round , and in advancing towards he show more markedly than ever the sign of premature age -- the student 's bent shoulders , the emaciate limb , and the melancholy line of the mouth . " poor fellow , " he think , " some man with he year be like lions ; one can tell nothing of they age except that they be full grow . " " , " say , with he invariably polite air , " I be exceedingly oblige to you for you punctuality . we will , if you please , carry on we conversation in walking to and . " " I hope you wish to see I be not due to the return of unpleasant symptom , " say , fill up a pause . " not immediately -- no . in order to account for that wish I must mention -- what it be otherwise needless to refer to -- that my life , on all collateral account insignificant , derive a possible importance from the incompleteness of labors which have extend through all its best year . in short , I have long have on hand a work which I would afain leave behind I in such a state , at least , that it might be commit to the press by -- other . be I assure that this be the utmost I can reasonably expect , that assurance would be a useful circumscription of my attempt , and a guide in both the positive and negative determination of my course . " here pause , remove one hand from he back and thrust it between the buttons of he single - breaste coat . to a mind largely instruct in the human destiny hardly anything could be more interesting than the inward conflict imply in he formal measure address , deliver with the usual sing - song and motion of the head . Nay , be there many situation more sublimely tragic than the struggle of the soul with the demand to renounce a work which have be all the
the significance of its life -- a significance which be to vanish as the water which come and go where no man have need of they ? but there be nothing to strike other as sublime about , and , who have some contempt at hand for futile scholarship , feel a little amusement mingling with he pity . he be at present too ill acquainted with disaster to enter into the patho of a lot where everything be below the level of tragedy except the passionate egoism of the sufferer . " you refer to the possible hindrance from want of health ? " he say , wish to help forward 's purpose , which seem to be clog by some hesitation . " I do . you have not imply to I that the symptom which -- I be bound to testify -- you watch with scrupulous care , be those of a fatal disease . but be it so , , I should desire to know the truth without reservation , and I appeal to you for a exact statement of you conclusion : I request it as a friendly service . if you can tell I that my life be not threaten by anything else than ordinary casualty , I shall rejoice , on grounds which I have already indicate . if not , knowledge of the truth be even more important to I . " " then I can no longer hesitate as to my course , " say ; " but the first thing I must impress on you be that my conclusion be doubly uncertain --uncertain not only because of my fallibility , but because disease of the heart be eminently difficult to find prediction on . in any ease , one can hardly increase appreciably the tremendous uncertainty of life . " wince perceptibly , but bow . " I believe that you be suffer from what be call fatty degeneration of the heart , a disease which be first divine and explore by , the man who give we the stethoscope , not so very many year ago . a good deal of experience -- a more lengthened observation -- be want on the subject . but after what you have say , it be my duty to tell you that death from this disease be often sudden . at the same time , no such result can be predict . you condition may be consistent with a tolerably comfortable life for another fifteen year , or even more . I could add no information to this beyond anatomical or medical detail , which would leave expectation at precisely the same point . " 's instinct be fine enough to tell he that plain speech , quite free from ostentatious caution , would be feel by as a tribute of respect . " I thank you , , " say , after a moment 's pause . " one thing more I have still to ask : do you communicate what you have now tell I to ? " " partly -- I mean , as to the possible issue . " be go to explain why he have tell , but , with a unmistakable desire to end the conversation , wave he hand slightly , and say again , " I thank you , " proceed to remark on the rare beauty of the day . Lydgate , certain that he patient wish to be alone , soon leave he ; and the black figure with hand behind and head bent forward continue to pace the walk where the dark yew - tree give he a mute companionship in melancholy , and the little shadow of bird or leaf that fleete across the isle of sunlight , steal along in silence as in the presence of a sorrow . here be a man who now for the first time find himself look into the eyes of death -- who be pass through one of those rare moment of experience when we feel the truth of a commonplace , which be as different from what we call know it , as the vision of water upon the earth be different from the delirious vision of the water which can not be have to cool the burn tongue . when the commonplace " we must all die " transform itself suddenly into the acute consciousness " I must die -- and soon , " then death grapple we , and he finger be cruel ; afterwards , he may come to fold we in he arm as we mother do , and we last moment of dim earthly discerning may be like the first . to now , it be as if he suddenly find himself on the dark river - brink and hear the plash of the oncoming oar , not discern the form , but expect the summon . in such a hour the mind do not change its lifelong bia , but carry it onward in imagination to the other side of death , gaze backward -- perhaps with the divine calm of beneficence , perhaps with the petty anxiety of self - assertion . what be 's bia he act will give we a clew to . he hold himself to be , with some private scholarly reservation , a believe , as to estimate of the present and hope of the future . but what we strive to gratify , though we may call it a distant hope , be a immediate desire : the future estate for which man drudge up city alley exist already in they imagination and love . and 's immediate desire be not for divine communion and light divest of earthly condition ; he passionate longing , poor man , clung low and mist - like in very shady place . Dorothea have be aware when Lydgate have ridden away , and
and she have step into the garden , with the impulse to go at once to she husband . but she hesitate , fear to offend he by obtrud herself ; for she ardor , continually repulse , serve , with she intense memory , to heighten she dread , as thwart energy subside into a shudder ; and she wander slowly round the nearer clumps of tree until she see he advancing . then she go towards he , and might have represent a heaven - send angel come with a promise that the short hour remain should yet be fill with that faithful love which cling the closer to a comprehend grief . he glance in reply to hers be so chill that she feel she timidity increase ; yet she turn and pass she hand through he arm . keep he hand behind he and allow she pliant arm to cling with difficulty against he rigid arm . there be something horrible to in the sensation which this unresponsive hardness inflict on she . that be a strong word , but not too strong : it be in these act call triviality that the seed of joy be forever waste , until man and woman look round with haggard face at the devastation they own waste have make , and say , the earth bear no harvest of sweetness -- call they denial knowledge . you may ask why , in the name of manliness , should have behave in that way . consider that he be a mind which shrank from pity : have you ever watch in such a mind the effect of a suspicion that what be press it as a grief may be really a source of contentment , either actual or future , to the being who already offend by pitying ? besides , he know little of 's sensation , and have not reflecte that on such a occasion as the present they be comparable in strength to he own sensibility about 's criticism . do not withdraw she arm , but she could not venture to speak . do not say , " I wish to be alone , " but he direct he step in silence towards the house , and as they enter by the glass door on this eastern side , withdraw she arm and linger on the matting , that she might leave she husband quite free . he enter the library and shut himself in , alone with he sorrow . she go up to she boudoir . the open bow - window let in the serene glory of the afternoon lie in the avenue , where the lime - tree cast long shadow . but know nothing of the scene . she throw herself on a chair , not heed that she be in the dazzling sun -ray : if there be discomfort in that , how could she tell that it be not part of she inward misery ? she be in the reaction of a rebellious anger stronger than any she have feel since she marriage . instead of tear there come word :-- " what have I do -- what be I -- that he should treat I so ? he never know what be in my mind -- he never care . what be the use of anything I do ? he wish he have never marry I . " she begin to hear herself , and be check into stillness . like one who have lose he way and be weary , she sit and see as in one glance all the path of she young hope which she should never find again . and just as clearly in the miserable light she see she own and she husband 's solitude -- how they walk apart so that she be oblige to survey he . if he have draw she towards he , she would never have survey he -- never have say , " be he worth liive for ? " but would have feel he simply a part of she own life . now she say bitterly , " it be he fault , not mine . " in the jar of she whole being , Pity be overthrown . be it she fault that she have believe in he -- have believe in he worthiness ?-- and what , exactly , be he ?-- she be able enough to estimate he -- she who wait on he glance with trembling , and shut she best soul in prison , pay it only hide visit , that she might be petty enough to please he . in such a crisis as this , some woman begin to hate . the sun be low when be think that she would not go down again , but would send a message to she husband say that she be not well and prefer remain up - stair . she have never deliberately allow she resentment to govern she in this way before , but she believe now that she could not see he again without tell he the truth about she feeling , and she must wait till she could do it without interruption . he might wonder and be hurt at she message . it be good that he should wonder and be hurt . she anger say , as anger be apt to say , that be with she -- that all heaven , though it be crowd with spirits watch they , must be on she side . she have determined to ring she bell , when there come a rap at the door . have send to say that he would have he dinner in the library . he wish to be quite alone this evening , be much occupi . " I shall not dine , then , . " " oh , madam , let
let I bring you a little something ? " " no ; I be not well . get everything ready in my dressing room , but pray do not disturb I again . " sit almost motionless in she meditative struggle , while the evening slowly deepen into night . but the struggle change continually , as that of a man who begin with a movement towards striking and end with conquer he desire to strike . the energy that would animate a crime be not more than be want to inspire a resolve submission , when the noble habit of the soul reassert itself . that think with which have go out to meet she husband -- she conviction that he have be ask about the possible arrest of all he work , and that the answer must have wrng he heart , could not be long without rise beside the image of he , like a shadowy monitor look at she anger with sad remonstrance . it cost she a litany of pictured sorrow and of silent cry that she might be the mercy for those sorrow -- but the resolved submission do come ; and when the house be still , and she know that it be near the time when habitually go to rest , she open she door gently and stand outside in the darkness wait for he come up - stair with a light in he hand . if he do not come soon she think that she would go down and even risk incurr another pang . she would never again expect anything else . but she do hear the library door open , and slowly the light advanc up the staircase without noise from the footstep on the carpet . when she husband stood opposite to she , she see that he face be more haggard . he start slightly on see she , and she look up at he beseechingly , without speak . " ! " he say , with a gentle surprise in he tone . " be you wait for I ? " " yes , I do not like to disturb you . " " come , my dear , come . you be young , and need not to extend you life by watch . " when the kind quiet melancholy of that speech fall on 's ear , she feel something like the thankfulness that might well up in we if we have narrowly escape hurte a lam creature . she put she hand into she husband 's , and they go along the broad corridor together . . the dead Hand . . this figure hath high price : ot be wrotch with love age ago in finest ivory ; nought modish in it , pure and noble line of generous womanhood that fit all time that too be costly ware ; majolica of deft design , to please a lordly eye : the smile , you see , be perfect--wonderful as mere Faience ! a table ornament to suit the richest mounting . " seldom leave home without she husband , but she do occasionally drive into alone , on little errand of shopping or charity such as occur to every lady of any wealth when she live within three mile of a town . two day after that scene in the Yew - tree Walk , she determine to use such a opportunity in order if possible to see , and learn from he whether she husband have really feel any depressing change of symptom which he be conceal from she , and whether he have insist on know the utmost about himself . she feel almost guilty in ask for knowledge about he from another , but the dread of be without it -- the dread of that ignorance which would make she unjust or hard -- overcame every scruple . that there have be some crisis in she husband 's mind she be certain : he have the very next day begin a new method of arrange he note , and have associate she quite newly in carry out he plan . poor Dorothea need to lay up store of patience . it be about four o'clock when she drive to 's house in , wish , in she immediate doubt of find he at home , that she have write beforehand . and he be not at home . " be Lydgate at home ? " say , who have never , that she know of , see , but now remember the fact of the marriage . yes , be at home . " I will go in and speak to she , if she will allow I . will you ask she if she can see I --see , for a few minute ? " when the servant have go to deliver that message , could hear sound of music through a open window -- a few note from a man 's voice and then a piano burst into roulade . but the roulade break off suddenly , and then the servant come back say that would be happy to see . when the drawing - room door open and enter , there be a sort of contrast not infrequent in country life when the habits of the different rank be less blent than now . let those who know , tell we exactly what stuff it be that wear in those day of mild autumn -- that thin white woollen stuff soft to the touch and soave to the eye . it always seem to have be lately wash , and to smell of the sweet hedge -- be always in the shape of a pelisse with sleeve hang all out of the fashion . yet if she have enter before a still audience as or 's daughter , the dress might have seem right enough :
: the grace and dignity be in she limb and neck ; and about she simply part hair and cando eye the large round poke which be then in the fate of woman , see no more odd as a head - dress than the gold trencher we call a halo . by the present audience of two person , no dramatic heroine could have be expect with more interest than . to she be one of those county divinity not mix with mortality , whose slightest mark of manner or appearance be worthy of she study ; moreover , be not without satisfaction that should have a opportunity of study _her . what be the use of be exquisite if you be not see by the best judge ? and since have receive the highest compliment at 's , she feel quite confident of the impression she must make on people of good birth . Dorothea put out she hand with she usual simple kindness , and look admiringly at 's lovely bride -- aware that there be a gentleman stand at a distance , but see he merely as a coate figure at a wide angle . the gentleman be too much occupy with the presence of the one woman to reflect on the contrast between the two -- a contrast that would certainly have be strike to a calm observer . they be both tall , and they eye be on a level ; but imagine 's infantine blondness and wondrous crown of hair - plait , with she pale - blue dress of a fit and fashion so perfect that no dressmaker could look at it without emotion , a large embroidered collar which it be to be hope all beholder would know the price of , she small hand duly set off with ring , and that control self - consciousness of manner which be the expensive substitute for simplicity . " thank you very much for allow I to interrupt you , " say , immediately . " I be anxious to see , if possible , before I go home , and I hope that you might possibly tell I where I could find he , or even allow I to wait for he , if you expect he soon . " " he be at the , " say ; " I be not sure how soon he will come home . but I can send for he . " " will you let I go and fetch he ? " say , come forward . he have already take up he hat before enter . she colore with surprise , but put out she hand with a smile of unmistakable pleasure , say -- " I do not know it be you : I have no thought of see you here . " " may I go to the and tell Lydgate that you wish to see he ? " say . " it would be quicker to send the carriage for he , " say , " if you will be kind enough to give the message to the coachman . " will be move to the door when , whose mind have flash in a instant over many connect memory , turn quickly and say , " I will go myself , thank you . I wish to lose no time before get home again . I will drive to the and see there . pray excuse I , . I be very much oblige to you . " she mind be evidently arrest by some sudden thought , and she leave the room hardly conscious of what be immediately around she -- hardly conscious that open the door for she and offer she he arm to lead she to the carriage . she take the arm but say nothing . will be feel rather vexed and miserable , and find nothing to say on he side . he hand she into the carriage in silence , they say good - by , and drive away . in the five minute ' drive to the hospital she have time for some reflection that be quite new to she . she decision to go , and she preoccupation in leave the room , have come from the sudden sense that there would be a sort of deception in she voluntarily allow any further intercourse between herself and will which she be unable to mention to she husband , and already she errand in seek be a matter of concealment . that be all that have be explicitly in she mind ; but she have be urge also by a vague discomfort . now that she be alone in she drive , she hear the note of the man 's voice and the accompanying piano , which she have not note much at the time , return on she inward sense ; and she find herself think with some wonder that be pass he time with in she husband 's absence . and then she could not help remember that he have pass some time with she under like circumstance , so why should there be any unfitness in the fact ? but be 's relative , and one towards whom she be bound to show kindness . still there have been sign which perhaps she ought to have understood as imply that do not like he cousin 's visit during he own absence . " perhaps I have be mistaken in many thing , " say poor Dorothea to herself , while the tear come roll and she have to dry they quickly . she feel confusedly unhappy , and the image of which have be so clear to she before be mysteriously spoiled . but the carriage stop at the gate of the . she be soon walk round the grass plot with , and she feeling recover the strong
strong bent which have make she seek for this interview . will , meanwhile , be mortified , and know the reason of it clearly enough . he chance of meeting Dorothea be rare ; and here for the first time there have come a chance which have set he at a disadvantage . it be not only , as it have be hitherto , that she be not supremely occupy with he , but that she have see he under circumstance in which he might appear not to be supremely occupy with she . he feel thrust to a new distance from she , amongst the circle of who make no part of she life . but that be not he fault : of course , since he have take he lodging in the town , he have be make as many acquaintance as he could , he position require that he should know everybody and everything . be really better worth know than any one else in the neighborhood , and he happen to have a wife who be musical and altogether worth call upon . here be the whole history of the situation in which have descend too unexpectedly on she worshipper . it be mortify . will be conscious that he should not have be at but for ; and yet he position there be threatening to divide he from she with those barrier of habitual sentiment which be more fatal to the persistence of mutual interest than all the distance between and . Prejudice about rank and status be easy enough to defy in the form of a tyrannical letter from ; but prejudice , like odorous body , have a double existence both solid and subtle -- solid as the pyramid , subtle as the twentieth echo of a echo , or as the memory of hyacinth which once scent the darkness . and be of a temperament to feel keenly the presence of subtlety : a man of clumsier perception would not have feel , as he do , that for the first time some sense of unfitness in perfect freedom with he have spring up in 's mind , and that they silence , as he conduct she to the carriage , have have a chill in it . perhaps , in he hatred and jealousy , have be insist to that will have slid below she socially . ! will re-enter the drawing - room , take up he hat , and look irritate as he advanc towards , who have seat herself at she work - table , say -- " it be always fatal to have music or poetry interrupt . may I come another day and just finish about the rendering of ' Lungi dal caro bene ' ? " " I shall be happy to be teach , " say . " but I be sure you admit that the interruption be a very beautiful one . I quite envy you acquaintance with . be she very clever ? she look as if she be . " " really , I never think about it , " say , sulkily . " that be just the answer give I , when I first ask he if she be handsome . what be it that you gentleman be think of when you be with ? " " herself , " say , not indispose to provoke the charming . " when one see a perfect woman , one never think of she attribute -- one be conscious of she presence . " " I shall be jealous when go to Lowick , " say , dimpl , and speak with aery lightness . " he will come back and think nothing of I . " " that do not seem to have be the effect on Lydgate hitherto . be too unlike other woman for they to be compare with she . " " you be a devout worshipper , I perceive . you often see she , I suppose . " " no , " say , almost pettishly . " worship be usually a matter of theory rather than of practice . but I be practise it to excess just at this moment -- I must really tear myself away . " pray come again some evening : will like to hear the music , and I can not enjoy it so well without he . " when she husband be at home again , say , stand in front of he and hold he coat - collar with both she hand , " be here singe with I when come in . he seem vexed . do you think he dislike she see he at we house ? surely you position be more than equal to he -- whatever may be he relation to the Casaubon . " " no , no ; it must be something else if he be really vex , be a sort of gypsy ; he think nothing of leather and prunella . " " music apart , he be not always very agreeable . do you like he ? " " yes : I think he be a good fellow : rather miscellaneous and bric - a - brac , but likable . " " do you know , I think he adore . " " poor devil ! " say , smile and pinch he wife 's ear . felt herself begin to know a great deal of the world , especially in discover what when she be in she unmarried girlhood have be inconceivable to she except as a dim tragedy in by - gone costume -- that woman , even after marriage , might make conquest and enslave man . at that time young lady in the country , even when educate at 's , read little french literature later than , and public print have not
not cast they present magnificent illumination over the scandal of life . still , vanity , with a woman 's whole mind and day to work in , can construct abundantly on slight hint , especially on such a hint as the possibility of indefinite conquest . how delightful to make captive from the throne of marriage with a husband as cry -prince by you side -- himself in fact a subject -- while the captive look up forever hopeless , lose they rest probably , and if they appetite too , so much the better ! but 's romance turn at present chiefly on she crown - prince , and it be enough to enjoy he assure subjection . when he say , " poor devil ! " she ask , with playful curiosity -- " why so ? " " why , what can a man do when he take to adore one of you mermaid ? he only neglect he work and run up bill . " " I be sure you do not neglect you work . you be always at the , or see poor patient , or think about some doctor 's quarrel ; and then at home you always want to pore over you microscope and phial . Confess you like those thing better than I . " " have not you ambition enough to wish that you husband should be something better than a doctor ? " say , let he hand fall on to he wife 's shoulders , and look at she with affectionate gravity . " I shall make you learn my favorite bit from a old poet -- ' why should we pride make such a stir to be and be forgot ? what good be like to this , to do worthy the writing , and to write worthy the reading and the worlds delight ? ' what I want , , be to do worthy the writing , -- and to write out myself what I have do . a man must work , to do that , my pet . " " of course , I wish you to make discoveries : no one could more wish you to attain a high position in some better place than . you can not say that I have ever try to hinder you from work . but we can not live like hermits . you be not discontent with I , ? " " no , dear , no . I be too entirely contente . " " but what do want to say to you ? " " merely to ask about she husband 's health . but I think she be go to be splendid to we : I think she will give we two hundred a - year . " . I would not creep along the coast but steer out in mid-sea , by guidance of the star . when , walk round the laurel - plant plot of the with , have learn from he that there be no sign of change in 's bodily condition beyond the mental sign of anxiety to know the truth about he illness , she be silent for a few moment , wonder whether she have say or do anything to rouse this new anxiety . Lydgate , not willing to let slip a opportunity of furthere a favorite purpose , venture to say -- " I do not know whether you or -- 's attention have be draw to the need of we . circumstance have make it seem rather egotistic in I to urge the subject ; but that be not my fault : it be because there be a fight be make against it by the other medical man . I think you be generally interested in such thing , for I remember that when I first have the pleasure of see you at before you marriage , you be ask I some question about the way in which the health of the poor be affect by they miserable housing . " " yes , indeed , " say , brighten . " I shall be quite grateful to you if you will tell I how I can help to make thing a little better . everything of that sort have slip away from I since I have be marry . I mean , " she say , after a moment 's hesitation , " that the people in we village be tolerably comfortable , and my mind have be too much take up for I to inquire further . but here -- in such a place as -- there must be a great deal to be do . " " there be everything to be do , " say , with abrupt energy . " and this hospital be a capital piece of work , due entirely to 's exertion , and in a great degree to he money . but one man can not do everything in a scheme of this sort . of course he look forward to help . and now there be a mean , petty feuld set up against the thing in the town , by certain person who want to make it a failure . " " what can be they reason ? " say , with naive surprise . " 's unpopularity , to begin with . half the town would almost take trouble for the sake of thwart he . in this stupid world most people never consider that a thing be good to be do unless it be do by they own set . I have no connection with before I come here . I look at he quite impartially , and I see that he have some notion -- that he have set thing on foot -- which I can turn to good public purpose . if a fair number of the better
better educate man go to work with the belief that they observation might contribute to the reform of medical doctrine and practice , we should soon see a change for the better . that be my point of view . I hold that by refuse to work with I should be turn my back on a opportunity of make my profession more generally serviceable . " " I quite agree with you , " say , at once fascinate by the situation sketch in 's word . " but what be there against ? I know that my uncle be friendly with he . " " people do not like he religious tone , " say , break off there . " that be all the stronger reason for despise such a opposition , " say , look at the affair of by the light of the great persecution . " to put the matter quite fairly , they have other objection to he :-- he be masterful and rather unsociable , and he be concerned with trade , which have complaint of its own that I know nothing about . but what have that to do with the question whether it would not be a fine thing to establish here a more valuable hospital than any they have in the county ? the immediate motive to the opposition , however , be the fact that have put the medical direction into my hand . of course I be glad of that . it give I a opportunity of do some good work , -- and I be aware that I have to justify he choice of I . but the consequence be , that the whole profession in have set themselves tooth and nail against the hospital , and not only refuse to cooperate themselves , but try to blacke the whole affair and hinder subscription . " " how very petty ! " exclaim , indignantly . " I suppose one must expect to fight one 's way : there be hardly anything to be do without it . and the ignorance of people about here be stupendous . I do not lay claim to anything else than have use some opportunity which have not come within everybody be reach ; but there be no stifling the offence of be young , and a new - comer , and happene to know something more than the old inhabitant . still , if I believe that I can set go a better method of treatment -- if I believe that I can pursue certain observation and inquiry which may be a last benefit to medical practice , I should be a base truckler if I allow any consideration of personal comfort to hinder I . and the course be all the clearer from there be no salary in question to put my persistence in a equivocal light . " " I be glad you have tell I this , , " say , cordially . " I feel sure I can help a little . I have some money , and do not know what to do with it -- that be often a uncomfortable thought to I . I be sure I can spare two hundred a - year for a grand purpose like this . how happy you must be , to know thing that you feel sure will do great good ! I wish I could awake with that knowledge every morning . there seem to be so much trouble take that one can hardly see the good of ! " there be a melancholy cadence in 's voice as she speak these last word . but she presently add , more cheerfully , " pray come to Lowick and tell we more of this . I will mention the subject to . I must hasten home now . " she do mention it that evening , and say that she should like to subscribe two hundred a - year -- she have seven hundred a - year as the equivalent of she own fortune , settle on she at she marriage . make no objection beyond a passing remark that the sum might be disproportionate in relation to other good object , but when in she ignorance resist that suggestion , he acquiesce . he do not care himself about spend money , and be not reluctant to give it . if he ever feel keenly any question of money it be through the medium of another passion than the love of material property . tell he that she have see , and recit the gist of she conversation with he about the hospital . do not question she further , but he feel sure that she have wish to know what have pass between and himself " she know that I know , " say the ever- restless voice within ; but that increase of tacit knowledge only thrust further off any confidence between they . he distrust she affection ; and what loneliness be more lonely than distrust ? . it be the humor of many head to extol the day of they forefather , and declai m against the wickedness of time present . which notwithstand they can not handsomely do , without the borrowed help and satire of time past ; condemn the vice of they own time , by the expression of vex in time which they commend , which can not but argue the community of vice in both . , therefore , , and , be no prophet , although they line do seem to indigitate and point at we time .-- Sir Thomas BROWNE : . that opposition to the which have sketch to be , like other opposition , to be view in many different light . he regard it as a mixture of jealousy and dunderhead prejudice . see in it not only medical jealousy but
but a determination to thwart himself , prompt mainly by a hatred of that vital religion of which he have strive to be a effectual lay representative -- a hatred which certainly find pretext apart from religion such as be only too easy to find in the entanglement of human action . these might be call the ministerial view . but opposition have the illimitable range of objection at command , which need never stop short at the boundary of knowledge , but can draw forever on the vast of ignorance . what the opposition in say about the and its administration have certainly a great deal of echo in it , for heaven have take care that everybody shall not be a originator ; but there be difference which represent every social shade between the polished moderation of and the trenchant assertion of , the landlady of the in . become more and more convinced by she own asseveration , that mean to let the people die in the hospital , if not to poison they , for the sake of cut they up without say by you leave or with you leave ; for it be a know " fac " that he have want to cut up Mrs . , as respectable a woman as any in , who have money in trust before she marriage -- a poor tale for a doctor , who if he be good for anything should know what be the matter with you before you die , and not want to pry into you inside after you be gone . if that be not reason , wish to know what be ; but there be a prevalent feeling in she audience that she opinion be a bulwark , and that if it be overthrown there would be no limit to the cut - up of body , as have be well see in and with they pitch -plaister -- such a hang business as that be not want in ! and let it not be suppose that opinion at the in be unimportant to the medical profession : that old authentic public - house -- the original , know by the name of 's -- be the resort of a great , which have some month before put to the vote whether its long - stand medical man , " , " should not be cashier in favor of " this , " who be capable of perform the most astonishing cure , and rescue people altogether give up by other practitioner . but the balance have be turn against by two member , who for some private reason hold that this power of resuscitating person as good as dead be a equivocal recommendation , and might interfere with providential favor . in the course of the year , however , there have be a change in the public sentiment , of which the unanimity at 's be a index . a good deal more than a year ago , before anything be know of 's skill , the judgment on it have naturally be divide , depend on a sense of likelihood , situate perhaps in the pit of the stomach or in the pineal gland , and differ in its verdict , but not the less valuable as a guide in the total deficit of evidence . patient who have chronic disease or whose life have long be worn threadbare , like old 's , have be at once inclined to try he ; also , many who do not like pay they doctor 's bill , think agreeably of open a account with a new doctor and send for he without stint if the child 's temper want a dose , occasion when the old practitioner be often crusty ; and all person thus inclin to employ hold it likely that he be clever . some consider that he might do more than other " where there be liver ; " -- at least there would be no harm in get a few bottle of " stuff " from he , since if these prove useless it would still be possible to return to the , which keep you alive if they do not remove the yellowness . but these be people of minor importance . good family be of course not go to change they doctor without reason show ; and everybody who have employ do not feel obliged to accept a new man merely in the character of he successor , object that he be " not likely to be equal to . " but have not be long in the town before there be particular enough report of he to breed much more specific expectation and to intensify difference into partisanship ; some of the particular be of that impressive order of which the significance be entirely hidden , like a statistical amount without a standard of comparison , but with a note of exclamation at the end . the cubic foot of oxygen yearly swallow by a full - grow man -- what a shudder they might have create in some circle ! " ! nobody know what that may be -- be it any wonder the cholera have get to ? and yet there be people who say quarantine be no good ! " one of the facts quickly rumor be that do not dispense drug . this be offensive both to the physician whose exclusive distinction seem infringe on , and to the surgeon - apothecary with whom he range himself ; and only a little while before , they might have count on have the law on they side against a man who without call himself a - make da to ask for pay except as a charge on drug . but have not be experience enough to foresee that he new course would be even more offensive to the laity ;
; and to , a important grocer in the top market , who , though not one of he patient , question he in a affable manner on the subject , he be injudicious enough to give a hasty popular explanation of he reason , point out to that it must lower the character of practitioner , and be a constant injury to the public , if they only mode of get pay for they work be by they make out long bill for draught , boluse , and mixture . " it be in that way that hard - work medical man may come to be almost as mischievous as quack , " say , rather thoughtlessly . " to get they own bread they must overdose the king 's liege ; and that be a bad sort of treason , -- undermine the constitution in a fatal way . " be not only a overseer ( it be about a question of outdoor pay that he be have a interview with ) , he be also asthmatic and have a increase family : thus , from a medical point of view , as well as from he own , he be a important man ; indeed , a exceptional grocer , whose hair be arrange in a flame - like pyramid , and whose retail deference be of the cordial , encourage kind -- jocosely complimentary , and with a certain considerate abstinence from let out the full force of he mind . it be 's friendly jocoseness in question he which have set the tone of 's reply . but let the wise be warn against too great readiness at explanation : it multiply the source of mistake , lengthen the sum for reckoner sure to go wrong . smile as he end he speech , put he foot into the stirrup , and laugh more than he would have do if he have know who the king 's liege be , give he " good morning , sir , good - morning , sir , " with the air of one who see everything clearly enough . but in truth he views be pertur . for year he have be pay bill with strictly make item , so that for every half - crown and eighteen - pence he be certain something measurable have be deliver . he have do this with satisfaction , include it among he responsibility as a husband and father , and regard a longer bill than usual as a dignity worth mention . moreover , in addition to the massive benefit of the drug to " self and family , " he have enjoy the pleasure of form a acute judgment as to they immediate effect , so as to give a intelligent statement for the guidance of -- a practitioner just a little lower in status than or , and especially esteem as a accoucheur , of whose ability have the poorest opinion on all other point , but in doctoring , he be will nt to say in a undertone , he place gambit above any of they . here be deeper reason than the superficial talk of a new man , which appear still flimsier in the drawing - room over the shop , when they be recit to , a woman accustom to be make much of as a fertile mother ,-- generally under attendance more or less frequent from , and occasionally have attack which require . " do this mean to say there be no use in take medicine ? " say , who be slightly give to draw . " I should like he to tell I how I could bear up at fair time , if I do not take strengthening medicine for a month beforehand . think of what I have to provide for call customer , my dear ! " -- here turn to a intimate female friend who sit by --" a large veal pie -- a stuffe fillet -- a round of beef -- ham , tongue , et cetera , et cetera ! but what keep I up best be the pink mixture , not the brown . I wonder , , with _your_ experience , you could have patience to listen . I should have tell he at once that I know a little better than that . " " no , no , no , " say ; " I be not go to tell he my opinion . hear everything and judge for yourself be my motto . but he do not know who he be talk to . I be not to be turn on _his_ finger . people often pretend to tell I thing , when they might as well say , ' Mawmsey , you be a fool . ' but I smile at it : I humor everybody 's weak place . if physic have do harm to self and family , I should have find it out by this time . " the next day be tell that go about say physic be of no use . " indeed ! " say he , lift he eyebrow with cautious surprise . ( he be a stout husky man with a large ring on he fourth finger . ) " how will he cure he patient , then ? " " that be what I say , " return , who habitually give weight to she speech by load she pronoun . " do _he_ suppose that people will pay he only to come and sit with they and go away again ? " have have a great deal of sitting from , include very full account of he own habits of body and other affair ; but of course he know there be no innuendo in she remark , since he spare time and personal narrative have never be charge for
for . so he reply , humorously -- " well , be a good - look young fellow , you know . " " not one that I would employ , " say . " _Other may do as they please . " hence could go away from the chief grocer 's without fear of rivalry , but not without a sense that be one of those hypocrite who try to discredit other by advertise they own honesty , and that it might be worth some people 's while to show he up . , however , have a satisfactory practice , much pervad by the smell of retail trading which suggest the reduction of cash payment to a balance . and he do not think it worth he while to show Lydgate up until he know how . he have not indeed great resource of education , and have have to work he own way against a good deal of professional contempt ; but he make none the worse accoucheur for call the breathing apparatus " long . " other medical man feel themselves more capable . share the highest practice in the town and belong to a old family : there be Toller in the law and everything else above the line of retail trade . unlike we irascible friend Wrench , he have the easiest way in the world of take thing which might be suppose to annoy he , be a well - breed , quietly facetious man , who keep a good house , be very fond of a little sporting when he could get it , very friendly with , and hostile to . it may seem od that with such pleasant habit he should have be give to the heroic treatment , bleed and blister and starve he patient , with a dispassionate disregard to he personal example ; but the incongruity favor the opinion of he ability among he patient , who commonly observe that have lazy manners , but he treatment be as active as you could desire : no man , say they , carry more seriousness into he profession : he be a little slow in come , but when he come , he _did_ something . he be a great favorite in he own circle , and whatever he imply to any one 's disadvantage tell doubly from he careless ironical tone . he naturally get tired of smile and say , " ah ! " when he be tell that 's successor do not mean to dispense medicine ; and one day mention it over the wine at a dinner - party , say , laughingly , " Dibbitts will get rid of he stale drug , then . I be fond of little Dibbitt -- I be glad he be in luck . " " I see you meaning , , " say , " and I be entirely of you opinion . I shall take a opportunity of express myself to that effect . a medical man should be responsible for the quality of the drug consume by he patient . that be the rationale of the system of charging which have hithertoo obtain ; and nothing be more offensive than this ostentation of reform , where there be no real amelioration . " " Ostentation , ? " say , ironically . " I do not see that . a man can not very well be ostentatious of what nobody believe in . there be no reform in the matter : the question be , whether the profit on the drug be pay to the medical man by the druggist or by the patient , and whether there shall be extra pay under the name of attendance . " " ah , to be sure ; one of you damned new version of old humbug , " say , pass the decanter to . , generally abstemious , often drank wine rather freely at a party , get the more irritable in consequence . " as to , , " he say , " that be a word easy to fl about . but what I contend against be the way medical man be foul they own nest , and set up a cry about the country as if a general practitioner who dispense drug could not be a gentleman . I throw back the imputation with scorn . I say , the most ungentlemanly trick a man can be guilty of be to come among the member of he profession with innovation which be a libel on they time - honor procedure . that be my opinion , and I be ready to maintain it against any one who contradict I . " 's voice have become exceedingly sharp . " I can not oblige you there , , " say , thrust he hand into he trouser-pocket . " my dear fellow , " say , strike in pacifically ! and look at , " the physician have they toe trodden on more than we have . if you come to dignity it be a question for and . " " do medical jurisprudence provide nothing against these infringement ? " say , with a disinterested desire to offer he light . " how do the law stand , eh , ? " " nothing to be do there , " say . " I look into it for . you would only break you nose against a damned judge 's decision . " " Pooh ! no need of law , " say . " so far as practice be concerned the attempt be a absurdity . no patient will like it -- certainly not Peacock 's , who have be use to depletion . pass the wine . " 's prediction be partly verify . if and , who have no idea of employing , be make uneasy by he suppose
suppose declaration against drug , it be inevitable that those who call he in should watch a little anxiously to see whether he do " use all the means he might use " in the case . even good , who in he constant charity of interpretation be inclin to esteem Lydgate the more for what see a conscientious pursuit of a better plan , have he mind disturb with doubt during he wife 's attack of erysipela , and could not abstain from mentio to Lydgate that on a similar occasion have administer a series of boluse which be not otherwise definable than by they remarkable effect in bring Powderell round before from a illness which have begin in a remarkably hot . at last , indeed , in the conflict between he desire not to hurt and he anxiety that no " mean " should be lack , he induce he wife privately to take 's , a esteem medicine , which arrest every disease at the fountain by set to work at once upon the blood . this co-operative measure be not to be mention to Lydgate , and himself have no certain reliance on it , only hope that it might be attend with a blessing . but in this doubtful stage of 's introduction he be help by what we mortal rashly call good fortune . I suppose no doctor ever come newly to a place without make cure that surprise somebody -- cure which may be call fortune 's testimonial , and deserve as much credit as the write or print kind . various patient get well while be attend they , some even of dangerous illness ; and it be remark that the new doctor with he new way have at least the merit of bring people back from the brink of death . the trash talk on such occasion be the more vexatious to Lydgate , because it give precisely the sort of prestige which a incompetent and unscrupulous man would desire , and be sure to be impute to he by the simmering dislike of the other medical man as a encouragement on he own part of ignorant puffing . but even he proud outspokenness be check by the discernment that it be as useless to fight against the interpretation of ignorance as to whip the fog ; and " good fortune " insist on use those interpretation . Larcher have just become charitably concerned about alarming symptom in she charwoman , when call , ask he to see she then and there , and to give she a certificate for the Infirmary ; whereupon after examination he write a statement of the case as one of tumor , and recommend the bearer as a out - patient . , call at home on she way to the , allow the stay maker and he wife , in whose attic she lod , to read 's paper , and by this means become a subject of compassionate conversation in the neighboring shop of as be afflict with a tumor at first declare to be as large and hard as a duck 's egg , but later in the day to be about the size of " you fist . " most hearer agree that it would have to be cut out , but one have know of oil and another of " squitchineal " as adequate to soften and reduce any lump in the body when take enough of into the inside -- the oil by gradually " soopl , " the squitchineal by eat away . meanwhile when present herself at the , it happen to be one of 's day there . after question and examine she , say to the house - surgeon in a undertone , " it be not tumor : it be cramp . " he order she a blister and some steel mixture , and tell she to go home and rest , give she at the same time a note to , who , she say , be she best employer , to testify that she be in need of good food . but by - and - by , in she attic , become portentously worse , the supposed tumor have indeed give way to the blister , but only wander to another region with angrier pain . the staymaker 's wife go to fetch , and he continue for a fortnight to attend in she own home , until under he treatment she get quite well and go to work again . but the case continue to be describe as one of tumor in and other street -- nay , by also ; for when 's remarkable cure be mention to , he naturally do not like to say , " the case be not one of tumor , and I be mistaken in describe it as such , " but answer , " indeed ! ah ! I see it be a surgical case , not of a fatal kind . " he have be inwardly annoyed , however , when he have ask at the about the woman he have recommend two day before , to hear from the house - surgeon , a youngster who be not sorry to vex with impunity , exactly what have occur : he privately pronounce that it be indecent in a general practitioner to contradict a physician 's diagnosis in that open manner , and afterwards agree with that be disagreeably inattentive to etiquette . do not make the affair a ground for value himself or ( very particularly ) despise , such rectification of misjudgment often happene among man of equal qualifications . but report take up this amazing case of tumor , not clearly distinguished from cancer , and consider the more awful for be of the wander sort ; till much prejudice against 's method as to drug be overcome
overcome by the proof of he marvellous skill in the speedy restoration of after she have be roll and roll in agony from the presence of a tumor both hard and obstinate , but nevertheless compelle to yield . how could help himself ? it be offensive to tell a lady when she be express she amazement at you skill , that she be altogether mistaken and rather foolish in she amazement . and to have enter into the nature of disease would only have add to he breach of medical propriety . thus he have to wince under a promise of success give by that ignorant praise which miss every valid quality . in the case of a more conspicuous patient , , be conscious of have show himself something better than a every - day doctor , though here too it be a equivocal advantage that he win . the eloquent auctioneer be seize with pneumonia , and have be a patient of 's , send for , whom he have express he intention to patronize . be a robust man , a good subject for try the expectant theory upon -- watch the course of a interesting disease when leave as much as possible to itself , so that the stage might be note for future guidance ; and from the air with which he describe he sensation surmise that he would like to be take into he medical man 's confidence , and be represent as a partner in he own cure . the auctioneer hear , without much surprise , that he be a constitution which ( always with due watch ) might be leave to itself , so as to offer a beautiful example of a disease with all its phase see in clear delineation , and that he probably have the rare strength of mind voluntarily to become the test of a rational procedure , and thus make the disorder of he pulmonary function a general benefit to society . acquiesce at once , and enter strongly into the view that a illness of he be no ordinary occasion for medical science . " never fear , sir ; you be not speak to one who be altogether ignorant of the vis medicatrix , " say he , with he usual superiority of expression , make rather pathetic by difficulty of breathing . and he go without shrink through he abstinence from drug , much sustain by application of the thermometer which imply the importance of he temperature , by the sense that he furnish object for the microscope , and by learn many new word which seem sui to the dignity of he secretion . for be acute enough to indulge he with a little technical talk . it may be imagine that rise from he couch with a disposition to speak of a illness in which he have manifest the strength of he mind as well as constitution ; and he be not backward in awarding credit to the medical man who have discern the quality of patient he have to deal with . the auctioneer be not a ungenerous man , and like to give other they due , feel that he could afford it . he have catch the word " expectant method , " and ring chime on this and other learn phrase to accompany the assurance that Lydgate " know a thing or two more than the rest of the doctor -- be far better verse in the secret of he profession than the majority of he compeer . " this have happen before the affair of 's illness have give to 's enmity towards more definite personal ground . the new - comer already threaten to be a nuisance in the shape of rivalry , and be certainly a nuisance in the shape of practical criticism or reflection on he hard - drive elder , who have have something else to do than to busy themselve with untried notion . he practice have spread in one or two quarter , and from the first the report of he high family have lead to he be pretty generally invite , so that the other medical man have to meet he at dinner in the best house ; and have to meet a man whom you dislike be not observe always to end in a mutual attachment . there be hardly ever so much unanimity among they as in the opinion that Lydgate be a arrogant young fellow , and yet ready for the sake of ultimately predominat to show a crawling subservience to . that , whose name be a chief flag of the anti-Bulstrode party , always defend and make a friend of he , be refer to 's unaccountable way of fight on both side . here be plenty of preparation for the outburst of professional disgust at the announcement of the law be lay down for the direction of the , which be the more exasperating because there be no present possibility of interfere with he will and pleasure , everybody except have refuse help towards the building , on the ground that they prefer give to the . meet all the expense , and have cease to be sorry that he be purchase the right to carry out he notion of improvement without hindrance from prejudiced coadjutor ; but he have have to spend large sum , and the building have linger . have undertake it , have fail during its progress , and before the interior fitting be begin have retire from the management of the business ; and when refer to the hospital he often say that however might ring if you try he , he like good solid carpentry and masonry , and have a notion both of drain and chimney . in fact , the have become a object of intense interest to , and he would willingly have continue
continue to spare a large yearly sum that he might rule it dictatorially without any board ; but he have another favorite object which also require money for its accomplishment : he wish to buy some land in the neighborhood of , and therefore he wish to get considerable contribution towards maintain the hospital . meanwhile he fram he plan of management . the Hospital be to be reserve for fever in all its form ; be to be chief medical superintendent , that he might have free authority to pursue all comparative investigation which he study , particularly in , have show he the importance of , the other medical visitor have a consultative influence , but no power to contravene 's ultimate decision ; and the general management be to be lod exclusively in the hand of five directors associate with , who be to have vote in the ratio of they contribution , the board itself fill up any vacancy in its number , and no mob of small contributor be admit to a share of government . there be a immediate refusal on the part of every medical man in the town to become a visitor at the . " very well , " say to , " we have a capital house - surgeon and dispenser , a clear - headed , neat - hand fellow ; we will get from , as good a country practitioner as any of they , to come over twice a - week , and in case of any exceptional operation , Protheroe will come from Brassing . I must work the harder , that be all , and I have give up my post at the Infirmary . the plan will flourish in spite of they , and then they will be glad to come in . thing can not last as they be : there must be all sort of reform soon , and then young fellow may be glad to come and study here . " be in high spirit . " I shall not flinch , you may depend upon it , , " say . " while I see you carry out high intention with vigor , you shall have my unfailing support . and I have humble confidence that the blessing which have hithertoo attend my effort against the spirit of evil in this town will not be withdraw . suitable director to assist I I have no doubt of securing . of have already give I he concurrence , and a pledge to contribute yearly : he have not specify the sum--probably not a great one . but he will be a useful member of the board . " a useful member be perhaps to be define as one who would originate nothing , and always vote with . the medical aversion to Lydgate be hardly disguis now . neither nor say that he dislike 's knowledge , or he disposition to improve treatment : what they dislike be he arrogance , which nobody feel to be altogether deniable . they imply that he be insolent , pretentious , and give to that reckless innovation for the sake of noise and show which be the essence of the charlatan . the word charlatan once throw on the air could not be let drop . in those day the world be agitate about the wondrous doings of , " nobleman and gentleman " attest he extraction of a fluid like mercury from the temple of a patient . remark one day , smilingly , to , that " have find a man to suit he in ; a charlatan in religion be sure to like other sort of charlatan . " " yes , indeed , I can imagine , " say . , keep the number of thirty stitch carefully in she mind all the while ; " there be so many of that sort . I remember , with he iron , try to make people straight when the have make they crooke . " " no , no , " say , " be all right -- all fair and above board . but there be . -- that be the kind of fellow we call a charlatan , advertising cure in way nobody know anything about : a fellow who want to make a noise by pretend to go deeper than other people . the other day he be pretend to tap a man 's brain and get quicksilver out of it . " " good gracious ! what dreadful trifling with people 's constitution ! " say . after this , it come to be hold in various quarter that play even with respectable constitution for he own purpose , and how much more likely that in he flighty experiment he should make six and sevens of hospital patient . especially it be to be expect , as the landlady of the have say , that he would recklessly cut up they dead body . for have attend . , who die apparently of a heart - disease not very clearly express in the symptom , too daringly ask leave of she relative to open the body , and thus give a offence quickly spread beyond , where that lady have long reside on a income such as make this association of she body with the victim of and a flagrant insult to she memory . affairs be in this stage when open the subject of the to . we see that he be bear enmity and silly misconception with much spirit , aware that they be partly create by he good share of success . " they will not drive I away , " he say , talk confidentially in 's study . " I have get a good opportunity here , for the end I care most about ; and I be pretty sure to get income
income enough for we want . by - and - by I shall go on as quietly as possible : I have no seduction now away from home and work . and I be more and more convince that it will be possible to demonstrate the homogeneous origin of all the tissue . Raspail and other be on the same track , and I have be lose time . " " I have no power of prophecy there , " say , who have be puffe at he pipe thoughtfully while talk ; " but as to the hostility in the town , you will weather it if you be prudent . " " how be I to be prudent ? " say , " I just do what come before I to do . I can not help people 's ignorance and spite , any more than could . it be not possible to square one 's conduct to silly conclusion which nobody can foresee . " " quite true ; I do not mean that . I mean only two thing . one be , keep yourself as separable from Bulstrode as you can : of course , you can go on do good work of you own by he help ; but do not get tie . perhaps it seem like personal feeling in I to say so -- and there be a good deal of that , I own -- but personal feeling be not always in the wrong if you boil it down to the impressions which make it simply a opinion . " " Bulstrode be nothing to I , " say , carelessly , " except on public grounds . as to get very closely united to he , I be not fond enough of he for that . but what be the other thing you mean ? " say , who be nurse he leg as comfortably as possible , and feel in no great need of advice . " why , this . take care --experto crede -- take care not to get hamper about money matter . I know , by a word you let fall one day , that you do not like my play at card so much for money . you be right enough there . but try and keep clear of want small sum that you have not get . I be perhaps talke rather superfluously ; but a man like to assume superiority over himself , by hold up he bad example and sermonize on it . " take 's hint very cordially , though he would hardly have borne they from another man . he could not help remember that he have lately make some debt , but these have see inevitable , and he have no intention now to do more than keep house in a simple way . the furniture for which he owed would not want renew ; nor even the stock of wine for a long while . many thought cheer he at that time -- and justly . a man conscious of enthusiasm for worthy aim be sustain under petty hostility by the memory of great worker who have to fight they way not without wound , and who hover in he mind as patron saint , invisibly help . at home , that same evening when he have be chat with , he have he long leg stretch on the sofa , he head throw back , and he hand clasp behind it accord to he favorite ruminat attitude , while sit at the piano , and play one tune after another , of which she husband only know ( like the emotional elephant he be ! ) that they fall in with he mood as if they have be melodious sea-breeze . there be something very fine in 's look just then , and any one might have be encourage to bet on he achievement . in he dark eye and on he mouth and brow there be that placidity which come from the fulness of contemplative thought -- the mind not search , but beholding , and the glance seem to be fill with what be behind it . presently leave the piano and seat herself on a chair close to the sofa and opposite she husband 's face . " be that enough music for you , my lord ? " she say , fold she hand before she and put on a little air of meekness . " yes , dear , if you be tired , " say , gently , turn he eye and rest they on she , but not otherwise move . 's presence at that moment be perhaps no more than a spoonful brotch to the lake , and she woman 's instinct in this matter be not dull . " what be absorb you ? " she say , lean forward and bring she face nearer to he . he move he hand and place they gently behind she shoulders . " I be think of a great fellow , who be about as old as I be three hundred year ago , and have already begin a new era in anatomy . " " I can not guess , " say , shak she head . " we use to play at guess historical character at 's , but not anatomist . " " I will tell you . he name be . and the only way he could get to know anatomy as he do , be by go to snatch body at night , from graveyard and place of execution . " " oh ! " say , with a look of disgust on she pretty face , " I be very glad you be not Vesalius . I should have think he might find some less horrible way than that . " " no ,
, he could not , " say , go on too earnestly to take much notice of she answer . " he could only get a complete skeleton by snatch the whitened bone of a criminal from the gallow , and bury they , and fetch they away by bit secretly , in the dead of night . " " I hope he be not one of you great heroe , " say , half playfully , half anxiously , " else I shall have you get up in the night to go to 's churchyard . you know how angry you tell I the people be about . you have enemy enough already . " " so have , . no wonder the medical fogy in be jealous , when some of the greatest doctor living be fierce upon because they have believe in , and he show that be wrong . they call he a liar and a poisonous monster . but the fact of the human frame be on he side ; and so he get the better of they . " " and what happen to he afterwards ? " say , with some interest . " oh , he have a good deal of fighting to the last . and they do exasperate he enough at one time to make he burn a good deal of he work . then he get shipwreck just as he be come from to take a great chair at . he die rather miserably . " there be a moment 's pause before say , " do you know , , I often wish you have not be a medical man . " " Nay , , do not say that , " say , draw she closer to he . " that be like say you wish you have marry another man . " " not at all ; you be clever enough for anything : you might easily have be something else . and you cousin at all think that you have sink below they in you choice of a profession . " " the cousin at may go to the devil ! " say , with scorn . " it be like there impudence if they say anything of the sort to you . " " , " say , " I do _not think it be a nice profession , dear . " we know that she have much quiet perseverance in she opinion . " it be the grandest profession in the world , , " say , gravely . " and to say that you love I without love the medical man in I , be the same sort of thing as to say that you like eat a peach but do not like its flavor . do not say that again , dear , it pain I . " " very well , grave - face , " say , dimpl , " I will declare in future that I dote on skeleton , and body -snatcher , and bit of thing in phial , and quarrel with everybody , that end in you dying miserably . " " no , no , not so bad as that , " say , give up remonstrance and pett she resignedly . . Pue no podemo haber aquello que queremo , queramo aquello que podremo . since we can not get what we like , let we like what we can get . -- spanish . while , safely marry and with the under he command , felt himself struggle for against , be become more and more conscious of the national struggle for another kind of Reform . by the time that 's measure be be debate in the of , there be a new political animation in , and a new definition of party which might show a decided change of balance if a new election come . and there be some who already predict this event , declare that a would never be carry by the actual parliament . this be what will Ladislee dwelt on to as a reason for congratulation that he have not yet try he strength at the husting . " thing will grow and ripen as if it be a comet year , " say . " the public temper will soon get to a cometary heat , now the question of have set in . there be likely to be another election before long , and by that time will have get more idea into its head . what we have to work at now be the ' pioneer ' and political meeting . " " quite right , Ladislaw ; we shall make a new thing of opinion here , " say . " only I want to keep myself independent about Reform , you know ; I do not want to go too far . I want to take up . 's and 's line , you know , and work at , criminal law -- that kind of thing . but of course I should support . " " if you go in for the principle of Reform , you must be prepared to take what the situation offer , " say . " if everybody pull for he own bit against everybody else , the whole question would go to tatter . " " yes , yes , I agree with you -- I quite take that point of view . I should put it in that light . I should support , you know . but I do not want to change the balance of the constitution , and I do not think would . " " but that be what the country want , " -say . " else there would be no meaning in political union or any other movement that know what it be about . it want
want to have a House of Commons which be not weighte with nominee of the landed class , but with representative of the other interest . and as to contend for a reform short of that , it be like ask for a bit of a avalanche which have already begin to thunder . " " that be fine , : that be the way to put it . write that down , now . we must begin to get document about the feeling of the country , as well as the machine - breaking and general distress . " " as to document , " say , " a two - inch card will hold plenty . a few row of figure be enough to deduce misery from , and a few more will show the rate at which the political determination of the people be grow . " " good : draw that out a little more at length , . that be a idea , now : write it out in the ' . ' put the figure and deduce the misery , you know ; and put the other figure and deduce -- and so on . you have a way of put thing . Burke , now :--when I think of , I can not help wish somebody have a pocket - borough to give you , . you would never get elect , you know . and we shall always want talent in the house : reform as we will , we shall always want talent . that avalanche and the thunder , now , be really a little like . I want that sort of thing -- not idea , you know , but a way of put they . " " pocket - borough would be a fine thing , " say , " if they be always in the right pocket , and there be always a Burke at hand . " will be not displease with that complimentary comparison , even from ; for it be a little too try to human flesh to be conscious of expressing one 's self better than other and never to have it notice , and in the general dearth of admiration for the right thing , even a chance bray of applause fall exactly in time be rather fortify . will feel that he literary refinement be usually beyond the limit of perception ; nevertheless , he be begin thoroughly to like the work of which when he begin he have say to himself rather languidly , " why not ? " -- and he study the political situation with as ardent a interest as he have ever give to poetic metre or mediaevalism . it be undeniable that but for the desire to be where Dorothea be , and perhaps the want of know what else to do , will would not at this time have be meditat on the need of the english people or criticise statesmanship : he would probably have be rambl in sketching plan for several drama , try prose and find it too jejune , try verse and find it too artificial , begin to copy " bits " from old picture , leave off because they be " no good , " and observe that , after all , self - culture be the principal point ; while in politics he would have be sympathize warmly with liberty and progress in general . we sense of duty must often wait for some work which shall take the place of dilettanteism and make we feel that the quality of we action be not a matter of indifference . Ladislaw have now accept he bit of work , though it be not that indeterminate loftiest thing which he have once dream of as alone worthy of continuous effort . he nature warme easily in the presence of subject which be visibly mix with life and action , and the easily stir rebellion in he help the glow of public spirit . in spite of and the banishment from , he be rather happy ; get a great deal of fresh knowledge in a vivid way and for practical purpose , and make the " pioneer " celebrate as far as Brassing ( never mind the smallness of the area ; the writing be not worse than much that reach the four corner of the earth ) . be occasionally irritat ; but 's impatience be relieve by the division of he time between visit to the and retreat to he lodging , which give variety to he life . " shiave the peg a little , " he say to himself , " and might be in the cabinet , while I be under - . that be the common order of thing : the little wave make the large one and be of the same pattern . I be better here than in the sort of life would have train I for , where the doing would be all laid down by a precedent too rigid for I to react upon . I do not care for prestige or high pay . " as have say of he , he be a sort of gypsy , rather enjoy the sense of belong to no class ; he have a feeling of romance in he position , and a pleasant consciousness of create a little surprise wherever he go . that sort of enjoyment have be disturb when he have feel some new distance between himself and in they accidental meeting at 's , and he irritation have go out towards , who have declare beforehand that will would lose caste . " I never have any caste , " he would have say , if that prophecy have be utter to he , and the quick blood would have come and go like breath in he transparent skin
skin . but it be one thing to like defiance , and another thing to like its consequence . meanwhile , the town opinion about the new editor of the " " be tend to confirm 's view . 's relationship in that distinguished quarter do not , like 's high connection , serve as a advantageous introduction : if it be rumored that young Ladislaw be 's nephew or cousin , it be also rumo that " would have nothing to do with he . " " have take he up , " say , " because that be what no man in he sense could have expect . have devilish good reason , you may be sure , for turn the cold shoulder on a young fellow whose bring - up he pay for . just like -- one of those fellow who would praise a cat to sell a horse . " and some oddity of 's , more or less poetical , appear to support , the editor of the " Trumpet , " in assert that Ladislaw , if the truth be know , be not only a polish emissary but crack - brain , which account for the preternatural quickness and glibness of he speech when he get on to a platform -- as he do whenever he have a opportunity , speak with a facility which cast reflection on solid generally . it be disgust to to see a strip of a fellow , with light curl round he head , get up and speechify by the hour against institution " which have exist when he be in he cradle . " and in a lead article of the " Trumpet , " characterize 's speech at a meeting as " the violence of a energuman -- a miserable effort to shroud in the brilliancy of firework the daring of irresponsible statement and the poverty of a knowledge which be of the cheapest and most recent description . " " that be a rattling article yesterday , , " say , with sarcastic intention . " but what be a energuman ? " " oh , a term that come up in the , " say . this dangerous aspect of be strangely contrast with other habit which become matter of remark . he have a fondness , half artistic , half affectionate , for little child -- the smaller they be on tolerably active leg , and the funnier they clothing , the better like to surprise and please they . we know that in he be give to ramble about among the poor people , and the taste do not quit he in . he have somehow pick up a troop of droll child , little hatless boy with they galligaskin much worn and scant shirting to hang out , little girl who toss they hair out of they eye to look at he , and guardian brothers at the mature age of seven . this troop he have lead out on gypsy excursion to at nutting - time , and since the cold weather have set in he have take they on a clear day to gather stick for a bonfire in the hollow of a hillside , where he draw out a small feast of gingerbread for they , and improvise a punch - and - Judy drama with some private home - make puppet . here be one oddity . another be , that in house where he get friendly , he be give to stretch himself at full length on the rug while he talk , and be apt to be discover in this attitude by occasional caller for whom such a irregularity be likely to confirm the notion of he dangerously mix blood and general laxity . but 's article and speech naturally recommend he in family which the new strictness of party division have mark off on the side of Reform . he be invite to 's ; but here he could not lie down on the rug , and . feel that he mode of talk about country , as if there be any truce with , illustrate the usual tendency to unsoundness in intellectual man . at 's , however , whom the irony of event have brotch on the same side with in the national movement , will become a favorite with the ladie ; especially with little , whom it be one of he oddity to escort when he meet she in the street with she little basket , give she he arm in the eyes of the town , and insist on go with she to pay some call where she distribute she small filching from she own share of sweet thing . but the house where he visit oftenest and lay most on the rug be 's . the two man be not at all alike , but they agree no the worse . be abrupt but not irritable , take little notice of megrim in healthy people ; and do not usually throw away he susceptibility on those who take no notice of they . with , on the other hand , he poute and be wayward -- nay , often uncomplimentary , much to she inward surprise ; nevertheless he be gradually become necessary to she entertainment by he companionship in she music , he varied talk , and he freedom from the grave preoccupation which , with all she husband 's tenderness and indulgence , often make he manners unsatisfactory to she , and confirm she dislike of the medical profession . Lydgate , inclin to be sarcastic on the superstitious faith of the people in the efficacy of " the bill , " while nobody care about the low state of pathology , sometimes assail Will with troublesome question . one evening in , in she cherry - color dress with swansdown trimm about the throat
throat sit at the tea - table ; Lydgate , lately come in tired from he outdoor work , be seat sideway on a easy - chair by the fire with one leg over the elbow , he brow look a little troubled as he eye ramble over the column of the " , " while , have notice that he be pertur , avoid look at he , and inwardly thanke heaven that she herself have not a moody disposition . will be stretch on the rug contemplate the curtain - pole abstractedly , and hum very low the note of " when first I see thy face ; " while the house spaniel , also stretch out with small choice of room , look from between he paw at the usurper of the rug with silent but strong objection . Rosamond bring he cup of tea , he throw down the paper , and say to , who have start up and go to the table -- " it be no use you puffe as a reform landlord , Ladislaw : they only pick the more holes in he coat in the ' Trumpet . ' " " no matter ; those who read the ' pioneer ' do not read the ' Trumpet , ' " say , swallow he tea and walk about . " do you suppose the public read with a view to its own conversion ? we should have a witch ' brewing with a vengeance then --' , mingle , mingle , mingle , you that mingle may ' -- and nobody would know which side he be go to take . " " Farebrother say , he do not believe would get elect if the opportunity come : the very man who profess to be for he would bring another member out of the bag at the right moment . " " there be no harm in try . it be good to have resident member . " " why ? " say , who be much give to use that inconvenient word in a curt tone . " they represent the local stupidity better , " say , laugh , and shake he curl ; " and they be keep on they best behavior in the neighborhood . be not a bad fellow , but he have do some good thing on he estate that he never would have do but for this Parliamentary bite . " " he be not fitte to be a public man , " say , with contemptuous decision . " he would disappoind everybody who count on he : I can see that at the . only , there hold the rein and drive he . " " that depend on how you fix you standard of public man , " say . " he be good enough for the occasion : when the people have make up they mind as they be make it up now , they do not want a man -- they only want a vote . " " that be the way with you political writer , Ladislaw -- cry up a measure as if it be a universal cure , and cry up man who be a part of the very disease that want curing . " " why not ? may help to cure themselves off the face of the land without know it , " say , who could find reasons impromptu , when he have not think of a question beforehand . " that be no excuse for encourage the superstitious exaggeration of hope about this particular measure , help the cry to swallow it whole and to send up voting popinjay who be good for nothing but to carry it . you go against rottenness , and there be nothing more thoroughly rotten than make people believe that society can be cure by a political hocus -pocus . " " that be very fine , my dear fellow . but you cure must begin somewhere , and put it that a thousand thing which debase a population can never be reform without this particular reform to begin with . look what say the other day -- that the house have be tinker long enough at small question of bribery , inquire whether this or that voter have have a guinea when everybody know that the seat have be sell wholesale . wait for wisdom and conscience in public agent -- fiddlestick ! the only conscience we can trust to be the massive sense of wrong in a class , and the best wisdom that will work be the wisdom of balancing claim . that be my text -- which side be injured ? I support the man who support they claim ; not the virtuous upholder of the wrong . " " that general talk about a particular case be mere question begge , . when I say , I go in for the dose that cure , it do not follow that I go in for opium in a give case of gout . " " I be not begge the question we be upon -- whether we be to try for nothing till we find immaculate man to work with . should you go on that plan ? if there be one man who would carry you a medical reform and another who would oppose it , should you inquire which have the better motive or even the better brain ? " " oh , of course , " say , see himself checkmate by a move which he have often use himself , " if one do not work with such man as be at hand , thing must come to a dead - lock . suppose the worst opinion in the town about be a true one , that would not make it less true that he have the sense and
and the resolution to do what I think ought to be do in the matters I know and care most about ; but that be the only ground on which I go with he , " add rather proudly , bear in mind 's remarnks . " he be nothing to I otherwise ; I would not cry he up on any personal ground -- I would keep clear of that . " " do you mean that I cry up Brooke on any personal ground ? " say , nettle , and turn sharp round . for the first time he feel offended with ; not the less so , perhaps , because he would have decline any close inquiry into the growth of he relation to . " not at all , " say , " I be simply explain my own action . I mean that a man may work for a special end with other whose motive and general course be equivocal , if he be quite sure of he personal independence , and that he be not work for he private interest -- either place or money . " " then , why do not you extend you liberality to other ? " say , still nettle . " my personal independence be as important to I as yours be to you . you have no more reason to imagine that I have personal expectation from , than I have to imagine that you have personal expectation from . motive be point of honor , I suppose -- nobody can prove they . but as to money and place in the world . " will end , toss back he head , " I think it be pretty clear that I be not determine by consideration of that sort . " " you quite mistake I , , " say , surprised . he have be preoccupy with he own vindication , and have be blind to what might infer on he own account . " I beg you pardon for unintentionally annoy you . in fact , I should rather attribute to you a romantic disregard of you own worldly interest . on the political question , I refer simply to intellectual bia . " " how very unpleasant you both be this evening ! " say . " I can not conceive why money should have be refer to . Polity and be sufficientely disagreeable to quarrel upon . you can both of you go on quarrelling with all the world and with each other on those two topic . " look mildly neutral as she say this , rise to ring the bell , and then cross to she work - table . " poor ! " say , put out he hand to she as she be pass he . " Disputation be not amuse to cherub . have some music . ask to s with you . " when Will be gone say to she husband , " what put you out of temper this evening , ? " " I ? it be who be out of temper . he be like a bit of tinder . " " but I mean , before that . something have vex you before you come in , you look cross . and that make you begin to dispute with . you hurt I very much when you look so , . " " do I ? then I be a brute , " say , caresse she penitently . " what vex you ? " " oh , outdoor thing -- business . " it be really a letter insist on the payment of a bill for furniture . but be expect to have a baby , and wish to save she from any perturbation . . be never true love love in vain , for truest love be highest gain . no art can make it : it must spre where element be foster . so in heaven 's spot and hour spring the little native flower , root and upward eye , Shapen by the earth and sky . it happen to be on a evening that will have that little discussion with . it be effect when he go to he own room be to make he sit up half the night , think over again , under a new irritation , all that he have before think of he have settle in and harness himself with . hesitation before he have take the step have since turn into susceptibility to every hint that he would have be wiser not to take it ; and hence come he heat towards -- a heat which still keep he restless . be he not make a fool of himself ?-- and at a time when he be more than ever conscious of be something better than a fool ? and for what end ? well , for no definite end . true , he have dreamy visions of possibility : there be no human be who have both passion and thought do not think in consequence of he passion -- do not find image rise in he mind which soothe the passion with hope or s it with dread . but this , which happen to we all , happen to some with a wide difference ; and be not one of those whose wit " keep the roadway : " he have he bypath where there be little joy of he own choosing , such as gentleman canter on the highroad might have think rather idiotic . the way in which he make a sort of happiness for himself out of he feeling for be a example of this . it may seem strange , but it be the fact , that the ordinary vulgar vision of which suspect he -- namely , that might become a widow , and
and that the interest he have establish in she mind might turn into acceptance of he as a husband -- have no tempting , arrest power over he ; he do not live in the scenery of such a event , and follow it out , as we all do with that imagined " otherwise " which be we practical heaven . it be not only that he be unwilling to entertain thoughts which could be accuse of baseness , and be already uneasy in the sense that he have to justify himself from the charge of ingratitude -- the latent consciousness of many other barriers between himself and besides the existence of she husband , have help to turn away he imagination from speculating on what might befall . and there be yet other reason . will , we know , could not bear the thought of any flaw appear in he crystal : he be at once exasperate and delighte by the calm freedom with which look at he and speak to he , and there be something so exquisite in think of she just as she be , that he could not long for a change which must somehow change she . do we not shin the street version of a fine melody ? -- or shrink from the news that the rarity -- some bit of chiselling or engrave perhaps -- which we have dwelt on even with exultation in the trouble it have cost we to snatch glimpse of it , be really not a uncommon thing , and may be obtain as a every - day possession ? we good depend on the quality and breadth of we emotion ; and to , a creature who care little for what be call the solid thing of life and greatly for its subtler influence , to have within he such a feeling as he have towards , be like the inheritance of a fortune . what other might have call the futility of he passion , make a additional delight for he imagination : he be conscious of a generous movement , and of verifie in he own experience that higher love - poetry which have charme he fancy . Dorothea , he say to himself , be forever enthron in he soul : no other woman could sit higher than she footstool ; and if he could have write out in immortal syllable the effect she wrotch within he , he might have boast after the example of old , that ,-- " Queens hereafter might be glad to live upon the alm of she superfluous praise . " but this result be questionable . and what else could he do for ? what be he devotion worth to she ? it be impossible to tell . he would not go out of she reach . he see no creature among she friend to whom he could believe that she speak with the same simple confidence as to he . she have once say that she would like he to stay ; and stay he would , whatever fire - breathing dragons might hiss around she . this have always be the conclusion of 's hesitation . but he be not without contradictoriness and rebellion even towards he own resolve . he have often get irritated , as he be on this particular night , by some outside demonstration that he public exertion with as a chief could not seem as heroic as he would like they to be , and this be always associate with the other ground of irritation -- that notwithstand he sacrifice of dignity for 's sake , he could hardly ever see she . , not be able to contradict these unpleasant fact , he contradict he own strongest bia and say , " I be a fool . " nevertheless , since the inward debate necessarily turn on , he end , as he have do before , only by get a livelier sense of what she presence would be to he ; and suddenly reflec that the morrow would be , he determine to go to and see she . he sleep upon that idea , but when he be dress in the rational morning light , objection say -- " that will be a virtual defiance of 's prohibition to visit , and will be displease . " " Nonsense ! " argue , " it would be too monstrous for he to hinder I from go out to a pretty country church on a spring morning . and will be glad . " " it will be clear to that you have come either to annoy he or to see . " " it be not true that I go to annoy he , and why should I not go to see ? be he to have everything to himself and be always comfortable ? let he smart a little , as other people be obliged to do . I have always like the quaintness of the church and congregation ; beside , I know the Tucker : I shall go into they pew . " have silenced objection by force of unreason , walk to as if he have be on the way to paradise , cross and skirt the wood , where the sunlight fall broadly under the budding bough , bring out the beauty of moss and lichen , and fresh green growth pierce the brown . everything seem to know that it be , and to approve of he go to . will easily feel happy when nothing cross he humor , and by this time the thought of vexing have become rather amusing to he , make he face break into its merry smile , pleasant to see as the breaking of sunshine on the water -- though the occasion be not exemplary . but most of we be apt to
to settle within ourselves that the man who block we way be odious , and not to mind cause he a little of the disgust which he personality excites in ourselves . will go along with a small book under he arm and a hand in each side - pocket , never read , but chant a little , as he make scene of what would happen in church and come out . he be experiment in tune to suit some word of he own , sometimes try a ready - make melody , sometimes improvise . the word be not exactly a hymn , but they certainly fitte he experience :-- " of I , of I , what frugal cheer my love doth feed upon ! a touch , a ray , that be not here , a shadow that be go : " a dream of breath that might be near , a inly - echoed tone , the thought that one may think I dear , the place where one be know , " the tremor of a banished fear , a ill that be not do -- of I , of I , what frugal cheer my love doth feed upon ! " sometimes , when he take off he hat , shak he head backward , and show he delicate throat as he sang , he look like a incarnation of the spring whose spirit fill the air -- a bright creature , abundant in uncertain promise . the bell be still ring when he get to , and he go into the curate 's pew before any one else arrive there . but he be still leave alone in it when the congregation have assemble . the curate 's pew be opposite the rector at the entrance of the small chancel , and have time to fear that might not come while he look round at the group of rural face which make the congregation from year to year within the white - wash wall and dark old pew , hardly with more change than we see in the bough of a tree which break here and there with age , but yet have young shoot . 's frog - face be something alien and unaccountable , but notwithstand this shock to the order of thing , there be still the and the rural stock of the Powderell in they pew side by side ; brother 's cheek have the same purple round as ever , and the three generation of decent cottager come as of old with a sense of duty to they betters generally -- the smaller child regard , who wear the black gown and mount to the highest box , as probably the chief of all betters , and the one most awful if offend . even in 1831 be at peace , not more agitate by than by the solemn tenor of the . the congregation have be use to see at church in former day , and no one take much note of he except the choir , who expect he to make a figure in the singing . do at last appear on this quaint background , walk up the short aisle in she white beaver bonnet and gray cloak -- the same she have wear in the . she face be , from she entrance , towards the chancel , even she shortsight eye soon discern , but there be no outward show of she feel except a slight paleness and a grave bow as she pass he . to he own surprise will feel suddenly uncomfortable , and da not look at she after they have bow to each other . two minute later , when come out of the vestry , and , enter the pew , seat himself in face of , feel he paralysis more complete . he could look nowhere except at the choir in the little gallery over the vestry - door : be perhaps pain , and he have make a wretched blunder . it be no longer amuse to vex , who have the advantage probably of watch he and see that he da not turn he head . why have he not imagine this beforehand ?-- but he could not expect that he should sit in that square pew alone , unrelieved by any Tucker , who have apparently depart from altogether , for a new clergyman be in the desk . still he call himself stupid now for not foresee that it would be impossible for he to look towards -- nay , that she might feel he come a impertinence . there be no delivering himself from he cage , however ; and find he place and look at he book as if he have be a school -mistress , feel that the morning service have never be so immeasurably long before , that he be utterly ridiculous , out of temper , and miserable . this be what a man get by worship the sight of a woman ! the clerk observ with surprise that do not join in the tune of , and reflecte that he might have a cold . do not preach that morning , and there be no change in 's situation until the blessing have be pronounce and every one rose . it be the fashion at for " the better " to go out first . with a sudden determination to break the spell that be upon he , will look straight at . but that gentleman 's eyes be on the button of the pew - door , which he open , allow to pass , and follow she immediately without raise he eyelid . 's glance have catch 's as she turn out of the pew , and again she bow , but this time with a look of agitation , as if she be repress
repress tear . will walk out after they , but they go on towards the little gate lead out of the churchyard into the shrubbery , never look round . it be impossible for he to follow they , and he could only walk back sadly at mid-day along the same road which he have trodden hopefully in the morning . the light be all change for he both without and withing . surely the golden hour be turn gray and dance no more , and vainly strive to run : I see they white lock streame in the wind -- each face be haggard as it look at I , slow turn in the constant clasping round . 's distress when she be leave the church come chiefly from the perception that be determine not to speak to he cousin , and that 's presence at church have serve to mark more strongly the alienation between they . will have come see to she quite excusable , nay , she think it a amiable movement in he towards a reconciliation which she herself have be constantly wish for . he have probably imagine , as she have , that if and he could meet easily , they would shake hand and friendly intercourse might return . but now feel quite robbed of that hope . will be banish further than ever , for must have be newly embitter by this thrusting upon he of a presence which he refuse to recognize . he have not be very well that morning , suffer from some difficulty in breathing , and have not preach in consequence ; she be not surprise , therefore , that he be nearly silent at luncheon , still less that he make no allusion to . for she own part she feel that she could never again introduce that subject . they usually spend apart the hour between luncheon and dinner on a ; in the library do chiefly , and in she boudoir , where she be will not to occupy herself with some of she favorite book . there be a little heap of they on the table in the bow - window -- of various sort , from , which she be learn to read with , to she old companion Pascal , and 's " . " but to - day open one after another , and could read none of they . everything seem dreary : the portent before the birth of -- jewish antiquities -- oh dear !-- devout epigram -- the sacred chime of favorite hymn -- all alike be as flat as tune beat on wood : even the spring flower and the grass have a dull shiver in they under the afternoon clouds that hide the sun fitfully ; even the sustaining thoughts which have become habits seem to have in they the weariness of long future day in which she would still live with they for she sole companion . it be another or rather a fuller sort of companionship that poor Dorothea be hunger for , and the hunger have grow from the perpetual effort demand by she married life . she be always try to be what she husband wish , and never able to repose on he delight in what she be . the thing that she like , that she spontaneously care to have , seem to be always exclude from she life ; for if it be only grant and not share by she husband it might as well have be deny . about will Ladislaw there have be a difference between they from the first , and it have end , since have so severely repulse 's strong feeling about he claim on the family property , by she be convinced that she be in the right and she husband in the wrong , but that she be helpless . this afternoon the helplessness be more wretchedly benumb than ever : she longe for object who could be dear to she , and to whom she could be dear . she longe for work which would be directly beneficent like the sunshine and the rain , and now it appear that she be to live more and more in a virtual tomb , where there be the apparatus of a ghastly labor produce what would never see the light . today she have stood at the door of the tomb and see reced into the distant world of warm activity and fellowship -- turn he face towards she as he go . books be of no use . thinking be of no use . it be , and she could not have the carriage to go to , who have lately have a baby . there be no refuge now from spiritual emptiness and discontent , and have to bear she bad mood , as she would have borne a headache . after dinner , at the hour when she usually begin to read aloud , propose that they should go into the library , where , he say , he have order a fire and light . he seem to have revive , and to be think intently . in the library observ that he have newly arrange a row of he note - book on a table , and now he take up and put into she hand a well - know volume , which be a table of contents to all the other . " you will oblige I , my dear , " he say , seat himself , " if instead of other read this evening , you will go through this aloud , pencil in hand , and at each point where I say ' mark , ' will make a cross with you pencil . this be the first step in a sift process which I have long have in view , and as
as we go on I shall be able to indicate to you certain principle of selection whereby you will , I trust , have a intelligent participation in my purpose . " this proposal be only one more sign add to many since he memorable interview with , that 's original reluctance to let work with he have give place to the contrary disposition , namely , to demand much interest and labor from she . after she have read and mark for two hour , he say , " we will take the volume up - stair -- and the pencil , if you please -- and in case of read in the night , we can pursue this task . it be not wearisome to you , I trust , ? " " I prefer always read what you like best to hear , " say , who tell the simple truth ; for what she dread be to exert herself in reading or anything else which leave he as joyless as ever . it be a proof of the force with which certain characteristic in impress those around she , that she husband , with all he jealousy and suspicion , have gather implicit trust in the integrity of she promise , and she power of devote herself to she idea of the right and best . of late he have begin to feel that these qualitie be a peculiar possession for himself , and he want to engross they . the reading in the night do come . Dorothea in she young weariness have sleep soon and fast : she be awaken by a sense of light , which seem to she at first like a sudden vision of sunset after she have climb a steep hill : she open she eye and see she husband wrap in he warm gown seate himself in the arm -chair near the fire - place where the ember be still glow . he have lit two candle , expect that would awake , but not like to rouse she by more direct means . " be you ill , ? " she say , rise immediately . " I feel some uneasiness in a recline posture . I will sit here for a time . " she throw wood on the fire , wrap herself up , and say , " you would like I to read to you ? " " you would oblige I greatly by do so , , " say , with a shade more meekness than usual in he polite manner . " I be wakeful : my mind be remarkably lucid . " " I fear that the excitement may be too great for you , " say , remember 's caution . " no , I be not conscious of undue excitement . thought be easy . " da not insist , and she read for a hour or more on the same plan as she have do in the evening , but get over the page with more quickness . 's mind be more alert , and he seem to anticipate what be come after a very slight verbal indication , say , " that will do -- mark that " -- or " pass on to the next head -- I omit the second excursus on . " be amaze to think of the bird - like speed with which he mind be survey the ground where it have be creeping for year . at last he say -- " close the book now , my dear . we will resume we work to - morrow . I have defer it too long , and would gladly see it complete . but you observe that the principle on which my selection be make , be to give adequate , and not disproportionate illustration to each of the theses enumerate in my introduction , as at present sketch . you have perceive that distinctly , ? " " yes , " say , rather tremulously . she feel sick at heart . " and now I think that I can take some repose , " say . he lay down again and beg she to put out the light . when she have lain down too , and there be a darkness only break by a dull glow on the hearth , he say -- " before I sleep , I have a request to make , . " " what be it ? " say , with dread in she mind . " it be that you will let I know , deliberately , whether , in case of my death , you will carry out my wish : whether you will avoid do what I should deprecate , and apply yourself to do what I should desire . " be not take by surprise : many incidents have be lead she to the conjecture of some intention on she husband 's part which might make a new yoke for she . she do not answer immediately . " you refuse ? " say , with more edge in he tone . " no , I do not yet refuse , " say , in a clear voice , the need of freedom assert itself within she ; " but it be too solemn -- I think it be not right -- to make a promise when I be ignorant what it will bind I to . whatever affection prompt I would do without promising . " " but you would use you own judgment : I ask you to obey mine ; you refuse . " " no , dear , no ! " say , beseechingly , crush by opposing fear . " but may I wait and reflect a little while ? I desire with my whole soul to do what will comfort you ; but I can
can not give any pledge suddenly -- still less a pledge to do I know not what . " " you can not then confide in the nature of my wish ? " " grant I till to - morrow , " say , beseechingly . " till to - morrow then , " say . she could hear that he be sleep , but there be no more sleep for she . while she constrain herself to lie still lest she should disturb he , she mind be carry on a conflict in which imagination range its force first on one side and then on the other . she have no presentiment that the power which she husband wish to establish over she future action have relation to anything else than he work . but it be clear enough to she that he would expect she to devote herself to sift those mix heap of material , which be to be the doubtful illustration of principle still more doubtful . the poor child have become altogether unbelieving as to the trustworthiness of that key which have make the ambition and the labor of she husband 's life . it be not wonderful that , in spite of she small instruction , she judgment in this matter be truer than he : for she look with unbiassed comparison and healthy sense at probability on which he have risk all he egoism . and now she picture to herself the day , and month , and year which she must spend in sorting what might be call shattered mummy , and fragment of a tradition which be itself a mosaic wrotch from crush ruin -- sort they as food for a theory which be already wither in the birth like a elfin child . doubtless a vigorous error vigorously pursue have keep the embryo of truth a - breathing : the quest of gold be at the same time a questioning of substance , the body of chemistry be prepare for its soul , and be bear . but 's theory of the element which make the seed of all tradition be not likely to bruise itself unawar against discoveries : it float among flexible conjecture no more solid than those etymology which seem strong because of likeness in sound until it be show that likeness in sound make they impossible : it be a method of interpretation which be not test by the necessity of form anything which have sharper collision than a elaborate notion of and : it be as free from interruption as a plan for thread the stars together . and have so often have to check she weariness and impatience over this questionable riddle - guessing , as it reveal itself to she instead of the fellowship in high knowledge which be to make life worthier ! she could understand well enough now why she husband have come to cling to she , as possibly the only hope leave that he labors would ever take a shape in which they could be give to the world . at first it have seem that he wish to keep even she alohave from any close knowledge of what he be do ; but gradually the terrible stringency of human need -- the prospect of a too speedy death -- and here 's pity turn from she own future to she husband 's past -- nay , to he present hard struggle with a lot which have grow out of that past : the lonely labor , the ambition breathe hardly under the pressure of self - distrust ; the goal reced , and the heavier limb ; and now at last the sword visibly trembl above he ! and have she not wish to marry he that she might help he in he life 's labor ? --but she have think the work be to be something greater , which she could serve in devoutly for its own sake . be it right , even to soothe he grief -- would it be possible , even if she promise -- to work as in a treadmill fruitlessly ? and yet , could she deny he ? could she say , " I refuse to content this pining hunger ? " it would be refuse to do for he dead , what she be almost sure to do for he living . if he live as have say he might , for fifteen year or more , she life would certainly be spend in help he and obey he . still , there be a deep difference between that devotion to the living and that indefinite promise of devotion to the dead . while he live , he could claim nothing that she would not still be free to remonstrate against , and even to refuse . but --they think pass through she mind more than once , though she could not believe in it -- might he not mean to demand something more from she than she have be able to imagine , since he want she pledge to carry out he wish without tell she exactly what they be ? no ; he heart be bound up in he work only : that be the end for which he fail life be to be ek out by hers . and now , if she be to say , " no ! if you die , I will put no finger to you work " -- it seem as if she would be crush that bruise heart . for four hour lay in this conflict , till she feel ill and bewildered , unable to resolve , pray mutely . helpless as a child which have sob and seek too long , she fall into a late morning sleep , and when she wake be already up . tell she that he have read prayer , breakfast , and
and be in the library . " I never see you look so pale , madam , " say , a solid-figured woman who have be with the sister at . " be I ever high - colored , ? " say , smile faintly . " well , not to say high - color , but with a bloom like a rose . but always smell those leather book , what can be expect ? do rest a little this morning , madam . let I say you be ill and not able to go into that close library . " " oh no , no ! let I make haste , " say . " want I particularly . " when she go down she feel sure that she should promise to fulfil he wish ; but that would be later in the day -- not yet . as enter the library , turn round from the table where he have be place some book , and say -- " I be wait for you appearance , my dear . I have hope to set to work at once this morning , but I find myself under some indisposition , probably from too much excitement yesterday . I be go now to take a turn in the shrubbery , since the air be milder . " " I be glad to hear that , " say . " you mind , I fear , be too active last night . " " I would afain have it set at rest on the point I last spoke of , . you can now , I hope , give I a answer . " " may I come out to you in the garden presently ? " say , win a little breathing space in that way . " I shall be in the for the next half - hour , " say , and then he leave she . Dorothea , feel very weary , rang and ask to bring she some wrap . she have be sit still for a few minute , but not in any renewal of the former conflict : she simply feel that she be go to say " yes " to she own doom : she be too weak , too full of dread at the thought of inflict a keen -edge blow on she husband , to do anything but submit completely . she sit still and let put on she bonnet and shawl , a passivity which be unusual with she , for she like to wait on herself . " bless you , madam ! " say , with a irrepressible movement of love towards the beautiful , gentle creature for whom she feel unable to do anything more , now that she have finish tie the bonnet . this be too much for 's highly - strung feeling , and she burst into tear , sobb against 's arm . but soon she check herself , dry she eye , and go out at the glass door into the shrubbery . " I wish every book in that library be build into a caticom for you master , " say to , the butler , finde he in the breakfast - room . she have be at , and visit the antiquities , as we know ; and she always decline to call anything but " you master , " when speak to the other servants . laugh . he like he master very well , but he like Tantripp better . when be out on the gravel walk , she linger among the nearer clumps of tree , hesitat , as she have do once before , though from a different cause . then she have fear lest she effort at fellowship should be unwelcome ; now she dread go to the spot where she foresee that she must bind herself to a fellowship from which she shrank . neither law nor the world 's opinion compelle she to this -- only she husband 's nature and she own compassion , only the ideal and not the real yoke of marriage . she see clearly enough the whole situation , yet she be fetter : she could not smite the stricken soul that entreate hers . if that be weakness , be weak . but the half - hour be pass , and she must not delay longer . when she enter the Yew - tree walk she could not see she husband ; but the walk have bend , and she go , expect to catch sight of he figure wrap in a blue cloak , which , with a warm velvet cap , be he outer garment on chill day for the garden . it occur to she that he might be rest in the summer - house , towards which the path diverge a little . turn the angle , she could see he seat on the bench , close to a stone table . he arm be rest on the table , and he brow be bow down on they , the blue cloak be drag forward and screen he face on each side . " he exhaust himself last night , " say to herself , think at first that he be asleep , and that the summer - house be too damp a place to rest in . but then she remembe that of late she have see he take that attitude when she be read to he , as if he find it easier than any other ; and that he would sometimes speak , as well as listen , with he face down in that way . she go into the summerhouse and say , " I be come , ; I be ready . " he take no notice , and she think that he must be fast asleep .
. she lay she hand on he shoulder , and repeat , " I be ready ! " still he be motionless ; and with a sudden confused fear , she lean down to he , take off he velvet cap , and lean she cheek close to he head , cry in a distressed tone -- " wake , dear , wake ! listen to I . I be come to answer . " but never give she answer . later in the day , be seat by she bedside , and she be talk deliriously , think aloud , and recalle what have go through she mind the night before . she know he , and call he by he name , but appear to think it right that she should explain everything to he ; and again , and again , beg he to explain everything to she husband . " tell he I shall go to he soon : I be ready to promise . only , think about it be so dreadful -- it have make I ill . not very ill . I shall soon be better . go and tell he . " but the silence in she husband 's ear be never more to be break . . a task too strong for wizard spell this squire have bring about ; be easy drop stone in well , but who shall get they out ? " " I wish to we could hinder from know this , " say , with a little frown on he brow , and a expression of intense disgust about he mouth . he be stand on the hearth - rug in the library at , and speak to . it be the day after have be bury , and be not yet able to leave she room . " that would be difficult , you know , , as she be a executrix , and she like to go into these thing -- property , land , that kind of thing . she have she notion , you know , " say , stick he eye - glass on nervously , and explore the edge of a fold paper which he hold in he hand ; " and she would like to act -- depend upon it , as a executrix Dorothea would want to act . and she be twenty - one last , you know . I can hinder nothing . " look at the carpet for a minute in silence , and then lift he eye suddenly fix they on , say , " I will tell you what we can do . until be well , all business must be keep from she , and as soon as she be able to be move she must come to we . be with and the baby will be the best thing in the world for she , and will pass away the time . and meanwhile you must get rid of Ladislaw : you must send he out of the country . " here 's look of disgust return in all its intensity . put he hand behind he , walk to the window and straighten he back with a little shake before he reply . " that be easily say , , easily say , you know . " " my dear sir , " persist , restrain he indignation within respectful form , " it be you who bring he here , and you who keep he here -- I mean by the occupation you give he . " " yes , but I can not dismiss he in a instant without assign reasons , my dear . have be invaluable , most satisfactory . I consider that I have do this part of the country a service by bring he -- by bring he , you know . " end with a nod , turn round to give it . " it be a pity this part of the country do not do without he , that be all I have to say about it . at any rate , as 's brother - in - law , I feel warrant in object strongly to he be keep here by any action on the part of she friend . you admit , I hope , that I have a right to speak about what concern the dignity of my wife 's sister ? " be get warm . " of course , my dear , of course . but you and I have different idea -- different -- " " not about this action of 's , I should hope , " interrupt . " I say that he have most unfairly compromised . I say that there never be a meaner , more ungentlemanly action than this - - a codicil of this sort to a will which he make at the time of he marriage with the knowledge and reliance of she family -- a positive insult to ! " " well , you know , be a little twisted about . have tell I the reason -- dislike of the bent he take , you know -- do not think much of 's notion , and -- that sort of thing : and i fancy that do not like the independent position have take up . I see the letter between they , you know . poor be a little bury in book -- he do not know the world . " " it be all very well for to put that color on it , " say . " but I believe be only jealous of he on 's account , and the world will suppose that she give he some reason ; and that be what make it so abominable -- couple she name with this young fellow 's . " " my dear , it
it will not lead to anything , you know , " say , seat himself and stick on he eye - glass again . " it be all of a piece with 's oddity . this paper , now , ' Synoptical Tabulation ' and so on , ' for the use of ,' it be lock up in the desk with the will . I suppose he mean to publish he research , eh ? and she will do it , you know ; she have go into he study uncommonly . " " my dear sir , " say , impatiently , " that be neither here nor there . the question be , whether you do not see with I the propriety of send young away ? " " well , no , not the urgency of the thing . by - and - by , perhaps , it may come round . as to gossip , you know , send he away will not hinder gossip . people say what they like to say , not what they have chapter and verse for , " say , become acute about the truth that lay on the side of he own wish . " I might get rid of up to a certain point -- take away the ' pioneer ' from he , and that sort of thing ; but I could not send he out of the country if he do not choose to go --do not choose , you know . " Brooke , persist as quietly as if he be only discuss the nature of last year 's weather , and nodd at the end with he usual amenity , be a exasperating form of obstinacy . " ! " say , with as much passion as he ever show , " let we get he a post ; let we spend money on he . if he could go in the suite of some ! Grampus might take he -- and I could write to Fulke about it . " " but will not be ship off like a head of cattle , my dear fellow ; have he idea . it be my opinion that if he be to part from I to - morrow , you would only hear the more of he in the country . with he talent for speak and draw up document , there be few man who could come up to he as a agitator -- a agitator , you know . " " ! " say , with bitter emphasis , feel that the syllable of this word properly repeat be a sufficient exposure of its hatefulness . " but be reasonable , . Dorothea , now . as you say , she have better go to as soon as possible . she can stay under you roof , and in the mean time thing may come round quietly . do not let we be fire off we gun in a hurry , you know . Standish will keep we counsel , and the news will be old before it be know . twenty thing may happen to carry off -- without my do anything , you know . " " then I be to conclude that you decline to do anything ? " " , do not say decline . but I really do not see what I could do . be a gentleman . " " I be glad to hear it ! " say , he irritation make he forget himself a little . " I be sure be not . " " well , it would have be worse if he have make the codicil to hinder she from marry again at all , you know . " " I do not know that , " say . " it would have be less indelicate . " " one of poor 's freak ! that attack upset he brain a little . it all go for nothing . she do not want to marry . " " but this codicil be fram so as to make everybody believe that she do . I do not believe anything of the sort about , " say -- then frowningly , " but I suspect . I tell you frankly , I suspect . " " I could not take any immediate action on that ground , . in fact , if it be possible to pack he off -- send he to -- that sort of thing -- it would look all the worse for to those who know about it . it would seem as if we distrust she -- distrust she , you know . " that have hit on a undeniable argument , do not tend to soothe . he put out he hand to reach he hat , imply that he do not mean to contmend further , and say , still with some heat -- " well , I can only say that I think be sacrifice once , because she friend be too careless . I shall do what I can , as she brother , to protect she now . " " you can not do better than get she to as soon as possible , . I approve that plan altogether , " say , well please that he have win the argument . it would have be highly inconvenient to he to part with at that time , when a dissolution might happen any day , and elector be to be convince of the course by which the interest of the country would be best serve . sincerely believe that this end could be secure by he own return to parliament : he offer the force of he mind honestly to the nation . . " ' this Loller here wol precil we somewhat . ' ' Nay by my father 's soule !
! that schal he nat ,' Sayde the Schipman , ' here schal he not preco , we schal no gospel glosen here ne teche . we leven all in the gret , ' quod he . he wolden sowen some diffcultee . " Canterbury tales . Dorothea have be safe at hall nearly a week before she have ask any dangerous question . every morning now she sit with in the prettiest of up - stair sitting - room , open into a small conservatory -- all in white and lavender like a bunch of mix violet , watch the remarkable act of the baby , which be so dubious to she inexperienced mind that all conversation be interrupt by appeal for they interpretation make to the oracular nurse . sit by in she widow 's dress , with a expression which rather provoke , as be much too sad ; for not only be baby quite well , but really when a husband have be so dull and troublesome while he liv , and besides that have -- well , well ! , of course , have tell everything , with a strong representation how important it be that should not know it sooner than be inevitable . but have be right in predict that would not long remain passive where action have be assign to she ; she know the purport of she husband 's will make at the time of they marriage , and she mind , as soon as she be clearly conscious of she position , be silently occupy with what she ought to do as the owner of with the patronage of the living attach to it . one morning when she uncle pay he usual visit , though with a unusual alacrity in he manner which he account for by say that it be now pretty certain parliament would be dissolve forthwith , say -- " uncle , it be right now that I should consider who be to have the living at . after have be provide for , I never hear my husband say that he have any clergyman in he mind as a successor to himself . I think I ought to have the key now and go to to examine all my husband 's papers . there may be something that would throw light on he wish . " " no hurry , my dear , " say , quietly . " by - and - by , you know , you can go , if you like . but I cast my eye over thing in the desk and drawer -- there be nothing -- nothing but deep subject , you know -- besides the will . everything can be do by - and - by . as to the living , I have have a application for interest already -- I should say rather good . have be strongly recommend to I -- I have something to do with get he a appointment before . a apostolic man , I believe -- the sort of thing that would suit you , my dear . " " I should like to have fuller knowledge about he , uncle , and judge for myself , if have not leave any expression of he wish . he have perhaps make some addition to he will -- there may be some instruction for I , " say , who have all the while have this conjecture in she mind with relation to she husband 's work . " nothing about the rectory , my dear -- nothing , " say , rise to go away , and put out he hand to he niece : " nor about he research , you know . nothing in the will . " 's lip quiver . " come , you must not think of these thing yet , my dear . by - and - by , you know . " " I be quite well now , uncle ; I wish to exert myself . " " well , well , we shall see . but I must run away now -- I have no end of work now -- it be a crisis -- a political crisis , you know . and here be and she little man -- you be a aunt , you know , now , and I be a sort of grandfather , " say , with placid hurry , anxious to get away and tell that it would not be he ( 's ) fault if insist on look into everything . sank back in she chair when she uncle have leave the room , and cast she eye down meditatively on she cross hand . " look , ! look at he ! do you ever see anything like that ? " say , in she comfortable staccato . " what , ? " say , lift she eye rather absently . " what ? why , he upper lip ; see how he be draw it down , as if he mean to make a face . be not it wonderful ! he may have he little thought . I wish nurse be here . do look at he . " a large tear which have be for some time gather , roll down 's cheek as she look up and try to smile . " do not be sad , Dodo ; kiss baby . what be you brood over so ? I be sure you do everything , and a great deal too much . you should be happy now . " " I wonder if would drive I to Lowick . I want to look over everything -- to see if there be any word write for I . " " you be not to go till say you may go . and he have not say so yet ( here
here you be , nurse ; take baby and walk up and down the gallery ) . besides , you have get a wrong notion in you head as usual , -- I can see that : it vex I . " " where be I wrong , ? " say , quite meekly . she be almost ready now to think wiser than herself , and be really wonder with some fear what she wrong notion be . feel she advantage , and be determined to use it . none of they know as well as she do , or know how to manage she . since 's baby be bear , she have have a new sense of she mental solidity and calm wisdom . it seem clear that where there be a baby , thing be right enough , and that error , in general , be a mere lack of that central poise force . " I can see what you be think of as well as can be , , " say . " you be want to find out if there be anything uncomfortable for you to do now , only because wish it . as if you have not be uncomfortable enough before . and he do not deserve it , and you will find that out . he have behave very badly . be as angry with he as can be . and I have better tell you , to prepare you . " " , " say , entreatingly , " you distress I . tell I at once what you mean . " it glance through she mind that ' have leave the property away from she -- which would not be so very distressing . " why , he have make a codicil to he will , to say the property be all to go away from you if you marry -- I mean -- " " that be of no consequence , " say , break in impetuously . " but if you marry , not anybody else , " go on with persevering quietude . " of course that be of no consequence in one way -- you never _would marry ; but that only make it worse of . " the blood rush to 's face and neck painfully . but be administer what she think a sobering dose of fact . it be take up notion that have do 's health so much harm . so she go on in she neutral tone , as if she have be remark on baby 's rob . " say so . he say it be abominable , and not like a gentleman . and there never be a better judge than . it be as if want to make people believe that you would wish to marry -- which be ridiculous . only say it be to hinder from want to marry you for you money -- just as if he ever would think of make you a offer . say you might as well marry a italian with white mouse ! but I must just go and look at baby , " add , without the least change of tone , throw a light shawl over she , and tripp away . Dorothea by this time have turn cold again , and now throw herself back helplessly in she chair . she might have compare she experience at that moment to the vague , alarme consciousness that she life be take on a new form that she be undergo a metamorphosis in which memory would not adjust itself to the stirring of new organ . everything be change its aspect : she husband 's conduct , she own duteous fee towards he , every struggle between they -- and yet more , she whole relation to . she world be in a state of convulsive change ; the only thing she could say distinctly to herself be , that she must wait and think anew . one change terrify she as if it have be a sin ; it be a violent shock of repulsion from she depart husband , who have have hidden thought , perhaps pervert everything she say and do . then again she be conscious of another change which also make she tremulous ; it be a sudden strange yearning of heart towards . it have never before enter she mind that he could , under any circumstance , be she lover : conceive the effect of the sudden revelation that another have thought of he in that light -- that perhaps he himself have be conscious of such a possibility , -- and this with the hurrying , crowd vision of unfitting condition , and question not soon to be solve . it seem a long while -- she do not know how long -- before she hear say , " that will do , nurse ; he will be quiet on my lap now . you can go to lunch , and let stay in the next room . " " what I think , , " go on , observe nothing more than that be lean back in she chair , and likely to be passive , " be that be spiteful . I never do like he , and never do . I think the corner of he mouth be dreadfully spiteful . and now he have behave in this way , I be sure religion do not require you to make yourself uncomfortable about he . if he have be take away , that be a mercy , and you ought to be grateful . we should not grieve , should we , baby ? " say confidentially to that unconscious centre and poise of the world , who have the most remarkable fist all complete even to the nail , and hair enough , really , when
when you take he cap off , to make -- you do not know what :-- in short , he be in a western form . at this crisis be announce , and one of the first thing he say be , " I fear you be not so well as you be , ; have you be agitate ? allow I to feel you pulse . " 's hand be of a marble coldness . " she want to go to , to look over papers , " say . " she ought not , ought she ? " do not speak for a few moment . then he say , look at . " I hardly know . in my opinion should do what would give she the most repose of mind . that repose will not always come from be forbidden to act . " " thank you , " say , exert herself , " I be sure that be wise . there be so many thing which I ought to attend to . why should I sit here idle ? " then , with a effort to recall subjects not connect with she agitation , she add , abruptly , " you know every one in , I think , . I shall ask you to tell I a great deal . I have serious thing to do now . I have a living to give away . you know and all the -- " but 's effort be too much for she ; she break off and burst into sob . make she drink a dose of sal volatile . " let do as she like , " he say to , whom he ask to see before quit the house . " she want perfect freedom , I think , more than any other prescription . " he attendance on while she brain be excited , have enable he to form some true conclusion concern the trial of she life . he feel sure that she have be suffer from the strain and conflict of self - repression ; and that she be likely now to feel herself only in another sort of pinfold than that from which she have be release . 's advice be all the easier for to follow when he find that have already tell Dorothea the unpleasant fact about the will . there be no help for it now -- no reason for any further delay in the execution of necessary business . and the next day comply at once with she request that he would drive she to Lowick . " I have no wish to stay there at present , " say ; " I could hardly bear it . I be much happier at with . I shall be able to think better about what should be do at by look at it from a distance . and I should like to be at the a little while with my uncle , and go about in all the old walk and among the people in the village . " " not yet , I think . you uncle be have political company , and you be better out of the way of such doings , " say , who at that moment think of the chiefly as a haunt of young 's . but no word pass between he and about the objectionable part of the will ; indeed , both of they feel that the mention of it between they would be impossible . be shy , even with man , about disagreeable subject ; and the one thing that would have choose to say , if she have speak on the matter at all , be forbidden to she at present because it seem to be a further exposure of she husband 's injustice . yet she do wish that could know what have pass between she and she husband about 's moral claim on the property : it would then , she think , be apparent to he as it be to she , that she husband 's strange indelicate proviso have be chiefly urge by he bitter resistance to that idea of claim , and not merely by personal feeling more difficult to talk about . also , it must be admit , wish that this could be know for 's sake , since she friend seem to think of he as simply a object of 's charity . why should he be compare with a italian carry white mice ? that word quote from seem like a mocking travesty wrotch in the dark by a impish finger . at search desk and drawer -- search all she husband 's place of deposit for private writing , but find no paper address especially to she , except that " Synoptical Tabulation , " which be probably only the beginning of many intend direction for she guidance . in carry out this bequest of labor to , as in all else , have be slow and hesitat , oppress in the plan of transmit he work , as he have be in execute it , by the sense of move heavily in a dim and clogging medium : distrust of 's competence to arrange what he have prepare be subdue only by distrust of any other redactor . but he have come at last to create a trust for himself out of 's nature : she could do what she resolve to do : and he willingly imagine she toil under the fetter of a promise to erect a tomb with he name upon it . ( not that call the future volume a tomb ; he call they the to all Mythologies . ) but the months gain on he and leave he plan belate : he have only have time to ask for that promise by which he seek to keep
keep he cold grasp on 's life . the grasp have slip away . bound by a pledge give from the depth of she pity , she would have be capable of undertake a toil which she judgment whisper be vain for all use except that consecration of faithfulness which be a supreme use . but now she judgament , instead of be controlle by duteous devotion , be make active by the imbittering discovery that in she past union there have lurk the hidden alienation of secrecy and suspicion . the living , suffer man be no longer before she to awake she pity : there remain only the retrospect of painful subjection to a husband whose thought have be lower than she have believe , whose exorbitant claim for himself have even blind he scrupulous care for he own character , and make he defeat he own pride by shock man of ordinary honor . as for the property which be the sign of that break tie , she would have be glad to be free from it and have nothing more than she original fortune which have be settle on she , if there have not be duty attach to ownership , which she ought not to flinch from . about this property many troublous question insist on rise : have she not be right in think that the half of it ought to go to ?-- but be it not impossible now for she to do that act of justice ? have take a cruelly effective means of hinder she : even with indignation against he in she heart , any act that see a triumphant eluding of he purpose revolt she . after collect papers of business which she wish to examine , she lock up again the desk and drawer -- all empty of personal word for she -- empty of any sign that in she husband 's lonely brood he heart have go out to she in excuse or explanation ; and she go back to with the sense that around he last hard demand and he last injuriious assertion of he power , the silence be unbroken . try now to turn she thought towards immediate duty , and one of these be of a kind which other be determined to remind she of . 's ear have catch eagerly she mention of the living , and as soon as he could , he reopen the subject , see here a possibility of make amend for the casting - vote he have once give with a ill - satisfied conscience . " instead of tell you anything about , " he say , " I should like to speak of another man -- , the of 's . he live be a poor one , and give he a stint provision for himself and he family . he mother , aunt , and sister all live with he , and depend upon he . I believe he have never marry because of they . I never hear such good preaching as he -- such plain , easy eloquence . he would have do to preach at 's after old . he talk be just as good about all subject : original , simple , clear . I think he a remarkable fellow : he ought to have do more than he have do . " " why have he not do more ? " say , interested now in all who have slipp below they own intention . " that be a hard question , " say . " I find myself that it be uncommonly difficult to make the right thing work : there be so many string pull at once . Farebrother often hint that he have get into the wrong profession ; he want a wider range than that of a poor clergyman , and I suppose he have no interest to help he on . he be very fond of Natural history and various scientific matter , and he be hamper in reconcile these taste with he position . he have no money to spare -- hardly enough to use ; and that have lead he into card -playing -- be a great place for whist . he do play for money , and he win a good deal . of course that take he into company a little beneath he , and make he slack about some thing ; and yet , with all that , look at he as a whole , I think he be one of the most blameless man I ever know . he have neither venom nor doubleness in he , and those often go with a more correct outside . " " I wonder whether he suffer in he conscience because of that habit , " say ; " I wonder whether he wish he could leave it off . " " I have no doubt he would leave it off , if he be transplant into plenty : he would be glad of the time for other thing . " " my uncle say that be speak of as a apostolic man , " say , meditatively . she be wish it be possible to restore the time of primitive zeal , and yet think of with a strong desire to rescue he from he chance - get money . " I do not pretend to say that be apostolic , " say . " he position be not quite like that of the Apostle : he be only a parson among parishioner whose live he have to try and make better . practically I find that what be call be apostolic now , be a impatience of everything in which the parson do not cut the principal figure . I see something of that in at the : a good deal of he doctrine be a sort of pinching hard
hard to make people uncomfortably -- aware of he . besides , a apostolic man at !-- he ought to think , as do , that it be needful to preach to the bird . " " true , " say . " it be hard to imagine what sort of notion we farmer and laborer get from they teaching . I have be look into a volume of sermon by : such sermon would be of no use at -- I mean , about impute righteousness and the prophecy in the Apocalypse . I have always be think of the different way in which be teach , and whenever I find one way that make it a wider bless than any other , I cling to that as the truest -- I mean that which take in the most good of all kind , and bring in the most people as sharer in it . it be surely better to pardon too much , than to condemn too much . but I should like to see and hear he preach . " " do , " say ; " I trust to the effect of that . he be very much beloved , but he have he enemy too : there be always people who can not forgive a able man for differing from they . and that money - win business be really a blot . you do not , of course , see many people : but , who be constantly see , be a great friend of 's old lady , and would be glad to s the 's praise . one of the old lady -- , the aunt -- be a wonderfully quaint picture of self - forgetful goodness , and gallant she about sometimes . I meet they one day in a back street : you know 's look -- a sort of Daphnis in coat and waistcoat ; and this little old maid reach up to he arm -- they look like a couple drop out of a romantic comedy . but the best evidence about be to see he and hear he . " be in she private sitting - room when this conversation occur , and there be no one present to make 's innocent introduction of painful to she . as be usual with he in matter of personal gossip , have quite forgotten 's remark that she think adore . at that moment he be only care for what would recommend the Farebrother family ; and he have purposely give emphasis to the worst that could be say about the , in order to forestall objection . in the week since 's death he have hardly seen , and he have hear no rumor to warn he that 's confidential secretary be a dangerous subject with . when he be go , he picture of linger in she mind and dispute the ground with that question of the liive . what be think about she ? would he hear of that fact which make she cheek burn as they never use to do ? and how would he feel when he hear it ? -- but she could see as well as possible how he smile down at the little old maid . a italian with white mouse !-- on the contrary , he be a creature who enter into every one 's feeling , and could take the pressure of they thought instead of urge he own with iron resistance . . be too , and you shall see by force of logic how they both agree : the many in the one , the one in many ; all be not some , nor some the same as any : Genus hold species , both be great or small ; one genus highest , one not high at all ; Each species have its differentia too , this be not that , and he be never you , through this and that be aye , and you and he be like as one to one , or three to three . no gossip about 's will have yet reach : the air seem to be fill with the dissolution of parliament and the come election , as the old wake and fair be fill with the rival clatter of itinerant show ; and more private noise be take little notice of . the famous " dry election " be at hand , in which the depth of public feeling might be measure by the low flood - mark of drink . will be one of the busiest at this time ; and though 's widowhood be continually in he thought , he be so far from wish to be speak to on the subject , that when seek he out to tell he what have pass about the living , he answer rather waspishly -- " why should you bring I into the matter ? I never see , and be not likely to see she , since she be at . I never go there . it be ground , where I and the ' pioneer ' be no more welcome than a poacher and he gun . " the fact be that will have be make the more susceptible by observe that , instead of wish he , as before , to come to the oftener than be quite agreeable to himself , see now to contrive that he should go there as little as possible . this be a shuffling concession of 's to 's indignant remonstrance ; and Will , awake to the slightest hint in this direction , conclude that he be to be keep away from the on 's account . she friend , then , regard he with some suspicion ? they fear be quite superfluous : they be very much mistaken if they imagine that he would put himself
himself forward as a needy adventurer try to win the favor of a rich woman . until now will have never fully see the chasm between himself and -- until now that he be come to the brink of it , and see she on the other side . he begin , not without some inward rage , to think of go away from the neighborhood : it would be impossible for he to show any further interest in without subject himself to disagreeable imputation -- perhaps even in she mind , which other might try to poison . " we be forever divide , " say . " I might as well be at ; she would be no farther from I . " but what we call we despair be often only the painful eagerness of unfed hope . there be plenty of reason why he should not go --public reason why he should not quit he post at this crisis , leave in the lurch when he need " coach " for the election , and when there be so much canvassing , direct and indirect , to be carry on . will could not like to leave he own chessman in the heat of a game ; and any candidate on the right side , even if he brain and marrow have be as soft as be consistent with a gentlemanly bearing , might help to turn a majority . to coach and keep he steadily to the idea that he must pledge himself to vote for the actual Reform , instead of insisting on he independence and power of pull up in time , be not a easy task . 's prophecy of a fourth candidate " in the bag " have not yet be fulfil , neither the nor any other power on the watch to secure a reforming majority see a worthy nodus for interference while there be a second reforming candidate like , who might be return at he own expense ; and the fight lay entirely between the old member , the new member return at the last election , and Brooke the future independent member , who be to fetter himself for this occasion only . and he party would bend all they force to the return of , and 's success must depend either on plumper which would leave in the rear , or on the new minting of Tory vote into reform vote . the latter means , of course , would be preferable . this prospect of converting vote be a dangerous distraction to : he impression that waverer be likely to be allure by wavering statement , and also the liability of he mind to stick afresh at opposing argument as they turn up in he memory , give much trouble . " you know there be tactic in these thing , " say ; " meet people half - way -- tempere you idea -- say , ' well now , there be something in that , ' and so on . I agree with you that this be a peculiar occasion -- the country with a will of its own -- political union -- that sort of thing -- but we sometimes cut with rather too sharp a knife , . these ten - pound householder , now : why ten ? draw the line somewhere -- yes : but why just at ten ? that be a difficult question , now , if you go into it . " " of course it be , " say , impatiently . " but if you be to wait till we get a logical , you must put yourself forward as a revolutionist , and then Middlemarch would not elect you , I fancy . as for trimming , this be not a time for trimming . " always end by agree with , who still appear to he a sort of with a leaven of ; but after a interval the wisdom of he own methods reassert itself , and he be again draw into use they with much hopefulness . at this stage of affair he be in excellent spirit , which even support he under large advance of money ; for he power of convincing and persuading have not yet be , test by anything more difficult than a chairman 's speech introduce other orator , or a dialogue with a voter , from which he come away with a sense that he be a tactician by nature , and that it be a pity he have not go earlier into this kind of thing . he be a little conscious of defeat , however , with , a chief representative in of that great social power , the retail trader , and naturally one of the most doubtful voter in the borough -- willing for he own part to supply a equal quality of tea and sugar to reformer and anti-reformer , as well as to agree impartially with both , and feel like the burgess of old that this necessity of electing member be a great burthan to a town ; for even if there be no danger in hold out hope to all party beforehand , there would be the painful necessity at last of disappoint respectable people whose name be on he book . he be accustom to receive large order from of ; but then , there be many of 's committee whose opinion have a great weight of grocery on they side . think that , as not too " clever in he intellect , " be the more likely to forgive a grocer who give a hostile vote under pressure , have become confidential in he back parlor . " as to , sir , put it in a family light , " he say , ratt the small silver in he pocket , and smile
smile affably . " will it support , and enable she to bring up six child when I be no more ? I put the question _fictiously , know what must be the answer . very well , sir . I ask you what , as a husband and a father , I be to do when gentleman come to I and say , ' do as you like , ; but if you vote against we , I shall get my grocery elsewhere : when I sugar my liquor I like to feel that I be benefit the country by maintain tradesman of the right color . ' those very word have be speak to I , sir , in the very chair where you be now sitte . I do not mean by you honorable self , . " " no , no , no -- that be narrow , you know . until my butler complain to I of you goods , , " say , soothingly , " until I hear that you send bad sugar , spice -- that sort of thing -- I shall never order he to go elsewhere . " " sir , I be you humble servant , and greatly oblige , " say , feel that politics be clear up a little . " there would be some pleasure in vote for a gentleman who speak in that honorable manner . " " well , you know , , you would find it the right thing to put yourself on we side . this Reform will touch everybody by - and - by -- a thoroughly popular measure -- a sort of , , , you know , that must come first before the rest can follow . I quite agree with you that you have get to look at the thing in a family light : but public spirit , now . we be all one family , you know -- it be all one cupboard . such a thing as a vote , now : why , it may help to make man 's fortune at the cape -- there be no knowing what may be the effect of a vote , " end , with a sense of be a little out at sea , though find it still enjoyable . but answer in a tone of decisive check . " I beg you pardon , sir , but I can not afford that . when I give a vote I must know what I be do ; I must look to what will be the effect on my till and ledger , speak respectfully . price , I will admit , be what nobody can know the merit of ; and the sudden fall after you have buy in currant , which be a goods that will not keep -- I have never ; myself see into the in and out there ; which be a rebuke to human pride . but as to one family , there be debtor and creditor , I hope ; they be not go to reform that away ; else I should vote for thing stay as they be . few man have less need to cry for change than I have , personally speak -- that be , for self and family . I be not one of those who have nothing to lose : I mean as to respectability both in parish and private business , and noways in respect of you honorable self and custom , which you be good enough to say you would not withdraw from I , vote or no vote , while the article send in be satisfactory . " after this conversation go up and boast to he wife that he have be rather too many for of , and that he do not mind so much now about go to the poll . on this occasion abstain from boasting of he tactic to , who for he part be glad enough to persuade himself that he have no concern with any canvassing except the purely argumentative sort , and that he work no meaner engine than knowledge . , necessarily , have he agent , who understand the nature of the voter and the means of enlist he ignorance on the side of the -- which be remarkably similar to the means of enlist it on the side against the . will stop he ear . occasionally parliament , like the rest of we life , even to we eating and apparel , could hardly go on if we imagination be too active about process . there be plenty of dirty - hand man in the world to do dirty business ; and will protest to himself that he share in bring through would be quite innocent . but whether he should succeed in that mode of contribute to the majority on the right side be very doubtful to he . he have write out various speech and memoranda for speech , but he have begin to perceive that 's mind , if it have the burthan of remember any train of thought , would let it drop , run away in search of it , and not easily come back again . to collect document be one mode of serve you country , and to remember the contents of a document be another . no ! the only way in which could be coerce into thinking of the right argument at the right time be to be well ply with they till they take up all the room in he brain . but here there be the difficulty of find room , so many thing have be take in beforehand . himself observ that he idea stand rather in he way when he be speak . however , 's coaching be forthwith to be put to the test , for before
before the day of nomination be to explain himself to the worthy elector of from the balcony of the , which look out advantageously at a angle of the market - place , command a large area in front and two converging street . it be a fine morning , and everything seem hopeful : there be some prospect of a understanding between 's committee and 's , to which , as a lawyer , and such manufacturer as and , give a solidity which almost counterbalance and he associate who sit for at the . , conscious of have weaken the blast of the " Trumpet " against he , by he reform as a landlord in the last half year , and hear himself cheer a little as he drive into the town , feel he heart tolerably light under he buff - color waistcoat . but with regard to critical occasion , it often happen that all moment seem comfortably remote until the last . " this look well , eh ? " say as the crowd gather . " I shall have a good audience , at any rate . I like this , now -- this kind of public make up of one 's own neighbor , you know . " the weaver and tanner of , unlike , have never think of as a neighbor , and be not more attach to he than if he have be send in a box from . but they listen without much disturbance to the speaker who introduce the candidate , one of they -- a political personage from , who come to tell its duty -- speak so fully , that it be alarming to think what the candidate could find to say after he . meanwhile the crowd become denser , and as the political personage neare the end of he speech , feel a remarkable change in he sensation while he still handle he eye - glass , trifle with document before he , and exchange remark with he committee , as a man to whom the moment of summon be indifferent . " I will take another glass of sherry , , " he say , with a easy air , to , who be close behind he , and presently hand he the suppose fortifier . it be ill - chosen ; for be a abstemious man , and to drink a second glass of sherry quickly at no great interval from the first be a surprise to he system which tend to scatter he energie instead of collect they . pray pity he : so many English gentleman make themselves miserable by speechify on entirely private grounds ! whereas wish to serve he country by standing for parliament -- which , indeed , may also be do on private grounds , but be once undertake do absolutely demand some speechifying . it be not about the beginning of he speech that be at all anxious ; this , he feel sure , would be all right ; he should have it quite pat , cut out as neatly as a set of couplet from . Embarking would be easy , but the vision of open sea that might come after be alarm . " and question , now , " hint the demon just wake up in he stomach , " somebody may put question about the schedule .-- Ladislaw , " he continue , aloud , " just hand I the memorandum of the schedule . " when present himself on the balcony , the cheer be quite loud enough to counterbalance the yell , groan , braying , and other expression of adverse theory , which be so moderate that ( decidedly a old bird ) observe in the ear next to he , " this look dangerous , by ! have get some deeper plan than this . " still , the cheer be exhilarat , and no candidate could look more amiable than , with the memorandum in he breast - pocket , he leave hand on the rail of the balcony , and he right trifling with he eye - glass . the striking point in he appearance be he buff waistcoat , short - clip blond hair , and neutral physiognomy . he begin with some confidence . " gentleman -- Elector of ! " this be so much the right thing that a little pause after it seem natural . " I be uncommonly glad to be here -- I be never so proud and happy in my life -- never so happy , you know . " this be a bold figure of speech , but not exactly the right thing ; for , unhappily , the pat opening have slip away -- even couplet from may be but " fallings from we , vanishing , " when fear clutch we , and a glass of sherry be hurrie like smoke among we idea . Ladislaw , who stand at the window behind the speaker , think , " it be all up now . the only chance be that , since the best thing will not always do , flounder may answer for once . " , meanwhile , have lose other clew , fall back on himself and he qualifications -- always a appropriate graceful subject for a candidate . " I be a close neighbor of yours , my good friend -- you have know I on the bench a good while -- I have always go a good deal into public question -- machinery , now , and machine - breaking -- you be many of you concerned with machinery , and I have be go into that lately . it will not do , you know , break machine : everything must go on -- trade , manufacture , commerce , interchange of staple -- that kind of thing
thing -- since , that must go on . we must look all over the globe :--'Observation with extensive view , ' must look everywhere , ' from to , ' as somebody say -- , I think , ' the , ' you know . that be what I have do up to a certain point -- not as far as ; but I have not always stay at home -- I see it would not do . I have be in the , where some of you goods go -- and then , again , in the . the Baltic , now . " Ply among he recollection in this way , might have get along , easily to himself , and would have come back from the remotest seas without trouble ; but a diabolical procedure have be set up by the enemy . at one and the same moment there have risen above the shoulders of the crowd , nearly opposite , and within ten yard of he , the effigy of himself : buff - colored waistcoat , eye - glass , and neutral physiognomy , pain on rag ; and there have arisen , apparently in the air , like the note of the cuckoo , a parrot - like , punch - voice echo of he word . everybody look up at the open window in the house at the opposite angles of the converge street ; but they be either blank , or fill by laugh listener . the most innocent echo have a impish mockery in it when it follow a gravely persistent speaker , and this echo be not at all innocent ; if it do not follow with the precision of a natural echo , it have a wicked choice of the word it overtake . by the time it say , " the , now , " the laugh which have be run through the audience become a general shout , and but for the sobering effect of party and that great public cause which the entanglement of thing have identify with " Brooke of , " the laugh might have catch he committee . ask , reprehensively , what the new police be do ; but a voice could not well be collar , and a attack on the effigy of the candidate would have be too equivocal , since probably mean it to be pelt . himself be not in a position to be quickly conscious of anything except a general slipping away of idea within himself : he have even a little singing in the ear , and he be the only person who have not yet take distinct account of the echo or discern the image of himself . few thing hold the perception more thoroughly captive than anxiety about what we have get to say . hear the laughter ; but he have expect some Tory effort at disturbance , and he be at this moment additionally excit by the tickling , stinge sense that he lose exordium be come back to fetch he from the . " that remind I , " he go on , thrust a hand into he side - pocket , with a easy air , " if I want a precedent , you know -- but we never want a precedent for the right thing -- but there be , now ; I can not say I should have support , or , the -- he be not a man of idea , and we want idea , you know . " " Blast you idea ! we want the , " say a loud rough voice from the crowd below . immediately the invisible punch , who have hitherto follow , repeat , " Blast you idea ! we want the . " the laugh be louder than ever , and for the first time be himself silent , hear distinctly the mocking echo . but it seem to ridicule he interrupter , and in that light be encourage ; so he reply with amenity -- " there be something in what you say , my good friend , and what do we meet for but to speak we mind --freedom of opinion , freedom of the press , liberty -- that kind of thing ? the , now -- you shall have the " -- here pause a moment to fix on he eye - glass and take the paper from he breast - pocket , with a sense of be practical and come to particular . the invisible punch follow :-- " you shall have the , , per electioneering contest , and a seat outside parliament as deliver , five thousand pound , seven shilling , and fourpence . " , amid the roar of laughter , turn red , let he eye - glass fall , and look about he confusedly , see the image of himself , which have come nearer . the next moment he see it dolorously bespatter with egg . he spirit rise a little , and he voice too . " Buffoonery , trick , ridicule the test of truth -- all that be very well " -- here a unpleasant egg break on 's shoulder , as the echo say , " all that be very well ; " then come a hail of egg , chiefly aim at the image , but occasionally hit the original , as if by chance . there be a stream of new man push among the crowd ; whistle , yell , bellowing , and fife make all the greater hubbub because there be shouting and struggle to put they down . no voice would have have wing enough to rise above the uproar , and , disagreeably anoint , stand he ground no longer . the frustration would have be less exasperat if it have be less gamesome and
and boyish : a serious assault of which the newspaper reporter " can aver that it endanger the learn gentleman 's rib , " or can respectfully bear witness to " the soles of that gentleman 's boot have be visible above the railing , " have perhaps more consolation attach to it . re-enter the committee - room , say , as carelessly as he could , " this be a little too bad , you know . I should have get the ear of the people by - and - by -- but they do not give I time . I should have go into the by - and - by , you know , " he add , glance at . " however , thing will come all right at the nomination . " but it be not resolve unanimously that thing would come right ; on the contrary , the committee look rather grim , and the political personage from be write busily , as if he be brew new device . " it be who do it , " say , evasively . " I know it as well as if he have be advertise . he be uncommonly good at ventriloquism , and he do it uncommonly well , by ! have be have he to dinner lately : there be a fund of talent in . " " well , you know , you never mention he to I , , else I would have invite he to dine , " say poor , who have go through a great deal of inviting for the good of he country . " there be not a more paltry fellow in than , " say , indignantly , " but it seem as if the paltry fellows be always to turn the scale . " will be thoroughly out of temper with himself as well as with he " principal , " and he go to shut himself in he room with a half - form resolve to throw up the " pioneer " and together . why should he stay ? if the impassable gulf between himself and be ever to be fill up , it must rather be by he go away and get into a thoroughly different position than by stay here and slipp into deserv contempt as a understrapper of 's . then come the young dream of wonder that he might do -- in five year , for example : political writing , political speaking , would get a higher value now public life be go to be wider and more national , and they might give he such distinction that he would not seem to be ask to step down to he . five year :-- if he could only be sure that she care for he more than for other ; if he could only make she aware that he stand aloon until he could tell he love without lower himself -- then he could go away easily , and begin a career which at five - and - twenty seem probable enough in the inward order of thing , where talent bring fame , and fame everything else which be delightful . he could speak and he could write ; he could master any subject if he choose , and he mean always to take the side of reason and justice , on which he would carry all he ardor . why should he not one day be lifte above the shoulders of the crowd , and feel that he have win that eminence well ? without doubt he would leave , go to town , and make himself fit for celebrity by " eat he dinner . " but not immediately : not until some kind of sign have pass between he and . he could not be satisfied until she know why , even if he be the man she would choose to marry , he would not marry she . hence he must keep he post and bear with Brooke a little longer . but he soon have reason to suspect that have anticipate he in the wish to break up they connection . Deputation without and voice withing have concur in inducing that philanthropist to take a stronger measure than usual for the good of mankind ; namely , to withdraw in favor of another candidate , to whom he leave the advantages of he canvassing machinery . he himself call this a strong measure , but observe that he health be less capable of sustain excitement than he have imagine . " I have feel uneasy about the chest -- it will not do to carry that too far , " he say to Ladislaw in explain the affair . " I must pull up . poor be a warning , you know . I have make some heavy advance , but I have dug a channel . it be rather coarse work -- this electioneering , eh , ? dare say you be tired of it . however , we have dug a channel with the ' pioneer ' -- put thing in a track , and so on . a more ordinary man than you might carry it on now -- more ordinary , you know . " " do you wish I to give it up ? " say , the quick color come in he face , as he rise from the writing - table , and take a turn of three step with he hand in he pocket . " I be ready to do so whenever you wish it . " " as to wish , my dear Ladislaw , I have the highest opinion of you power , you know . but about the ' pioneer ,' I have be consult a little with some of the man on we side , and they be inclin
inclin to take it into they hand -- indemnify I to a certain extent -- carry it on , in fact . and under the circumstance , you might like to give up -- might find a better field . these people might not take that high view of you which I have always take , as a alter ego , a right hand -- though I always look forward to you do something else . I think of have a run into . but I will write you any letter , you know -- to Althorpe and people of that kind . I have meet . " " I be exceedingly oblige to you , " say , proudly . " since you be go to part with the ' pioneer ,' I need not trouble you about the step I shall take . I may choose to continue here for the present . " after have leave he will say to himself , " the rest of the family have be urge he to get rid of I , and he do not care now about my go . I shall stay as long as I like . I shall go of my own movement and not because they be afraid of I . " . " he heart the lowliest duty on itself do lay . " -- WORDSWORTH . on that evening when know that he be to have the living , there be joy in the old fashioned parlor , and even the portrait of the great lawyer seem to look on with satisfaction . he mother leave she tea and toast untouched , but sit with she usual pretty primness , only show she emotion by that flush in the cheek and brightness in the eyes which give a old woman a touching momentary identity with she far - off youthful self , and say decisively -- " the greatest comfort , , be that you have deserv it . " " when a man get a good berth , mother , half the deserving must come after , " say the son , brimful of pleasure , and not try to conceal it . the gladness in he face be of that active kind which seem to have energy enough not only to flash outwardly , but to light up busy vision within : one seem to see thought , as well as delight , in he glance . " now , aunt , " he go on , rub he hand and look at , who be make tender little beaver - like noise , " there shall be sugar - candy always on the table for you to steal and give to the child , and you shall have a great many new stocking to make present of , and you shall darn you own more than ever ! " nod at she nephew with a subdue half - frightene laugh , conscious of have already drop a additional lump of sugar into she basket on the strength of the new preferment . " as for you , " -- the go on -- " I shall make no difficulty about you marry any bachelor -- , for example , as soon as I find you be in love with he . " , who have be look at she brother all the while and cry heartily , which be she way of rejoicing , smile through she tear and say , " you must set I the example , Cam : _you_ must marry now . " " with all my heart . but who be in love with I ? I be a seedy old fellow , " say the Vicar , rise , push he chair away and look down at himself . " what do you say , mother ? " " you be a handsome man , : though not so fine a figure of a man as you father , " say the old lady . " I wish you would marry , brother , " say . " she would make we so lively at . " " very fine ! you talk as if young woman be tie up to be choose , like poultry at market ; as if I have only to ask and everybody would have I , " say the , not care to specify . " we do not want everybody , " say . " but _you_ would like , mother , should not you ? " " my son 's choice shall be mine , " say , with majestic discretion , " and a wife would be most welcome , . you will want you whist at home when we go to , and never be a whist - player . " ( always call she tiny old sister by that magnificent name . ) " I shall do without whist now , mother . " " why so , ? in my time whist be think a undeniable amusement for a good churchman , " say , innocent of the meaning that whist have for she son , and speak rather sharply , as at some dangerous countenancing of new doctrine . " I shall be too busy for whist ; I shall have two parish , " say the Vicar , prefer not to discuss the virtue of that game . he have already say to , " I do not feel bound to give up 's . it be protest enough against the pluralism they want to reform if I give somebody else most of the money . the stronger thing be not to give up power , but to use it well . " " I have think of that , " say . " so far as self be concerned , I think it would be easier to give up power
power and money than to keep they . it seem very unfitting that I should have this patronage , yet I feel that I ought not to let it be use by some one else instead of I . " " it be I who be bound to act so that you will not regret you power , " say . he be one of the nature in which conscience get the more active when the yoke of life cease to gall they . he make no display of humility on the subject , but in he heart he feel rather asham that he conduct have show lach which other who do not get benefice be free from . " I use often to wish I have be something else than a clergyman , " he say to Lydgate , " but perhaps it will be better to try and make as good a clergyman out of myself as I can . that be the well - beneficed point of view , you perceive , from which difficulty be much simplified , " he end , smile . the do feel then as if he share of duty would be easy . but have a trick of behaving unexpectedly -- something like a heavy friend whom we have amiably ask to visit we , and who break he leg within we gate . hardly a week later , present itself in he study under the disguise of , now return from with he bachelor 's degree . " I be asham to trouble you , Farebrother , " say , whose fair open face be propitiat , " but you be the only friend I can consult . I tell you everything once before , and you be so good that I can not help come to you again . " " sit down , , I be ready to hear and do anything I can , " say the , who be busy pack some small object for removal , and go on with he work . " I want to tell you -- " hesitate a instant and then go on plungingly , " I might go into the Church now ; and really , look where I may , I can not see anything else to do . I do not like it , but I know it be uncommonly hard on my father to say so , after he have spend a good deal of money in educate I for it . " pause again a instant , and then repeat , " and I can not see anything else to do . " " I do talk to you father about it , , but I make little way with he . he say it be too late . but you have get over one bridge now : what be you other difficulty ? " " merely that I do not like it . I do not like divinity , and preach , and feel obliged to look serious . I like ride across country , and do as other man do . I do not mean that I want to be a bad fellow in any way ; but I have no taste for the sort of thing people expect of a clergyman . and yet what else am I to do ? my father can not spare I any capital , else I might go into farming . and he have no room for I in he trade . and of course I can not begin to study for law or physic now , when my father want I to earn something . it be all very well to say i be wrong to go into the Church ; but those who say so might as well tell I to go into the backwood . " 's voice have take a tone of grumbling remonstrance , and might have be inclin to smile if he mind have not be too busy in imagine more than tell he . " have you any difficulty about doctrine -- about the article ? " he say , try hard to think of the question simply for 's sake . " no ; I suppose the article be right . I be not prepare with any argument to disprove they , and much better , cleverer fellow than I be go in for they entirely . I think it would be rather ridiculous in I to urge scruple of that sort , as if I be a judge , " say , quite simply . " I suppose , then , it have occur to you that you might be a fair parish priest without be much of a divine ? " " of course , if I be oblige to be a clergyman , I shall try and do my duty , though I may not like it . do you think any body ought to blame I ? " " for go into the under the circumstance ? that depend on you conscience , -- how far you have count the cost , and see what you position will require of you . I can only tell you about myself , that I have always be too lax , and have be uneasy in consequence . " " but there be another hindrance , " say , coloring . " I do not tell you before , though perhaps I may have say thing that make you guess it . there be somebody I be very fond of : I have love she ever since we be child . " " , I suppose ? " say the Vicar , examine some label very closely . " yes . I should not mind anything if she would have I . and I know I could be a good fellow then . " " and you think
think she return the feeling ? " " she never will say so ; and a good while ago she make I promise not to speak to she about it again . and she have set she mind especially against my be a clergyman ; I know that . but I can not give she up . I do think she care about I . I see . Garth last night , and she say that be stay at with . " " yes , she be very kindly help my sister . do you wish to go there ? " " no , I want to ask a great favor of you . I be asham to bother you in this way ; but might listen to what you say , if you mention the subject to she -- I mean about my go into the . " " that be rather a delicate task , my dear . I shall have to presuppose you attachment to she ; and to enter on the subject as you wish I to do , will be ask she to tell I whether she return it . " " that be what I want she to tell you , " say , bluntly . " I do not know what to do , unless I can get at she feeling . " " you mean that you would be guide by that as to you go into the Church ? " " if say she would never have I I might as well go wrong in one way as another . " " that be nonsense , . outlive they love , but they do not outlive the consequence of they recklessness . " " not my sort of love : I have never be without loving . if I have to give she up , it would be like begin to live on wooden leg . " " will she not be hurt at my intrusion ? " " no , I feel sure she will not . she respect you more than any one , and she would not put you off with fun as she do I . of course I could not have tell any one else , or ask any one else to speak to she , but you . there be no one else who could be such a friend to both of we . " pause a moment , and then say , rather complainingly , " and she ought to acknowledge that I have work in order to pass . she ought to believe that I would exert myself for she sake . " there be a moment 's silence before laid down he work , and put out he hand to say -- " very well , my boy . I will do what you wish . " that very day go to parsonage on the nag which he have just set up . " Decidedly I be a old stalk , " he think , " the young growth be push I aside . " he find in the garden gather rose and sprinkl the petal on a sheet . the sun be low , and tall tree send they shadow across the grassy walk where be move without bonnet or parasol . she do not observe 's approach along the grass , and have just stoop down to lecture a small black - and - tan terrier , which would persist in walking on the sheet and smell at the rose - leave as sprinkle they . she take he fore - paw in one hand , and lift up the forefinger of the other , while the dog wrinkle he brows and look embarrassed . " fly , fly , I be asham of you , " be say in a grave contralto . " this be not become in a sensible dog ; anybody would think you be a silly young gentleman . " " you be unmerciful to yoing gentleman , , " say the , within two yard of she . start up and blush . " it always answer to reason with , " she say , laughingly . " but not with young gentleman ? " " oh , with some , I suppose ; since some of they turn into excellent man . " " I be glad of that admission , because I want at this very moment to interest you in a young gentleman . " " not a silly one , I hope , " say , begin to pluck the rose again , and feel she heart beat uncomfortably . " no ; though perhaps wisdom be not he strong point , but rather affection and sincerity . however , wisdom lie more in those two qualitie than people be apt to imagine . I hope you know by those mark what young gentleman I mean . " " yes , I think I do , " say , bravely , she face get more serious , and she hand cold ; " it must be Fred . " " he have ask I to consult you about he go into the Church . I hope you will not think that I consent to take a liberty in promising to do so . " " on the contrary , , " say , give up the rose , and fold she arm , but unable to look up , " whenever you have anything to say to I I feel honored . " " but before I enter on that question , let I just touch a point on which you father take I into confidence ; by the way , it be that very evening on which I once before fulfil a mission from , just after he have go to college . tell I what happen on the night
night of 's death -- how you refuse to burn the will ; and he say that you have some heart - pricking on that subject , because you have be the innocent means of hinder from get he ten thousand pound . I have keep that in mind , and I have hear something that may relieve you on that score --may show you that no sin-offering be demand from you there . " pause a moment and look at . he mean to give he full advantage , but it would be well , he think , to clear she mind of any superstition , such as woman sometimes follow when they do a man the wrong of marry he as a act of atonement . 's cheek have begin to burn a little , and she be mute . " I mean , that you action make no real difference to 's lot . I find that the first will would not have be legally good after the burning of the last ; it would not have stand if it have be dispute , and you may be sure it would have be dispute . so , on that score , you may feel you mind free . " " thank you , , " say , earnestly . " I be grateful to you for remembere my feeling . " " well , now I may go on . , you know , have take he degree . he have work he way so far , and now the question be , what be he to do ? that question be so difficult that he be inclin to follow he father 's wish and enter the Church , though you know better than I do that he be quite set against that formerly . I have question he on the subject , and I confess I see no insuperable objection to he be a clergyman , as thing go . he say that he could turn he mind to do he best in that vocation , on one condition . if that condition be fulfil I would do my utmost in help on . after a time -- not , of course , at first -- he might be with I as my curate , and he would have so much to do that he stipend would be nearly what I use to get as vicar . but I repeat that there be a condition without which all this good can not come to pass . he have open he heart to I , , and ask I to plead for he . the condition lie entirely in you feeling . " look so much move , that he say after a moment , " let we walk a little ; " and when they be walk he add , " to speak quite plainly , will not take any course which would lessen the chance that you would consent to be he wife ; but with that prospect , he will try he best at anything you approve . " " I can not possibly say that I will ever be he wife , : but I certainly never will be he wife if he become a clergyman . what you say be most generous and kind ; I do not mean for a moment to correct you judgment . it be only that I have my girlish , mock way of look at thing , " say , with a return sparkle of playfulness in she answer which only make its modesty more charming . " he wish I to report exactly what you think , " say . " I could not love a man who be ridiculous , " say , not choose to go deeper . " have sense and knowledge enough to make he respectable , if he like , in some good worldly business , but I can never imagine he preach and exhort , and pronounce blessing , and pray by the sick , without feel as if I be look at a caricature . he be a clergyman would be only for gentility 's sake , and I think there be nothing more contemptible than such imbecile gentility . I use to think that of , with he empty face and neat umbrella , and mince little speeches . what right have such man to represent -- as if it be a institution for get up idiot genteelly -- as if -- " check herself . she have be carry along as if she have be speak to instead of . " young woman be severe : they do not feel the stress of action as man do , though perhaps I ought to make you a exception there . but you do not put on so low a level as that ? " " no , indeed , he have plenty of sense , but I think he would not show it as a clergyman . he would be a piece of professional affectation . " " then the answer be quite decided . as a clergyman he could have no hope ? " shook she head . " but if he brave all the difficulty of get he bread in some other way -- will you give he the support of hope ? may he count on win you ? " " I think ought not to need tell again what I have already say to he , " answer , with a slight resentment in she manner . " I mean that he ought not to put such question until he have do something worthy , instead of say that he could do it . " be silent for a minute or more , and then , as they turn and pause under the shadow of a maple at the end of a grassy walk
walk , say , " I understand that you resist any attempt to fetter you , but either you feeling for exclude you entertaine another attachment , or it do not : either he may count on you remaining single until he shall have earn you hand , or he may in any case be disappoint . pardon I , Mary -- you know I use to catechise you under that name -- but when the state of a woman 's affection touch the happiness of another life -- of more life than one -- I think it would be the nobler course for she to be perfectly direct and open . " in she turn be silent , wonder not at 's manner but at he tone , which have a grave restrain emotion in it . when the strange idea flash across she that he word have reference to himself , she be incredulous , and asham of entertaine it . she have never think that any man could love she except , who have espouse she with the umbrella ring , when she wear sock and little strapped shoe ; still less that she could be of any importance to , the cleverest man in she narrow circle . she have only time to feel that all this be hazy and perhaps illusory ; but one thing be clear and determined -- she answer . " since you think it my duty , , I will tell you that I have too strong a feeling for to give he up for any one else . I should never be quite happy if I think he be unhappy for the loss of I . it have take such deep root in I -- my gratitude to he for always love I best , and mind so much if I hurt myself , from the time when we be very little . I can not imagine any new feeling come to make that weaker . I should like better than anything to see he worthy of every one 's respect . but please tell he I will not promise to marry he till then : I should shame and grieve my father and mother . he be free to choose some one else . " " then I have fulfil my commission thoroughly , " say , put out he hand to , " and I shall ride back to forthwith . with this prospect before he , we shall get into the right niche somehow , and I hope I shall live to join you hand . bless you ! " " oh , please stay , and let I give you some tea , " say . she eye fill with tear , for something indefinable , something like the resolute suppression of a pain in 's manner , make she feel suddenly miserable , as she have once feel when she see she father 's hand trembling in a moment of trouble . " no , my dear , no . I must get back . " in three minute the be on horseback again , have go magnanimously through a duty much harder than the renunciation of whist , or even than the writing of penitential meditation . . it be but a shallow haste which concludeth insincerity from what outsider call inconsistency -- put a dead mechanism of " if " and " therefore " for the living myriad of hidden sucker whereby the belief and the conduct be wrotch into mutual sustainment . , when he be hope to acquire a new interest in , have naturally have a especial wish that the new clergyman should be one whom he thoroughly approve ; and he believe it to be a chastisement and admonition direct to he own shortcoming and those of the nation at large , that just about the time when he come in possession of the deed which make he the proprietor of , " read himself " into the quaint little church and preach he first sermon to the congregation of farmer , laborer , and village artisan . it be not that intend to frequent or to reside at for a good while to come : he have buy the excellent farm and fine homestead simply as a retreat which he might gradually enlarge as to the land and beautify as to the dwelling , until it should be conducive to the divine glory that he should enter on it as a residence , partially withdraw from he present exertion in the administration of business , and throw more conspicuously on the side of truth the weight of local landed proprietorship , which Providence might increase by unforeseen occasion of purchase . a strong leading in this direction seem to have be give in the surprising facility of get , when every one have expect that would have clung to it as the of . that be what poor old himself have expect ; have often , in imagination , look up through the sod above he , and , unobstruct by . perspective , see he frog - face legatee enjoy the fine old place to the perpetual surprise and disappointment of other survivor . but how little we know what would make paradise for we neighbor ! we judge from we own desire , and we neighbor themselves be not always open enough even to throw out a hint of theirs . the cool and judicious have not allow he parent to perceive that be anything less than the chief good in he estimation , and he have certainly wish to call it he own . but as look at gold and think of buy , so look at and think of buy gold . he have a very distinct and intense vision of he chief good , the vigorous greed which he have inherit have take a
a special form by dint of circumstance : and he chief good be to be a moneychanger . from he earliest employment as a errand - boy in a seaport , he have look through the window of the moneychanger as other boy look through the window of the pastry - cook ; the fascination have wrotch itself gradually into a deep special passion ; he mean , when he have property , to do many thing , one of they be to marry a genteel young person ; but these be all accident and joy that imagination could dispense with . the one joy after which he soul thirst be to have a money - changer 's shop on a much-frequented quay , to have lock all round he of which he hold the key , and to look sublimely cool as he handle the breed coin of all nation , while helpless Cupidity look at he enviously from the other side of a iron lattice . the strength of that passion have be a power enable he to master all the knowledge necessary to gratify it . and when other be think that he have settle at for life , himself be think that the moment now be not far off when he should settle on the with the best appointment in saf and lock . enough . we be concerned with look at 's sale of he land from 's point of view , and he interpret it as a cheering dispensation convey perhaps a sanction to a purpose which he have for some time entertaine without external encouragement ; he interpret it thus , but not too confidently , offer up he thanksgiving in guarded phraseology . he doubt do not arise from the possible relation of the event to 's destiny , which belong to the unmapped region not take under the providential government , except perhaps in a imperfect colonial way ; but they arise from reflec that this dispensation too might be a chastisement for himself , as 's induction to the living clearly be . this be not what say to any man for the sake of deceive he : it be what he say to himself -- it be as genuinely he mode of explaining event as any theory of yours may be , if you happen to disagree with he . for the egoism which enter into we theory do not affect they sincerity ; rather , the more we egoism be satisfied , the more robust be we belief . however , whether for sanction or for chastisement , , hardly fifteen month after the death of , have become the proprietor of , and what would say " if he be worthy to know , " have become a inexhaustible and consolatory subject of conversation to he disappointed relative . the table be now turn on that dear brother depart , and to contemplate the frustration of he cunning by the superior cunning of thing in general be a cud of delight to . have a melancholy triumph in the proof that it do not answer to make false Featherstone and cut off the genuine ; and receive the news in the say , " dear , dear ! then the could have be none so pleased with the almshouse after all . " be particularly glad of the advantage which she husband 's health be likely to get from the purchase of . few day pass without he riding thither and look over some part of the farm with the bailiff , and the evening be delicious in that quiet spot , when the new hay -rick lately set up be send forth odors to mingle with the breath of the rich old garden . one evening , while the sun be still above the horizon and burn in golden lamps among the great walnut bough , be pause on horseback outside the front gate wait for , who have meet he by appointment to give a opinion on a question of stable drainage , and be now advise the bailiff in the rick - yard . be conscious of be in a good spiritual frame and more than usually serene , under the influence of he innocent recreation . he be doctrinally convince that there be a total absence of merit in himself ; but that doctrinal conviction may be hold without pain when the sense of demerit do not take a distinct shape in memory and revive the tingling of shame or the pang of remorse . Nay , it may be hold with intense satisfaction when the depth of we sinning be but a measure for the depth of forgiveness , and a clenching proof that we be peculiar instrument of the divine intention . the memory have as many mood as the temper , and shift its scenery like a diorama . at this moment feel as if the sunshine be all one with that of far - off evening when he be a very young man and use to go out preach beyond . and he would willingly have have that service of exhortation in prospect now . the texts be there still , and so be he own facility in expound they . he brief reverie be interrupt by the return of , who also be on horseback , and be just shak he bridle before start , when he exclaim -- " bless my heart ! what be this fellow in black come along the lane ? he be like one of those man one see about after the races . " turn he horse and look along the lane , but make no reply . the comer be we slight acquaintance , whose appearance present no other change than such as be due to a suit of black and a crape hat - band . he be within three yard
yard of the horseman now , and they could see the flash of recognition in he face as he whir he stick upward , look all the while at , and at last exclaiming :-- " by , , it be you ! I could not be mistaken , though the five - and - twenty year have play old with we both ! how be you , eh ? you do not expect to see _me_ here . come , shake we by the hand . " to say that 's manner be rather excited would be only one mode of say that it be evening . could see that there be a moment of struggle and hesitation in , but it end in he put out he hand coldly to and say -- " I do not indeed expect to see you in this remote country place . " " well , it belong to a stepson of mine , " say Raffles , adjust himself in a swagger attitude . " I come to see he here before . I be not so surprised at see you , old fellow , because I pick up a letter -- what you may call a providential thing . it be uncommonly fortunate I meet you , though ; for I do not care about see my stepson : he be not affectionate , and he poor mother have go now . to tell the truth , I come out of love to you , : I come to get you address , for -- look here ! " Raffle draw a crumple paper from he pocket . almost any other man than might have be tempt to linger on the spot for the sake of hear all he could about a man whose acquaintance with seem to imply passage in the banker 's life so unlike anything that be know of he in that they must have the nature of a secret to pique curiosity . but be peculiar : certain human tendency which be commonly strong be almost absent from he mind ; and one of these be curiosity about personal affair . especially if there be anything discreditable to be find out concern another man , prefer not to know it ; and if he have to tell anybody under he that he evil doings be discover , he be more embarrassed than the culprit . he now spurr he horse , and say , " I wish you good evening , ; I must be get home , " set off at a trot . " you do not put you full address to this letter , " Raffle continue . " that be not like the first - rate man of business you use to be . ' the , ' -- they may be anywhere : you live near at hand , eh ?-- have cut the concern altogether -- perhaps turn country squire -- have a rural mansion to invite I to . , how many year it be ago ! the old lady must have be dead a pretty long while -- go to glory without the pain of know how poor she daughter be , eh ? but , by ! you be very pale and pasty , . come , if you be go home , I will walk by you side . " 's usual paleness have in fact take a almost deathly hue . five minute before , the expanse of he life have be submerge in its evening sunshine which shine backward to its remember morning : sin seem to be a question of doctrine and inward penitence , humiliation a exercise of the closet , the bearing of he deed a matter of private vision adjust solly by spiritual relation and conception of the divine purpose . and now , as if by some hideous magic , this lould red figure have risen before he in unmanageable solidity -- a incorporate past which have not enter into he imagination of chastisement . but 's thought be busy , and he be not a man to act or speak rashly . " I be go home , " he say , " but I can defer my ride a little . and you can , if you please , rest here . " " thank you , " say Raffles , make a grimace . " I do not care now about see my stepson . I would rather go home with you . " " you stepson , if be he , be here no longer . I be master here now . " Raffle open wide eye , and give a long whistle of surprise , before he say , " well then , I 've no objection . I have have enough walking from the coach - road . I never be much of a walker , or rider either . what I like be a smart vehicle and a spirited cob . I be always a little heavy in the saddle . what a pleasant surprise it must be to you to see I , old fellow ! " he continue , as they turn towards the house . " you do not say so ; but you never take you luck heartily -- you be always think of improve the occasion -- you would such a gift for improve you luck . " seem greatly to enjoy he own wit , and swing he leg in a swaggering manner which be rather too much for he companion 's judicious patience . " if I remember rightly , " observe , with chill anger , " we acquaintance many year ago have not the sort of intimacy which you be now assume , . any service you desire of I will be the more readily render if you will avoid a tone of familiarity
familiarity which do not lie in we former intercourse , and can hardly be warrant by more than twenty year of separation . " " you do not like be call ? why , I always call you in my heart , and though lose to sight , to memory dear . by ! my feeling have ripen for you like fine old cognac . I hope you have get some in the house now . fill my flask well the last time . " have not yet fully learn that even the desire for cognac be not stronger in Raffles than the desire to torment , and that a hint of annoyance always serve he as a fresh cue . but it be at least clear that further objection be useless , and , in give order to the housekeeper for the accommodation of the guest , have a resolute air of quietude . there be the comfort of think that this housekeeper have be in the service of also , and might accept the idea that entertaine Raffles merely as a friend of she former master . when there be food and drink spread before he visitor in the wainscote parlor , and no witness in the room , say -- " you habits and mine be so different , , that we can hardly enjoy each other 's society . the wisest plan for both of we will therefore be to part as soon as possible . since you say that you wish to meet I , you probably consider that you have some business to transact with I . but under the circumstance I will invite you to remain here for the night , and I will myself ride over here early to - morrow morning -- before breakfast , in fact , when I can receive any communication you have to make to I . " " with all my heart , " say ; " this be a comfortable place -- a little dull for a continuance ; but I can put up with it for a night , with this good liquor and the prospect of see you again in the morning . you be a much better host than my stepson be ; but owed I a bit of a grudge for marry he mother ; and between you and I there be never anything but kindness . " , hope that the peculiar mixture of joviality and sneer in 's manner be a good deal the effect of drink , have determined to wait till he be quite sober before he spend more word upon he . but he ride home with a terribly lucid vision of the difficulty there would be in arrange any result that could be permanently count on with this man . it be inevitable that he should wish to get rid of , though he reappearance could not be regard as lie outside the divine plan . the spirit of evil might have send he to threat 's subversion as a instrument of good ; but the threat must have be permit , and be a chastisement of a new kind . it be a hour of anguish for he very different from the hour in which he struggle have be securely private , and which have end with a sense that he secret misdeed be pardon and he service accept . those misdeed even when commit -- have they not be half sanctify by the singleness of he desire to devote himself and all he possess to the furtherance of the divine scheme ? and be he after all to become a mere stone of stumbling and a rock of offence ? for who would understand the work within he ? who would not , when there be the pretext of casting disgrace upon he , confound he whole life and the truth he have espouse , in one heap of obloquy ? in he closest meditation the life - long habit of 's mind clad he most egoistic terror in doctrinal reference to superhuman end . but even while we be talk and meditat about the earth 's orbit and the solar system , what we feel and adjust we movement to be the stable earth and the change day . and now within all the automatic succession of theoretic phrasis -- distinct and inmost as the shiver and the ache of oncoming fever when we be discuss abstract pain , be the forecast of disgrace in the presence of he neighbor and of he own wife . for the pain , as well as the public estimate of disgrace , depend on the amount of previous profession . to man who only aim at escape felony , nothing short of the prisoner 's dock be disgrace . but have aim at be a eminent . it be not more than half - past seven in the morning when he again reach . the fine old place never look more like a delightful home than at that moment ; the great white lily be in flower , the nasturtium , they pretty leave all silver with dew , be run away over the low stone wall ; the very noise all around have a heart of peace within they . but everything be spoil for the owner as he walk on the gravel in front and await the descent of , with whom he be condemn to breakfast . it be not long before they be seat together in the wainscote parlor over they tea and toast , which be as much as Raffles care to take at that early hour . the difference between he morning and evening self be not so great as he companion have imagine that it might be ; the delight in tormenting be perhaps even the stronger because he spirit be rather less highly pitch . certainly he manners
manners seem more disagreeable by the morning light . " as I have little time to spare , , " say the banker , who could hardly do more than sip he tea and break he toast without eat it , " I shall be oblige if you will mention at once the ground on which you wish to meet with I . I presume that you have a home elsewhere and will be glad to return to it . " " why , if a man have get any heart , do not he want to see a old friend , ?-- I must call you -- we always do call you yong when we know you mean to marry the old widow . some say you have a handsome family likeness to old , but that be you mother 's fault , call you . be not you glad to see I again ? I expect a invite to stay with you at some pretty place . my own establishment be break up now my wife 's dead . I have no particular attachment to any spot ; I would have soon settle hereabout as anywhere . " " may I ask why you return from ? I consider that the strong wish you express to go there , when a adequate sum be furnished , be tantamount to a engagement that you would remain there for life . " " never know that a wish to go to a place be the same thing as a wish to stay . but I do stay a matter of ten year ; it do not suit I to stay any longer . and I be not go again , . " here wink slowly as he look at . " do you wish to be settle in any business ? what be you call now ? " " thank you , my calling be to enjoy myself as much as I can . I do not care about work any more . if I do anything it would be a little travelling in the tobacco line -- or something of that sort , which take a man into agreeable company . but not without a independence to fall back upon . that be what I want : I be not so strong as I be , , though I have get more color than you . I want a independence . " " that could be supply to you , if you would engage to keep at a distance , " say , perhaps with a little too much eagerness in he undertone . " that must be as it suit my convenience , " say coolly . " I see no reason why I should not make a few acquaintance hereabout . I be not asham of myself as company for anybody . I drop my portmanteau at the turnpike when I get down -- change of linen -- genuine -- honor bright -- more than fronts and wristband ; and with this suit of mourning , strap and everything , I should do you credit among the nob here . " have push away he chair and look down at himself , particularly at he strap . he chief intention be to annoy , but he really think that he appearance now would produce a good effect , and that he be not only handsome and witty , but clad in a mourning style which imply solid connection . " if you intend to rely on I in any way , , " say , after a moment 's pause , " you will expect to meet my wish . " " ah , to be sure , " say , with a mocking cordiality . " do not I always do it ? , you make a pretty thing out of I , and I get but little . I have often think since , I might have do better by tell the old woman that I would find she daughter and she grandchild : it would have suit my feeling better ; I have get a soft place in my heart . but you have bury the old lady by this time , I suppose -- it be all one to she now . and you have get you fortune out of that profitable business which have such a blessing on it . you have take to be a nob , buy land , be a country bashaw . still in the line , eh ? still godly ? or take to the Church as more genteel ? " this time 's slow wink and slight protrusion of he tongue be worse than a nightmare , because it hold the certitude that it be not a nightmare , but a wake misery . feel a shuddering nausea , and do not speak , but be consider diligently whether he should not leave Raffles to do as he would , and simply defy he as a slanderer . the man would soon show himself disreputable enough to make people disbelieve he . " but not when he tell any ugly - look truth about _you _, " say discern consciousness . and again : it seem no wrong to keep Raffle at a distance , but shrank from the direct falsehood of deny true statement . it be one thing to look back on forgiven sins , nay , to explain questionable conformity to lax custom , and another to enter deliberately on the necessity of falsehood . but since do not speak , run on , by way of use time to the utmost . " I have not have such fine luck as you , by ! thing go confoundedly with I in ; those Yankee be cool hand , and a man of gentlemanly feeling have no chance with they . I marry when
when I come back -- a nice woman in the tobacco trade -- very fond of I -- but the trade be restrict , as we say . she have be settle there a good many year by a friend ; but there be a son too much in the case . and I never hit it off . however , I make the most of the position , and I have always take my glass in good company . it be be all on the square with I ; I be as open as the day . you will not take it ill of I that I do not look you up before . I have get a complaint that make I a little dilatory . I think you be trade and pray away in still , and do not find you there . but you see I be send to you , -- perhaps for a blessing to both of we . " end with a jocose snuffle : no man feel he intellect more superior to religious cant . and if the cunning which calculate on the meanest feeling in man could be , call intellect , he have he share , for under the blurting rallying tone with which he speak to , there be a evident selection of statement , as if they have be so many move at chess . meanwhile have determine on he move , and he say , with gather resolution -- " you will do well to reflect , Raffles , that it be possible for a man to overreach himself in the effort to secure undue advantage . although I be not in any way bound to you , I be willing to supply you with a regular annuity -- in quarterly payment -- so long as you fulfil a promise to remain at a distance from this neighborhood . it be in you power to choose . if you insist on remain here , even for a short time , you will get nothing from I . I shall decline to know you . " " , ha ! " say , with a affect explosion , " that remind I of a droll dog of a thief who decline to know the constable . " " you allusion be lose on I sir , " say , with white heat ; " the law have no hold on I either through you agency or any other . " " you can not understand a joke , my good fellow . I only mean that I should never decline to know you . but let we be serious . you quarterly payment will not quite suit I . I like my freedom . " here rise and stalk once or twice up and down the room , swing he leg , and assume a air of masterly meditation . at last he stop opposite Bulstrode , and say , " I will tell you what ! give we a couple of hundred -- come , that be modest -- and I will go away -- honor bright !-- pick up my portmanteau and go away . but I shall not give up my for a dirty annuity . I shall come and go where I like . perhaps it may suit I to stay away , and correspond with a friend ; perhaps not . have you the money with you ? " " no , I have one hundred , " say , feel the immediate riddance too great a relief to be reject on the ground of future uncertainty . " I will forward you the other if you will mention a address . " " no , I will wait here till you bring it , " say Raffles . " I will take a stroll and have a snack , and you will be back by that time . " 's sickly body , shatte by the agitation he have go through since the last evening , make he feel abjectly in the power of this loud invulnerable man . at that moment he snatch at a temporary repose to be win on any term . he be rise to do what Raffles suggest , when the latter say , lift up he finger as if with a sudden recollection -- " I do have another look after again , though I do not tell you ; I ' a tender conscience about that pretty young woman . I do not find she , but I find out she husband 's name , and I make a note of it . but hang it , I lose my pocketbook . however , if I hear it , I should know it again . I have get my faculty as if I be in my prime , but name wear out , by ! sometimes I be no better than a confound tax - paper before the name be fill in . however , if I hear of she and she family , you shall know , . you would like to do something for she , now she be you step - daughter . " " doubtless , " say , with the usual steady look of he light - gray eye ; " though that might reduce my power of assist you . " as he walk out of the room , wink slowly at he back , and then turn towards the window to watch the banker ride away -- virtually at he command . he lip first curl with a smile and then open with a short triumphant laugh . " but what the deuce be the name ? " he presently say , half aloud , scratch he head , and wrinkl he brows horizontally . he have not really care or think about this point of forgetfulness until it occur
occur to he in he invention of annoyance for . " it begin with ; it be almost all l' I fancy , " he go on , with a sense that he be get hold of the slippery name . but the hold be too slight , and he soon get tired of this mental chase ; for few man be more impatient of private occupation or more in need of make themselves continually hear than . he prefer use he time in pleasant conversation with the bailiff and the housekeeper , from whom he gather as much as he want to know about 's position in . after all , however , there be a dull space of time which need relieive with bread and cheese and ale , and when he be seat alone with these resource in the wainscote parlor , he suddenly slap he knee , and exclaim , " Ladislaw ! " that action of memory which he have try to set go , and have abandon in despair , have suddenly complete itself without conscious effort -- a common experience , agreeable as a complete sneeze , even if the name remember be of no value . Raffles immediately take out he pocket - book , and write down the name , not because he expect to use it , but merely for the sake of not be at a loss if he ever do happen to want it . he be not go to tell Bulstrode : there be no actual good in tell , and to a mind like that of Raffles there be always probable good in a secret . he be satisfied with he present success , and by three o'clock that day he have take up he portmanteau at the turnpike and mount the coach , relieive 's eye of a ugly black spot on the landscape at , but not relieive he of the dread that the black spot might reappear and become inseparable even from the vision of he hearth . . the Widow and the wife . . " Negli occhi porta la mia donna ; co si fa gentil eio ch'ella mira : passa , ogni uom ver lei si gira , e cui saluta fa tremar lo core . Sicche , bassando il viso , tuttoo smore , d'ogni suo difetto allor sospira : Fuggon dinanzi a lei ed : Aiutatemi , donne , a farle onore . Ogni dolcezza , ogni pensiero umile Nasee nel core a chi parlar la sente ; e beato chi prima la vide . par quand ' un poco sorride , non si pub dicer , ne tener a ment , Si e nuovo miracolo gentile . " -- Dante : la . by that delightful morning when the hay - rick at be scent the air quite impartially , as if have be a guest worthy of finest incense , have again take up she abode at . after three month have become rather oppressive : to sit like a model for look rapturously at 's baby would not do for many hour in the day , and to remain in that momentous babe 's presence with persistent disregard be a course that could not have be tolerate in a childless sister . Dorothea would have be capable of carry baby joyfully for a mile if there have be need , and of love it the more tenderly for that labor ; but to a aunt who do not recognize she infant nephew as , and have nothing to do for he but to admire , he behavior be apt to appear monotonous , and the interest of watch he exhaustible . this possibility be quite hide from , who feel that 's childless widowhood fell in quite prettily with the birth of little Arthur ( baby be name after ) . " Dodo be just the creature not to mind about have anything of she own -- child or anything ! " say to she husband . " and if she have have a baby , it never could have be such a dear as . could it , ? " not if it have be like , " say , conscious of some indirectness in he answer , and of hold a strictly private opinion as to the perfection of he first - bear . " no ! just imagine ! really it be a mercy , " say ; " and I think it be very nice for to be a widow . she can be just as fond of we baby as if it be she own , and she can have as many notion of she own as she like . " " it be a pity she be not a queen , " say the devout . " but what should we have be then ? we must have be something else , " say , object to so laborious a flight of imagination . " I like she better as she be . " hence , when she find that be make arrangement for she final departure to , raise she eyebrow with disappointment , and in she quiet unemphatic way shoot a needle - arrow of sarcasm . " what will you do at , ? you say yourself there be nothing to be do there : everybody be so clean and well off , it make you quite melancholy . and here you have be so happy go all about with into the worst backyard . and now uncle be abroad , you and can have it all you own way ; and I be sure do everything you tell he . " " I shall often come here , and I shall see how baby grow all the better , " say . " but you will never see he wash , " say ; " and
and that be quite the best part of the day . " she be almost pout : it do seem to she very hard in to go away from the baby when she might stay . " dear , I will come and stay all night on purpose , " say ; " but I want to be alone now , and in my own home . I wish to know the Farebrother better , and to talk to about what there be to be do in . " 's native strength of will be no longer all convert into resolute submission . she have a great yearning to be at , and be simply determined to go , not feel bound to tell all she reason . but every one around she disapprove . be much pain , and offer that they should all migrate to for a few month with the sacred ark , otherwise call a cradle : at that period a man could hardly know what to propose if be reject . the , just return from a visit to she daughter in town , wish , at least , that . should be write to , and invite to accept the office of companion to : it be not credible that Dorothea as a young widow would think of live alone in the house at . . have be reader and secretary to royal personage , and in point of knowledge and sentiment even could have nothing to object to she . Cadwallader say , privately , " you will certainly go mad in that house alone , my dear . you will see vision . we have all get to exert ourselves a little to keep sane , and call thing by the same name as other people call they by . to be sure , for younger son and woman who have no money , it be a sort of provision to go mad : they be take care of then . but you must not run into that . I dare say you be a little bore here with we good dowager ; but think what a bore you might become yourself to you fellow - creature if you be always play tragedy queen and take thing sublimely . sit alone in that library at you may fancy yourself rule the weather ; you must get a few people round you who would not believe you if you tell they . that be a good lowering medicine . " " I never call everything by the same name that all the people about I do , " say , stoutly . " but I suppose you have find out you mistake , my dear , " say Cadwallader , " and that be a proof of sanity . " be aware of the sting , but it do not hurt she . " no , " she say , " I still think that the greater part of the world be mistaken about many thing . surely one may be sane and yet think so , since the greater part of the world have often have to come round from its opinion . " say no more on that point to , but to she husband she remark , " it will be well for she to marry again as soon as it be proper , if one could get she among the right people . of course the would not wish it . but I see clearly a husband be the best thing to keep she in order . if we be not so poor I would invite . he will be marqui some day , and there be no denying that she would make a good marchioness : she look handsomer than ever in she mourning . " " my dear , do let the poor woman alone . such contrivance be of no use , " say the easy rector . " no use ? how be matches make , except by bring man and woman together ? and it be a shame that she uncle should have run away and shut up the just now . there ink to be plenty of eligible match invite to and the Grange . be precisely the man : full of plan for make the people happy in a soft - head sort of way . that would just suit . " " let choose for herself , . " " that be the nonsense you wise man talk ! how can she choose if she have no variety to choose from ? a woman 's choice usually mean take the only man she can get . Mark my word , . if she friend do not exert themselves , there will be a worse business than the business yet . " " for heaven 's sake do not touch on that topic , ! it be a very sore point with he would be deeply offende if you enter on it to he unnecessarily . " " I have never enter on it , " say , open she hand . " tell I all about the will at the beginning , without any asking of mine . " " yes , yes ; but they want the thing hush up , and I understand that the young fellow be go out of the neighborhood . " say nothing , but give she husband three significant nod , with a very sarcastic expression in she dark eye . quietly persist in spite of remonstrance and persuasion . so by the end of the shutter be all open at , and the morning gaze calmly into the library , shine on the row of note - book as it shine on the weary waste plan with huge stone , the mute memorial of a forget faith ; and the evening laden with rose
rose enter silently into the blue - green boudoir where choose oftenest to sit . at first she walk into every room , question the eighteen month of she married life , and carry on she thought as if they be a speech to be hear by she husband . then , she linger in the library and could not be at rest till she have carefully range all the note - book as she imagine that he would wish to see they , in orderly sequence . the pity which have be the restraining compelle motive in she life with he still cling about he image , even while she remonstrate with he in indignant thought and tell he that he be unjust . one little act of hers may perhaps be smile at as superstitious . the Synoptical Tabulation for the use of , she carefully enclose and seal , write within the envelope , " I could not use it . do you not see now that I could not submit my soul to yours , by work hopelessly at what I have no belief in -- ? " then she deposit the paper in she own desk . that silent colloquy be perhaps only the more earnest because underneath and through it all there be always the deep long which have really determin she to come to . the longing be to see . she do not know any good that could come of they meeting : she be helpless ; she hand have be tie from make up to he for any unfairness in he lot . but she soul thirst to see he . how could it be otherwise ? if a princess in the day of enchantment have see a four -footed creature from among those which live in herd come to she once and again with a human gaze which rest upon she with choice and beseech , what would she think of in she journeying , what would she look for when the herd pass she ? surely for the gaze which have find she , and which she would know again . life would be no better than candle - light tinsel and daylight rubbish if we spirit be not touch by what have be , to issue of longing and constancy . it be true that want to know the Farebrother better , and especially to talk to the new rector , but also true that remember what have tell she about and little , she count on 's come to Lowick to see the Farebrother family . the very first , _before she enter the church , she see he as she have see he the last time she be there , alone in the clergyman 's pew ; but _when she enter he figure be gone . in the week - day when she go to see the lady at the Rectory , she listen in vain for some word that they might let fall about ; but it seem to she that talk of every one else in the neighborhood and out of it . " probably some of 's hearer may follow he to Lowick sometimes . do you not think so ? " say , rather despise herself for have a secret motive in ask the question . " if they be wise they will , , " say the old lady . " I see that you set a right value on my son 's preaching . he grandfather on my side be a excellent clergyman , but he father be in the law :-- most exemplary and honest nevertheless , which be a reason for we never be rich . they say be a woman and capricious . but sometimes she be a good woman and give to those who merit , which have be the case with you , , who have give a living to my son . " recur to she knitt with a dignified satisfaction in she neat little effort at oratory , but this be not what want to hear . poor thing ! she do not even know whether be still at , and there be no one whom she da to ask , unless it be Lydgate . but just now she could not see Lydgate without send for he or go to seek he . perhaps Will Ladislaw , have heard of that strange ban against he leave by , have feel it better that he and she should not meet again , and perhaps she be wrong to wish for a meeting that other might find many good reason against . " I do wish it " come at the end of those wise reflection as naturally as a sob after hold the breath . and the meeting do happen , but in a formal way quite unexpected by she . one morning , about eleven , be seat in she boudoir with a map of the land attach to the manor and other papers before she , which be to help she in make a exact statement for herself of she income and affair . she have not yet apply herself to she work , but be seat with she hand fold on she lap , look out along the avenue of lime to the distant field . every leaf be at rest in the sunshine , the familiar scene be changeless , and seem to represent the prospect of she life , full of motiveless ease -- motiveless , if she own energy could not seek out reason for ardent action . the widow 's cap of those time make a oval frame for the face , and have a crown stand up ; the dress be a experiment in the utmost lay on of crape ; but this heavy solemnity of clothing make she face look all the younger , with
with its recover bloom , and the sweet , inquire candor of she eye . she reverie be break by , who come to say that be below , and beg permission to see Madam if it be not too early . " I will see he , " say , rise immediately . " let he be show into the drawing - room . " the drawing - room be the most neutral room in the house to she -- the one least associate with the trial of she married life : the damask match the wood - work , which be all white and gold ; there be two tall mirror and table with nothing on they -- in brief , it be a room where you have no reason for sitting in one place rather than in another . it be below the boudoir , and have also a bow - window look out on the avenue . but when show into it the window be open ; and a win visitor , buz in and out now and then without mind the furniture , make the room look less formal and uninhabited . " to see you here again , sir , " say , linger to adjust a blind . " I be only come to say good - by , , " say , who wish even the butler to know that he be too proud to hang about now she be a rich widow . " very sorry to hear it , sir , " say , retire . of course , as a servant who be to be tell nothing , he know the fact of which be still ignorant , and have draw he inference ; indeed , have not differ from he betroth when she say , " you master be as jealous as a fiend -- and no reason . madam would look higher than , else I do not know she . 's maid say there be a lord come who be to marry she when the mourning 's over . " there be not many moment for to walk about with he hat in he hand before enter . the meeting be very different from that first meeting in when will have be embarrassed and . this time he feel miserable but determined , while she be in a state of agitation which could not be hide . just outside the door she have feel that this long - for meeting be after all too difficult , and when she see will advanc towards she , the deep blush which be rare in she come with painful suddenness . neither of they know how it be , but neither of they speak . she give she hand for a moment , and then they go to sit down near the window , she on one settee and he on another opposite . will be peculiarly uneasy : it seem to he not like that the mere fact of she be a widow should cause such a change in she manner of receive he ; and he know of no other condition which could have affect they previous relation to each other -- except that , as he imagination at once tell he , she friend might have be poiso she mind with they suspicion of he . " I hope I have not presume too much in call , " say ; " I could not bear to leave the neighborhood and begin a new life without see you to say good - by . " " Presume ? surely not . I should have think it unkind if you have not wish to see I , " say , she habit of speak with perfect genuineness assert itself through all she uncertainty and agitation . " be you go away immediately ? " " very soon , I think . I intend to go to town and eat my dinner as a barrister , since , they say , that be the preparation for all public business . there will be a great deal of political work to be do by - and - by , and I mean to try and do some of it . other man have manage to win a honorable position for themselves without family or money . " " and that will make it all the more honorable , " say , ardently . " , you have so many talents . I have hear from my uncle how well you speak in public , so that every one be sorry when you leave off , and how clearly you can explain thing . and you care that justice should be do to every one . I be so glad . when we be in , I think you only care for poetry and art , and the thing that adorn life for we who be well off . but now I know you think about the rest of the world . " while she be speak have lose she personal embarrassment , and have become like she former self . she look at with a direct glance , full of delighted confidence . " you approve of my go away for year , then , and never come here again till I have make myself of some mark in the world ? " say , try hard to reconcile the utmost pride with the utmost effort to get a expression of strong feeling from . she be not aware how long it be before she answer . she have turn she head and be look out of the window on the rose - bushes , which seem to have in they the summer of all the year when will would be away . this be not judicious behavior . but never think of study she manners : she think only
only of bowing to a sad necessity which divide she from . those first word of he about he intentions have seem to make everything clear to she : he know , she suppose , all about 's final conduct in relation to he , and it have come to he with the same sort of shock as to herself . he have never feel more than friendship for she -- have never have anything in he mind to justify what she feel to be she husband 's outrage on the feeling of both : and that friendship he still feel . something which may be call a inward silent sob have go on in before she say with a pure voice , just trembl in the last word as if only from its liquid flexibility -- " yes , it must be right for you to do as you say . I shall be very happy when I hear that you have make you value feel . but you must have patience . it will perhaps be a long while . " will never quite know how it be that he save himself from fall down at she foot , when the " long while " come forth with it be gentle tremor . he use to say that the horrible hue and surface of she crape dress be most likely the sufficient control force . he sit still , however , and only say -- " I shall never hear from you . and you will forget all about I . " " no , " say , " I shall never forget you . I have never forget any one whom I once know . my life have never be crowd , and seem not likely to be so . and I have a great deal of space for memory at , have not I ? " she smile . " ! " will burst out passionately , rise , with he hat still in he hand , and walk away to a marble table , where he suddenly turn and lean he back against it . the blood have mount to he face and neck , and he look almost angry . it have see to he as if they be like two creature slowly turn to marble in each other 's presence , while they heart be conscious and they eye be year . but there be no help for it . it should never be true of he that in this meeting to which he have come with bitter resolution he have end by a confession which might be interpret into ask for she fortune . moreover , it be actually true that he be fearful of the effect which such confession might have on herself . she look at he from that distance in some trouble , imagine that there might have be a offence in she word . but all the while there be a current of think in she about he probable want of money , and the impossibility of she help he . if she uncle have be at home , something might have be do through he ! it be this preoccupation with the hardship of 's want money , while she have what ought to have be he share , which lead she to say , see that he remain silent and look away from she -- " I wonder whether you would like to have that miniature which hang up - stair -- I mean that beautiful miniature of you grandmother . I think it be not right for I to keep it , if you would wish to have it . it be wonderfully like you . " " you be very good , " say , irritably . " no ; I do not mind about it . it be not very consol to have one 's own likeness . it would be more consol if other want to have it . " " I think you would like to cherish she memory -- I think -- " Dorothea break off a instant , she imagination suddenly warn she away from 's history --" you would surely like to have the miniature as a family memorial . " " why should I have that , when I have nothing else ! a man with only a portmanteau for he stowage must keep he memorial in he head . " will speak at random : he be merely vent he petulance ; it be a little too exasperat to have he grandmother 's portrait offer he at that moment . but to 's feel he word have a peculiar sting . she rise and say with a touch of indignation as well as yohauteu -- " you be much the happier of we two , , to have nothing . " will be start . whatever the word might be , the tone seem like a dismissal ; and quit he leaning posture , he walk a little way towards she . they eye meet , but with a strange questioning gravity . something be keep they mind aloof , and each be left to conjecture what be in the other . will have really never think of himself as have a claim of inheritance on the property which be hold by , and would have require a narrative to make he understand she present feeling . " I never feel it a misfortune to have nothing till now , " he say . " but poverty may be as bad as leprosy , if it divide we from what we must care for . " the word cut to the heart , and make she relent . she answer in a tone of sad fellowship . " Sorrow come in so many way . two year ago I have no notion of that -- I mean
mean of the unexpected way in which trouble come , and ty we hand , and make we silent when we long to speak . I use to despise woman a little for not shape they life more , and do better thing . I be very fond of do as I like , but I have almost give it up , " she end , smile playfully . " I have not give up do as I like , but I can very seldom do it , " say . he be stand two yard from she with he mind full of contradictory desire and resolve -- desire some unmistakable proof that she love he , and yet dread the position into which such a proof might bring he . " the thing one most long for may be surround with condition that would be intolerable . " at this moment enter and say , " be in the library , madam . " " ask to come in here , " say , immediately . it be as if the same electric shock have pass through she and . each of they feel proudly resistant , and neither look at the other , while they await 's entrance . after shak hand with , he bow as slightly as possible to , who repay the slightness exactly , and then go towards , say -- " I must say good - by , ; and probably for a long while . " Dorothea put out she hand and say she good - by cordially . the sense that be depreciat , and behave rudely to he , rouse she resolution and dignity : there be no touch of confusion in she manner . and when will have leave the room , she look with such calm self -possession at , say , " how be ? " that he be oblige to behave as if nothing have annoye he . and what would be the use of behave otherwise ? indeed , shrank with so much dislike from the association even in thought of with as she possible lover , that he would himself have wish to avoid a outward show of displeasure which would have recognize the disagreeable possibility . if any one have ask he why he shrank in that way , I be not sure that he would at first have say anything fuller or more precise than " That_ ! " --though on reflection he might have urge that 's codicil , bar 's marriage with , except under a penalty , be enough to cast unfitness over any relation at all between they . he aversion be all the stronger because he feel himself unable to interfere . but be a power in a way unguessed by himself . enter at that moment , he be a incorporation of the strongest reason through which 's pride become a repellent force , keep he asunder from . . Hath she she fault ? I would you have they too . they be the fruity must of soundest wine ; or say , they be regenerat fire such as hath turn the dense black element into a crystal pathway for the sun . if be the season of hope , it be often so only in the sense that we elders be hopeful about we ; for no age be so apt as youth to think its emotion , parting , and resolves be the last of they kind . each crisis seem final , simply because it be new . we be tell that the oldest inhabitant in do not cease to be agitate by the earthquake , but they probably see beyond each shock , and reflect that there be plenty more to come . to , still in that time of youth when the eyes with they long full lash look out after they rain of tear unsoiled and unwearied as a freshly open passion - flower , that morning 's part with seem to be the close of they personal relation . he be go away into the distance of unknown year , and if ever he come back he would be another man . the actual state of he mind --he prould resolve to give the lie beforehand to any suspicion that he would play the needy adventurer seek a rich woman -- lay quite out of she imagination , and she have interpret all he behavior easily enough by she supposition that 's codicil seem to he , as it do to she , a gross and cruel interdict on any active friendship between they . they young delight in speak to each other , and say what no one else would care to hear , be forever ended , and become a treasure of the past . for this very reason she dwelt on it without inward check . that unique happiness too be dead , and in its shadowed silent chamber she might vent the passionate grief which she herself wonder at . for the first time she take down the miniature from the wall and keep it before she , like to blend the woman who have be too hardly judge with the grandson whom she own heart and judgment defend . can any one who have rejoice in woman 's tenderness think it a reproach to she that she take the little oval picture in she palm and make a bed for it there , and lean she cheek upon it , as if that would soothe the creature who have suffer unjust condemnation ? she do not know then that it be who have come to she briefly , as in a dream before awak , with the hue of morning on he wing -- that it be to whom she be sobb she farewell as he image be banish by the blameless rigor of
of irresistible day . she only feel that there be something irrevocably amiss and lose in she lot , and she thought about the future be the more readily shapen into resolve . Ardent soul , ready to construct they come life , be apt to commit themselves to the fulfilment of they own vision . one day that she go to to fulfil she promise of stay all night and see baby wash , come to dine , the rector be go on a fishing excursion . it be a warm evening , and even in the delightful drawing - room , where the fine old turf slop from the open window towards a lilied pool and well - plan mounds , the heat be enough to make in she white muslin and light curl reflect with pity on what must feel in she black dress and close cap . but this be not until some episode with baby be over , and have leave she mind at leisure . she have seat herself and take up a fan for some time before she say , in she quiet guttural -- " dear Dodo , do throw off that cap . I be sure you dress must make you feel ill . " " I be so use to the cap -- it have become a sort of shell , " say , smile . " I feel rather bare and expose when it be off . " " I must see you without it ; it make we all warm , " say , throw down she fan , and go to . it be a pretty picture to see this little lady in white muslin unfasten the widow 's cap from she more majestic sister , and toss it on to a chair . just as the coil and braid of dark - brown hair have be set free , enter the room . he look at the release head , and say , " ah ! " in a tone of satisfaction . " it be i who do it , , " say . " Dodo need not make such a slavery of she mourning ; she need not wear that cap any more among she friend . " " my dear , " say , " a widow must wear she mourn at least a year . " " not if she marry again before the end of it , " say , who have some pleasure in start she good friend the Dowager . be annoyed , and lean forward to play with 's Maltese dog . " that be very rare , I hope , " say , in a tone intend to guard against such event . " no friend of ours ever commit herself in that way except , and it be very painful to when she do so . she first husband be objectionable , which make it the greater wonder . and severely she be punish for it . they say drag she about by the hair , and hold up load pistol at she . " " oh , if she take the wrong man ! " say , who be in a decidedly wicked mood . " marriage be always bad then , first or second . priority be a poor recommendation in a husband if he have get no other . I would rather have a good second husband than a indifferent first . " " my dear , you clever tongue run away with you , " say . " I be sure you would be the last woman to marry again prematurely , if we dear rector be take away . " " oh , I make no vow ; it might be a necessary economy . it be lawful to marry again , I suppose ; else we might as well be instead of . of course if a woman accept the wrong man , she must take the consequence , and one who do it twice over deserve she fate . but if she can marry blood , beauty , and bravery -- the sooner the better . " " I think the subject of we conversation be very ill - chosen , " say , with a look of disgust . " suppose we change it . " " not on my account , , " say , determine not to lose the opportunity of free herself from certain oblique reference to excellent match . " if you be speak on my behalf , I can assure you that no question can be more indifferent and impersonal to I than second marriage . it be no more to I than if you talk of woman go fox -hunt : whether it be admirable in they or not , I shall not follow they . pray let . Cadwallader amuse herself on that subject as much as on any other . " " my dear , " say , in she stateliest way , " you do not , I hope , think there be any allusion to you in my mention . it be only a instance that occur to I . she be step - daughter to : he marry for he second wife . there could be no possible allusion to you . " " oh no , " say . " nobody choose the subject ; it all come out of 's cap . only say what be quite true . a woman could not be marry in a widow 's cap , . " " Hush , my dear ! " say . " I will not offend again . I will not even refer to or . only what be we to talk about ? I , for my part , object to the discussion of human nature , because that be the nature of rector
rector 's wife . " later in the evening , after be gone , say privately to , " really , , take you cap off make you like yourself aagain in more way than one . you speak up just as you use to do , when anything be say to displease you . but I could hardly make out whether it be that you think wrong , or . " " neither , " say . " speak out of delicacy to I , but he be mistaken in supposing that I mind what say . I should only mind if there be a law oblige I to take any piece of blood and beauty that she or anybody else recommend . " " but you know , , if you ever do marry , it would be all the better to have blood and beauty , " say , reflec that have not be richly endow with those gift , and that it would be well to caution Dorothea in time . " do not be anxious , ; I have quite other thought about my life . I shall never marry again , " say , touch she sister 's ching , and look at she with indulgent affection . be nurse she baby , and have come to say good - night to she . " really -- quite ? " say . " not anybody at all -- if he be very wonderful indeed ? " shook she head slowly . " not anybody at all . I have delightful plan . I should like to take a great deal of land , and drain it , and make a little colony , where everybody should work , and all the work should be do well . I should know every one of the people and be they friend . I be go to have great consultation with : he can tell I almost everything I want to know . " " then you _will be happy , if you have a plan , ? " say . " perhaps little Arthur will like plan when he grow up , and then he can help you . " be inform that same night that be really quite set against marry anybody at all , and be go to take to " all sort of plan , " just like what she use to have . make no remark . to he secret feel there be something repulsive in a woman 's second marriage , and no match would prevent he from feel it a sort of desecration for . he be aware that the world would regard such a sentiment as preposterous , especially in relation to a woman of one - and - twenty ; the practice of " the world " be to treat of a young widow 's second marriage as certain and probably near , and to smile with meaning if the widow act accordingly . but if do choose to espouse she solitude , he feel that the resolution would well become she . . " how happy be he bear and teach that serveth not another have will ; whose armor be he honest thought , and simple truth he only skill ! . . . . . . . this man be free from servile band have hope to rise or fear to fall ; of himself though not of lands ; and have nothing yet hath all . " -- . 's confidence in 's knowledge , which have begin on she hear that he approve of she cottage , have grow fast during she stay at , have induce she to take ride over the two estate in company with himself and , who quite return she admiration , and tell he wife that have a head for business most uncommon in a woman . it must be remembe that by " business " never mean money transaction , but the skilful application of labor . " most uncommon ! " repeat . " she say a thing I often use to think myself when I be a lad :--'Mr . , I should like to feel , if I liv to be old , that I have improve a great piece of land and build a great many good cottage , because the work be of a healthy kind while it be be do , and after it be do , man be the better for it . ' those be the very word : she see into thing in that way . " " but womanly , I hope , " say , half suspect that might not hold the true principle of subordination . " oh , you can not think ! " say , shak he head . " you would like to hear she speak , . she speak in such plain word , and a voice like music . bless I ! it remind I of bit in the ' Messiah ' -- 'and straightway there appear a multitude of the heavenly host , praise and say ;' it have a tone with it that satisfy you ear . " be very fond of music , and when he could afford it go to hear a oratorio that come within he reach , return from it with a profound reverence for this mighty structure of tone , which make he sit meditatively , look on the floor and throw much unutterable language into he outstretched hand . with this good understanding between they , it be natural that ask to undertake any business connect with the three farm and the numerous tenement attach to ; indeed , he expectation of get work for two be be fast fulfil . as he say , " business breed . " and one form of business which be begin to breed just then
then be the construction of railway . a project line be to run through parish where the cattle have hitherto graze in a peace unbroken by astonishment ; and thus it happen that the infant struggle of the railway system enter into the affair of , and determine the course of this history with regard to two person who be dear to he . the submarine railway may have its difficulty ; but the bed of the sea be not divide among various landed proprietor with claim for damage not only measurable but sentimental . in the hundr to which belong railways were as excite a topic as the or the imminent horror of , and those who hold the most decided view on the subject be woman and landholder . women both old and young regard travel by steam as presumptuous and dangerous , and argue against it by say that nothing should induce they to get into a railway carriage ; while proprietor , differ from each other in they argument as much as differ from , be yet unanimous in the opinion that in sell land , whether to the of mankind or to a company oblige to purchase , these pernicious agency must be make to pay a very high price to landowner for permission to injure mankind . but the slower wit , such as and , who both occupy land of they own , take a long time to arrive at this conclusion , they mind halt at the vivid conception of what it would be to cut the big pasture in two , and turn it into three - corner bits , which would be " nohow ; " while accommodation - bridge and high payment be remote and incredible . " the cow will all cast they calf , brother , " say . , in a tone of deep melancholy , " if the railway come across the near close ; and I should not wonder at the mare too , if she be in foal . it be a poor tale if a widow 's property be to be spa away , and the law say nothing to it . what be to hinder them from cutting right and leave if they begin ? it be well know , _I_ can not fight . " " the best way would be to say nothing , and set somebody on to send them away with a flea in they ear , when they come spying and measuring , " say . " folk do that about , by what I can understand . it be all a pretence , if the truth be know , about they be force to take one way . let them go cut in another parish . and I do not believe in any pay to make amend for bring a lot of ruffian to trample you crop . where be a company 's pocket ? " " , forgive he , get money out of a company , " say . " but that be for the manganese . that be not for railway to blow you to piece right and leave . " " well , there be this to be say , , " conclude , lower he voice in a cautious manner -- " the more spokes we put in they wheel , the more they will pay we to let them go on , if they must come whether or not . " this reasoning of 's be perhaps less thorough than he imagine , he cunning bear about the same relation to the course of railway as the cunning of a diplomatist bear to the general chill or catarrh of the solar system . but he set about acting on he view in a thoroughly diplomatic manner , by stimulating suspicion . he side of be the most remote from the village , and the house of the laboring people be either lone cottage or be collect in a hamlet call , where a water-mill and some stone - pit make a little centre of slow , heavy - shouldered industry . in the absence of any precise idea as to what railway be , public opinion in be against they ; for the human mind in that grassy corner have not the proverbial tendency to admire the unknown , hold rather that it be likely to be against the poor man , and that suspicion be the only wise attitude with regard to it . even the rumor of have not yet excite any millennial expectation in , there be no definite promise in it , as of gratuitous grain to fate 's pig , or of a publican at the " weight and Scale " who would braw beer for nothing , or of a offer on the part of the three neighboring farmer to raise wage during winter . and without distinct good of this kind in its promise , seem on a footing with the bragging of pedler , which be a hint for distrust to every know person . the man of be not ill - feed , and be less give to fanaticism than to a strong muscular suspicion ; less inclined to believe that they be peculiarly care for by heaven , than to regard heaven itself as rather dispose to take they in -- a disposition observable in the weather . thus the mind of be exactly of the sort for to work upon , he have more plenteous idea of the same order , with a suspicion of heaven and earth which be better fed and more entirely at leisure . be overseer of the roads at that time , and on he slow - pace cob often take he round by to look at the workman get the stone there , pause with a mysterious deliberation , which might have misl
misl you into supposing that he have some other reason for stay than the mere want of impulse to move . after look for a long while at any work that be go on , he would raise he eye a little and look at the horizon ; finally he would shake he bridle , touch he horse with the whip , and get it to move slowly onward . the hour - hand of a clock be quick by comparison with , who have a agreeable sense that he could afford to be slow . he be in the habit of pausing for a cautious , vaguly designe chat with every hedger or ditcher on he way , and be especially willing to listen even to news which he have hear before , feel himself at a advantage over all narrator in partially disbelieve they . one day , however , he get into a dialogue with , a wagoner , in which he himself contribute information . he wish to know whether have see fellow with stave and instrument spy about : they call themselves railroad people , but there be no telling what they be or what they mean to do . the least they pretend be that they be go to cut into six and seven . " why , there will be no stirrin ' from one pla -ace to another , " say , think of he wagon and horse . " not a bit , " say . " and cut up fine land such as this parish ! let them go into , say I . but there be no knowing what there be at the bottom of it . be what they put for 'ard ; but it be to do harm to the land and the poor man in the long - run . " " why , they be chap , I reckon , " say , who have a dim notion of as a centre of hostility to the country . " ay , to be sure . and in some part against , by what I have hear say , the folk fall on th'ey when they be spy , and break they peep - hole as they carry , and drive 'em away , so as they know better than come again . " " it war good foon , I would be bound , " say , whose fun be much restrict by circumstance . " well , I would not meddle with them myself , " say . " but some say this country 's see its best day , and the sign be , as it be be overrun with these fellows trampl right and leave , and want to cut it up into railway ; and all for the big traffic to swallow up the little , so as there sha not be a team leave on the land , nor a whip to crack . " " I will crack _my whip about they ear 'n , afore they bring it to that , though , " say , while , shak he bridle , move onward . Netle - see needs no digging . the ruin of this countryside by railroad be discuss , not only at the " weight and Scale , " but in the hay - field , where the muster of work hand give opportunity for talk such as be rarely have through the rural year . one morning , not long after that interview between and , in which she confess to he she feel for , it happen that she father have some business which take he to 's farm in the direction of : it be to measure and value a outlying piece of land belong to , which expect to dispose of advantageously for ( it must be confess that he bia be towards get the best possible term from railroad company ) . he put up he gig at 's , and in walking with he assistant and measuring - chain to the scene of he work , he encounter the party of the company 's agent , who be adjust they spirit -level . after a little chat he leave they , observe that by - and - by they would reach he again where he be go to measure . it be one of those gray morning after light rains , which become delicious about twelve o'clock , when the cloud part a little , and the scent of the earth be sweet along the lane and by the hedgerow . the scent would have be sweeter to , who be come along the lane on horseback , if he mind have not be worry by unsuccessful effort to imagine what he be to do , with he father on one side expect he straightway to enter the Church , with on the other threatening to forsake he if he do enter it , and with the work - day world show no eager need whatever of a young gentleman without capital and generally unskilled . it be the harder to 's disposition because he father , satisfy that he be no longer rebellious , be in good humor with he , and have send he on this pleasant ride to see after some greyhound . even when he have fix on what he should do , there would be the task of tell he father . but it must be admit that the fixing , which have to come first , be the more difficult task :-- what secular avocation on earth be there for a young man ( whose friend could not get he a " appointment " ) which be at once gentlemanly , lucrative , and to be follow without special knowledge ? ride along the lane by in this mood , and slacken he pace
pace while he reflect whether he should venture to go round by to call on , he could see over the hedge from one field to another . suddenly a noise rouse he attention , and on the far side of a field on he left hand he could see six or seven man in smock - frock with hay - fork in they hand make a offensive approach towards the four railway agent who be face they , while and he assistant be hasten across the field to join the threaten group . , delay a few moment by have to find the gate , could not gallop up to the spot before the party in smock - frock , whose work of turn the hay have not be too pressing after swallow they mid-day beer , be drive the man in coat before they with they hay - fork ; while 's assistant , a lad of seventeen , who have snatch up the spirit - level at 's order , have be knock down and seem to be lie helpless . the coated man have the advantage as runners , and cover they retreat by get in front of the smock - frock and charge they suddenly enough to throw they chase into confusion . " what do you confound fools mean ? " shoute , pursue the divided group in a zigzag , and cutte right and leave with he whip . " I will swear to every one of you before the magistrate . you have knock the lad down and kill he , for what I know . you will every one of you be hang at the next assize , if you do not mind , " say , who afterwards laugh heartily as he remember he own phrase . the laborer have be drive through the gate - way into they hay - field , and have check he horse , when , observe himself at a safe challenging distance , turn back and shoute a defiance which he do not know to be . " yo be a coward , yo be . yo git off you horse , young measter , and I will have a round wi' ye , I wull . yo da not come on wi'out you hoss a ' whip . I would soon knock the breath out on ye , I would . " " wait a minute , and I will come back presently , and have a round with you all in turn , if you like , " say , who feel confidence in he power of boxing with he dearly belove breth . but just now he want to hasten back to and the prostrate youth . the lad 's ankle be strain , and he be in much pain from it , but he be no further hurt , and place he on the horse that he might ride to 's and be take care of there . " let they put the horse in the stable , and tell the surveyor they can come back for they trap , " say . " the ground be clear now . " " no , no , " say , " here be a breakage . they will have to give up for to - day , and it will be as well . here , take the thing before you on the horse , . they will see you come , and they will turn back . " " I be glad I happen to be here at the right moment , , " say , as ride away . " no know what might have happene if the cavalry have not come up in time . " " ay , ay , it be lucky , " say , speak rather absently , and look towards the spot where he have be at work at the moment of interruption . " but -- deuce take it -- this be what come of man be fool -- I be hinder of my day 's work . I can not get along without somebody to help I with the measuring - chain . however ! " he be begin to move towards the spot with a look of vexation , as if he have forget 's presence , but suddenly he turn round and say quickly , " what have you get to do to - day , young fellow ? " " Nothing , . I will help you with pleasure -- can I ? " say , with a sense that he should be court when he be help she father . " well , you must not mind stoop and get hot . " " I do not mind anything . only I want to go first and have a round with that hulky fellow who turn to challenge I . it would be a good lesson for he . I shall not be five minute . " " Nonsense ! " say , with he most peremptory intonation . " I shall go and speak to the man myself . it be all ignorance . somebody have be tell they lie . the poor fool do not know any better . " " I shall go with you , then , " say . " no , no ; stay where you be . I do not want you young blood . I can take care of myself . " be a powerful man and know little of any fear except the fear of hurte other and the fear of have to speechify . but he feel it he duty at this moment to try and give a little harangue . there be a striking mixture in he -- which come from he have always be a hard - work man himself -- of rigorous notion about workman
workman and practical indulgence towards they . to do a good day 's work and to do it well , he hold to be part of they welfare , as it be the chief part of he own happiness ; but he have a strong sense of fellowship with they . when he advanc towards the laborer they have not go to work again , but be stand in that form of rural grouping which consist in each turn a shoulder towards the other , at a distance of two or three yard . they look rather sulkily at , who walk quickly with one hand in he pocket and the other thrust between the buttons of he waistcoat , and have he every - day mild air when he pause among they . " why , my lad , how be this ? " he begin , take as usual to brief phrase , which seem pregnant to himself , because he have many thought lie under they , like the abundant root of a plant that just manage to peep above the water . " how come you to make such a mistake as this ? somebody have be tell you lie . you think those man up there want to do mischief . " " Aw ! " be the answer , drop at interval by each accord to he degree of unreadiness . " Nonsense ! no such thing ! they be look out to see which way the railroad be to take . now , my lad , you can not hinder the railroad : it will be make whether you like it or not . and if you go fight against it , you will get yourselves into trouble . the law give those man leave to come here on the land . the owner have nothing to say against it , and if you meddle with they you will have to do with the constable and , and with the handcuffs and Middlemarch jail . and you might be in for it now , if anybody inform against you . " pause here , and perhaps the greatest orator could not have choose either he pause or he image better for the occasion . " but come , you do not mean any harm . somebody tell you the railroad be a bad thing . that be a lie . it may do a bit of harm here and there , to this and to that ; and so do the sun in heaven . but the railway be a good thing . " " Aw ! good for the big folk to make money out on , " say old , who have stay behind turn he hay while the other have be go on they spree ;--" I and see lot of ' thing turn up sin' I war a young un -- the war a ' the peace , and the canell , a ' the oald , a ' the ' , a ' the new , a ' the new un as have get a new ne -ame -- an' it be be all aloike to the poor mon . what be the canell be t ' he ? they and bring he neyther I - at nor be - acon , nor wage to lay by , if he do not save it wi' clemmin ' he own inside . ha ' get wusser for he sin' I war a young un . a ' so it will be wi' the railroad . they will on 'y leave the poor mon furder behind . but they be fool as meddle , and so I tell the chap here . this be the big folk 's world , this be . but yo be for the big folk , , yo be . " be a wiry old laborer , of a type lingering in those time -- who have he savings in a stocking - foot , live in a lone cottage , and be not to be wrotch on by any oratory , have as little of the feudal spirit , and believe as little , as if he have not be totally unacquainted with the of and the rights of man . be in a difficulty know to any person attempt in dark time and unassist by miracle to reason with rustic who be in possession of a undeniable truth which they know through a hard process of feeling , and can let it fall like a giant 's club on you neatly carve argument for a social benefit which they do not feel . have no cant at command , even if he could have choose to use it ; and he have be accustom to meet all such difficulty in no other way than by do he " business " faithfully . he answer -- " if you do not think well of I , , never mind ; that be neither here nor there now . thing may be bad for the poor man -- bad they be ; but I want the lad here not to do what will make thing worse for themselves . the cattle may have a heavy load , but it will not help them to throw it over into the roadside pit , when it be partly they own fodder . " " we war on 'y for a bit of ' foon , " say , who be begin to see consequence . " that war all we war arter . " " well , promise I not to meddle again , and I will see that nobody inform against you . " " I 'n ne 'er meddle , an' I 'n no call to promise , " say . " no , but the rest . come , I be as hard at work
work as any of you to - day , and I can not spare much time . you will be quiet without the constable . " " Aw , we wooant meddle -- they may do as they loike for oos " -- be the form in which get he pledge ; and then he hasten back to , who have follow he , and watch he in the gateway . they go to work , and help vigorously . he spirit have risen , and he heartily enjoy a good slip in the moist earth under the hedgerow , which soil he perfect summer trousers . be it he successful onset which have elate he , or the satisfaction of help 's father ? something more . the accident of the morning have help he frustrated imagination to shape a employment for himself which have several attraction . I be not sure that certain fibre in 's mind have not resume they old vibration towards the very end which now reveal itself to . for the effective accident be but the touch of fire where there be oil and tow ; and it al way appear to that the railway bring the need touch . but they go on in silence except when they business demand speech . at last , when they have finish and be walk away , say -- " a young fellow need not be a to do this sort of work , eh , ? " " I wish I have take to it before I have think of be a , " say . he pause a moment , and then add , more hesitatingly , " do you think I be too old to learn you business , ? " " my business be of many sort , my boy , " say , smile . " a good deal of what I know can only come from experience : you can not learn it off as you learn thing out of a book . but you be young enough to lay a foundation yet . " pronounce the last sentence emphatically , but pause in some uncertainty . he have be under the impression lately that have make up he mind to enter the Church . " you do think I could do some good at it , if I be to try ? " say , more eagerly . " that depend , " say , turn he head on one side and lower he voice , with the air of a man who feel himself to be say something deeply religious . " you must be sure of two thing : you must love you work , and not be always look over the edge of it , want you play to begin . and the other be , you must not be asham of you work , and think it would be more honorable to you to be do something else . you must have a pride in you own work and in learning to do it well , and not be always say , there be this and there be that -- if I have this or that to do , I might make something of it . no matter what a man be -- I would not give twopence for he " -- here 's mouth look bitter , and he snap he finger -- " whether he be the prime minister or the rick - thatcher , if he do not do well what he undertake to do . " " I can never feel that I should do that in be a clergyman , " say , mean to take a step in argument . " then let it alone , my boy , " say , abruptly , " else you will never be easy . or , if you _are_ easy , you will be a poor stick . " " that be very nearly what think about it , " say , coloring . " I think you must know what I feel for , : I hope it do not displease you that I have always love she better than any one else , and that I shall never love any one as I love she . " the expression of 's face be visibly soften while speak . but he swing he head with a solemn slowness , and say -- " that make thing more serious , Fred , if you want to take 's happiness into you keeping . " " I know that , , " say , eagerly , " and I would do anything for _her . she say she will never have I if I go into the Church ; and I shall be the most miserable devil in the world if I lose all hope of . really , if I could get some other profession , business -- anything that I be at all fit for , I would work hard , I would deserve you good opinion . I should like to have to do with outdoor thing . I know a good deal about land and cattle already . I use to believe , you know -- though you will think I rather foolish for it -- that I should have land of my own . I be sure knowledge of that sort would come easily to I , especially if I could be under you in any way . " " Softly , my boy , " say , have the image of " " before he eye . " what have you say to you father about all this ? " " nothing , yet ; but I must tell he . I be only wait to know what I can do instead of enter the Church . I be very sorry to disappoind he , but a
a man ought to be allow to judge for himself when he be four - and - twenty . how could I know when I be fifteen , what it would be right for I to do now ? my education be a mistake . " " but hearke to this , , " say . " be you sure be fond of you , or would ever have you ? " " I ask to talk to she , because she have forbide I -- I do not know what else to do , " say , apologetically . " and he say that I have every reason to hope , if I can put myself in a honorable position -- I mean , out of the I dare say you think it unwarrantable in I , , to be trouble you and obtrud my own wish about , before I have do anything at all for myself . of course I have not the least claim -- indeed , I have already a debt to you which will never be discharged , even when I have be , able to pay it in the shape of money . " " yes , my boy , you have a claim , " say , with much feeling in he voice . " the young one have always a claim on the old to help they forward . I be young myself once and have to do without much help ; but help would have be welcome to I , if it have be only for the fellow - feeling 's sake . but I must consider . come to I to - morrow at the office , at nine o'clock . at the office , mind . " would take no important step without consult , but it must be confess that before he reach home he have take he resolution . with regard to a large number of matter about which other man be decide or obstinate , he be the most easily manageable man in the world . he never know what meat he would choose , and if have say that they ought to live in a four -roomed cottage , in order to save , he would have say , " let we go , " without inquire into detail . but where 's feeling and judgament strongly pronounce , he be a ruler ; and in spite of he mildness and timidity in reprove , every one about he know that on the exceptional occasion when he choose , he be absolute . he never , indeed , choose to be absolute except on some one else 's behalf . on ninety - nine point decide , but on the hundredth she be often aware that she would have to perform the singularly difficult task of carry out she own principle , and to make herself subordinate . " it be come round as I think , , " say , when they be seat alone in the evening . he have already narrate the adventure which have bring about 's sharing in he work , but have keep back the further result . " the child _are fond of each other -- I mean , and . " lay she work on she knee , and fix she penetrating eye anxiously on she husband . " after we would do we work , pour it all out to I . he can not bear to be a clergyman , and say she will not have he if he be one ; and the lad would like to be under I and give he mind to business . and I have determi to take he and make a man of he . " " ! " say , in a deep contralto , expressive of resign astonishment . " it be a fine thing to do , " say , settle himself firmly against the back of he chair , and grasp the elbow . " I shall have trouble with he , but I think I shall carry it through . the lad love , and a true love for a good woman be a great thing , . it shape many a rough fellow . " " have speak to you on the subject ? " say , secretly a little hurt that she have to be inform on it herself . " not a word . I ask she about once ; I give she a bit of a warning . but she assure I she would never marry a idle self -indulgent man --nothing since . but it seem Fred set on to talk to she , because she have forbide he to speak himself , and have find out that she be fond of , but say he must not be a clergyman . 's heart be fix on , that I can see : it give I a good opinion of the lad -- and we always like he , . " " it be a pity for , I think , " say . " why -- a pity ? " " because , , she might have have a man who be worth twenty 's . " " ah ? " say , with surprise . " I firmly believe that be attach to she , and mean to make she a offer ; but of course , now that have use he as a envoy , there be a end to that better prospect . " there be a severe precision in 's utterance . she be vex and disappoint , but she be bend on abstaining from useless word . be silent a few moments under a conflict of feeling . he look at the floor and move he head and hand in accompaniment to some inward argumentation . at last he say -- "
" that would have make I very proud and happy , , and I should have be glad for you sake . I have always feel that you belonging have never be on a level with you . but you take I , though I be a plain man . " " I take the best and cleverest man I have ever know , " say , convince that _she would never have love any one who come short of that mark . " well , perhaps other think you might have do better . but it would have be worse for I . and that be what touch I close about . the lad be good at bottom , and clever enough to do , if he be put in the right way ; and he love and honor my daughter beyond anything , and she have give he a sort of promise accord to what he turn out . I say , that young man 's soul be in my hand ; and I will do the best I can for he , so help I ! it be my duty , . " be not give to tear , but there be a large one roll down she face before she husband have finish . it come from the pressure of various feeling , in which there be much affection and some vexation . she wip it away quickly , say -- " few man besides you would think it a duty to add to they anxiety in that way , . " " that signify nothing -- what other man would think . I have get a clear feeling inside I , and that I shall follow ; and I hope you heart will go with I , , in make everything as light as can be to , poor child . " , lean back in he chair , look with anxious appeal towards he wife . she rise and kiss he , say , " bless you , ! we child have a good father . " but she go out and have a hearty cry to make up for the suppression of she word . she feel sure that she husband 's conduct would be misunderstood , and about she be rational and unhopeful . which would turn out to have the more foresight in it -- she rationality or 's ardent generosity ? when go to the office the next morning , there be a test to be go through which he be not prepare for . " now , " say , " you will have some desk - work . I have always do a good deal of write myself , but I can not do without help , and as I want you to understand the account and get the value into you head , I mean to do without another clerk . so you must buckle to . how be you at writing and arithmetic ? " feel a awkward movement of the heart ; he have not think of desk - work ; but he be in a resolute mood , and not go to shrink . " I be not afraid of arithmetic , : it always come easily to I . I think you know my writing . " " let we see , " say , take up a pen , examine it carefully and hand it , well dip , to with a sheet of rule paper . " copy I a line or two of that valuation , with the figure at the end . " at that time the opinion exist that it be beneath a gentleman to write legibly , or with a hand in the least suitable to a clerk . write the line demand in a hand as gentlemanly as that of any viscount or bishop of the day : the vowel be all alike and the consonant only distinguishable as turn up or down , the stroke have a blotted solidity and the letter disdain to keep the line -- in short , it be a manuscript of that venerable kind easy to interpret when you know beforehand what the writer mean . as look on , he visage show a grow depression , but when hand he the paper he give something like a snarl , and rap the paper passionately with the back of he hand . bad work like this dispell all 's mildness . " the deuce ! " he exclaim , snarlingly . " to think that this be a country where a man 's education may cost hundred and hundred , and it turn you out this ! " then in a more pathetic tone , push up he spectacle and look at the unfortunate scribe , " the have mercy on we , Fred , I can not put up with this ! " " what can I do , ? " say , whose spirit have sink very low , not only at the estimate of he handwriting , but at the vision of himself as liable to be rank with office clerk . " do ? why , you must learn to form you letter and keep the line . what be the use of write at all if nobody can understand it ? " ask , energetically , quite preoccupy with the bad quality of the work . " be there so little business in the world that you must be send puzzle over the country ? but that be the way people be bring up . I should lose no end of time with the letter some people send I , if do not make they out for I . it be disgust . " here toss the paper from he . any stranger pee into the office at that moment might have wonder what be the
the drama between the indignant man of business , and the fine - look young fellow whose blond complexion be get rather patchy as he bit he lip with mortification . be struggle with many thought . have be so kind and encourage at the beginning of they interview , that gratitude and hopefulness have be at a high pitch , and the downfall be proportionate . he have not think of desk - work -- in fact , like the majority of young gentleman , he want a occupation which should be free from disagreeable . I can not tell what might have be the consequence if he have not distinctly promise himself that he would go to to see and tell she that he be engage to work under she father . he do not like to disappoint himself there . " I be very sorry , " be all the word that he could muster . but be already relent . " we must make the best of it , , " he begin , with a return to he usual quiet tone . " every man can learn to write . I tatch myself . go at it with a will , and sit up at night if the day - time be not enough . we will be patient , my boy . shall go on with the book for a bit , while you be learn . but now I must be off , " say , rise . " you must let you father know we agreement . you will save I 's salary , you know , when you can write ; and I can afford to give you eighty pound for the first year , and more after . " when make the necessary disclosure to he parent , the relative effect on the two be a surprise which enter very deeply into he memory . he go straight from 's office to the warehouse , rightly feel that the most respectful way in which he could behave to he father be to make the painful communication as gravely and formally as possible . moreover , the decision would be more certainly understand to be final , if the interview take place in he father 's gravest hour , which be always those spend in he private room at the warehouse . enter on the subject directly , and declare briefly what he have do and be resolved to do , expresse at the end he regret that he should be the cause of disappointment to he father , and take the blame on he own deficiencies . the regret be genuine , and inspire with strong , simple word . listen in profound surprise without uttere even a exclamation , a silence which in he impatient temperament be a sign of unusual emotion . he have not be in good spirit about trade that morning , and the slight bitterness in he lip grow intense as he listen . when have end , there be a pause of nearly a minute , during which replace a book in he desk and turn the key emphatically . then he look at he son steadily , and say -- " so you have make up you mind at last , sir ? " " yes , father . " " very well ; stick to it . I have no more to say . you have throw away you education , and go down a step in life , when I have give you the means of rising , that be all . " " I be very sorry that we differ , father . I think I can be quite as much of a gentleman at the work I have undertaken , as if I have be a curate . but I be grateful to you for wish to do the best for I . " " very well ; I have no more to say . I wash my hand of you . I only hope , when you have a son of you own he will make a better return for the pain you spend on he . " this be very cutting to . he father be use that unfair advantage possess by we all when we be in a pathetic situation and see we own past as if it be simply part of the patho . in reality , 's wish about he son have have a great deal of pride , inconsiderateness , and egoistic folly in they . but still the disappointed father hold a strong lever ; and feel as if he be be banish with a malediction . " I hope you will not object to my remaining at home , sir ? " he say , after rise to go ; " I shall have a sufficient salary to pay for my board , as of course I should wish to do . " " board be hang ! " say Vincy , recovere himself in he disgust at the notion that 's keep would be miss at he table . " of course you mother will want you to stay . but I shall keep no horse for you , you understand ; and you will pay you own tailor . you will do with a suit or two less , I fancy , when you have to pay for th'ey . " linger ; there be still something to be say . at last it come . " I hope you will shake hand with I , father , and forgive I the vexation I have cause you . " from he chair throw a quick glance upward at he son , who have advance near to he , and then give he hand , say hurriedly , " yes , yes , let we say no more . " go
go through much more narrative and explanation with he mother , but she be inconsolable , have before she eye what perhaps she husband have never think of , the certainty that would marry , that she life would henceforth be spoil by a perpetual infusion of Garths and they way , and that she darl boy , with he beautiful face and stylish air " beyond anybody else 's son in , " would be sure to get like that family in plainness of appearance and carelessness about he clothes . to she it seem that there be a conspiracy to get possession of the desirable , but she da not enlarge on this opinion , because a slight hint of it have make he " fly out " at she as he have never do before . she temper be too sweet for she to show any anger , but she feel that she happiness have receive a bruise , and for several day merely to look at make she cry a little as if he be the subject of some baleful prophecy . perhaps she be the slower to recover she usual cheerfulness because have warn she that she must not reopen the sore question with he father , who have accept he decision and forgive he . if she husband have be vehement against , she would have be urge into defence of she darling . it be the end of the fourth day when say to she -- " come , , my dear , do not be so down - hear . you always have spoilead the boy , and you must go on spoil he . " " nothing ever do cut I so before , , " say the wife , she fair throat and ching begin to tremble again , " only he illness . " " Pooh , pooh , never mind ! we must expect to have trouble with we child . do not make it worse by let I see you out of spirit . " " well , I will not , " say . , rouse by this appeal and adjust herself with a little shake as of a bird which lay down its ruffled plumage . " it will not do to begin make a fuss about one , " say , wish to combine a little grumbling with domestic cheerfulness . " there be as well as . " " yes , poor thing . I be sure I feel for she be disappointed of she baby ; but she get over it nicely . " " , pooh ! I can see be make a mess of he practice , and get into debt too , by what I hear . I shall have come to I with a pretty tale one of these day . but they will get no money from I , I know . let _his_ family help he . I never do like that marriage . but it be no use talk . ring the bell for lemon , and do not look dull any more , . I will drive you and to to - morrow . " . they numbe scarce eight summer when a name rose on they soul and stir such motion there as thrill the bud and shape they hidden frame at penetration of the quickening air : he name who tell of loyal , of quaint , and , make the little world they childhood know large with a land of mountain lake and scaur , and larger yet with wonder love belief who live far away send they this wealth of joy and noble grief . the book and they must part , but day by day , in line that thwart like portly spider run they write the tale , from . the evening that F walk to Lowick parsonage ( he have begin to see that this be a world in which even a spirited young man must sometimes walk for want of a horse to carry he ) he set out at five o'clock and call on by the way , wish to assure himself that she accept they new relation willingly . he find the family group , dog and cat include , under the great apple - tree in the orchard . it be a festival with , for she eldest son , , she peculiar joy and pride , have come home for a short holiday -- , who hold it the most desirable thing in the world to be a tutor , to study all literature and be a regenerate Porson , and who be a incorporate criticism on poor , a sort of object - lesson give to he by the educational mother . himself , a square - browed , broad - shouldere masculine edition of he mother not much higher than 's shoulder -- which make it the harder that he should be hold superior -- be always as simple as possible , and think no more of 's disinclination to scholarship than of a giraffe 's , wish that he himself be more of the same height . he be lie on the ground now by he mother 's chair , with he straw hat lay flat over he eye , while on the other side be read aloud from that beloved writer who have make a chief part in the happiness of many young life . the volume be " , " and be in the great archery scene at the tournament , but suffer much interruption from , who have fetch he own old bow and arrow , and be make himself dreadfully disagreeable , think , by begge all present to observe he random shot , which no one wish to do except , the active - minded but probably shallow mongrel , while the grizzl lie in
in the sun look on with the dull - ey neutrality of extreme old age . Letty herself , show as to she mouth and pinafore some slight sign that she have be assist at the gathering of the cherry which stand in a coral - heap on the tea - table , be now seate on the grass , listen open - eye to the reading . but the centre of interest be change for all by the arrival of . when , seat himself on a garden - stool , he say that he be on he way to Lowick Parsonage , , who have throw down he bow , and snatch up a reluctant half - grow kitten instead , strode across 's outstretched leg , and say " take I ! " " oh , and I too , " say . " you can not keep up with and I , " say . " yes , I can . mother , please say that I be to go , " urge , whose life be much checker by resistance to she depreciation as a girl . " I shall stay with , " observe ; as much as to say that he have the advantage of those simpleton ; whereupon put she hand up to she head and look with jealous indecision from the one to the other . " let we all go and see , " say , open he arm . " no , my dear child , we must not go in a swarm to the parsonage . and that old suit of yours would never do . besides , you father will come home . we must let go alone . he can tell Mary that you be here , and she will come back to - morrow . " glance at he own threadbare knee , and then at 's beautiful white trousers . certainly 's tailoring suggest the advantages of a english university , and he have a graceful way even of look warm and of push he hair back with he handkerchief . " child , run away , " say ; " it be too warm to hang about you friend . take you brother and show he the rabbit . " the eldest understood , and lead off the child immediately . feel that . wish to give he a opportunity of say anything he have to say , but he could only begin by observe -- " how glad you must be to have here ! " " yes ; he have come sooner than I expect . he get down from the coach at nine o'clock , just after he father go out . I be longe for to come and hear what wonderful progress be make . he have pay he expense for the last year by give lesson , carry on hard study at the same time . he hope soon to get a private tutorship and go abroad . " " he be a great fellow , " say , to whom these cheerful truth have a medicinal taste , " and no trouble to anybody . " after a slight pause , he add , " but I fear you will think that I be go to be a great deal of trouble to . " " like take trouble : he be one of those man who always do more than any one would have think of ask they to do , " answer . she be knitt , and could either look at or not , as she choose -- always a advantage when one be bend on loading speech with salutary meaning ; and though intend to be duly reserve , she do wish to say something that might be the better for . " I know you think I very undeserving , , and with good reason , " say , he spirit rise a little at the perception of something like a disposition to lecture he . " I happen to have behave just the worst to the people I can not help wish for the most from . but while two man like and have not give I up , I do not see why I should give myself up . " think it might be well to suggest these masculine example to . " Assuredly , " say she , with gather emphasis . " a young man for whom two such elders have devote themselves would indeed be culpable if he throw himself away and make they sacrifice vain . " wonder a little at this strong language , but only say , " I hope it will not be so with I , , since I have some encouragement to believe that I may win . have tell you about that ? you be not surprise , I dare say ? " end , innocently refer only to he own love as probably evident enough . " not surprise that have give you encouragement ? " return , who think it would be well for to be more alive to the fact that 's friend could not possibly have wish this beforehand , whatever the Vincys might suppose . " yes , I confess I be surprised . " " she never do give I any -- not the least in the world , when I talk to she myself , " say , eager to vindicate . " but when I ask to speak for I , she allow he to tell I there be a hope . " the power of admonition which have begin to stir in have not yet discharge itself . it be a little too provoke even for _her self - control that this blooming youngster should flourish on the disappointment of sadder and wiser people -- make a meal of a nightingale and
and never know it -- and that all the while he family should suppose that hers be in eager need of this sprig ; and she vexation have ferment the more actively because of its total repression towards she husband . Exemplary wife will sometimes find scapegoat in this way . she now say with energetic decision , " you make a great mistake , , in ask Farebrother to speak for you . " " do I ? " say , redden instantaneously . he be alarm , but at a loss to know what mean , and add , in a apologetic tone , " have always be such a friend of ours ; and , I know , would listen to he gravely ; and he take it on himself quite readily . " " yes , young people be usually blind to everything but they own wish , and seldom imagine how much those wish cost other , " say she do not mean to go beyond this salutary general doctrine , and throw she indignation into a needless unwinding of she worst , knitt she brow at it with a grand air . " I can not conceive how it could be any pain to , " say , who nevertheless feel that surprising conception be begin to form themselves . " precisely ; you can not conceive , " say , cut she word as neatly as possible . for a moment look at the horizon with a dismayed anxiety , and then turn with a quick movement say almost sharply -- " do you mean to say , , that be in love with ? " " and if it be so , , I think you be the last person who ought to be surprised , " return , lay she knitt down beside she and fold she arm . it be a unwonted sign of emotion in she that she should put she work out of she hand . in fact she feeling be divide between the satisfaction of give he discipline and the sense of have go a little too far . take he hat and stick and rise quickly . " then you think I be stand in he way , and in 's too ? " he say , in a tone which seem to demand a answer . could not speak immediately . she have bring herself into the unpleasant position of be call on to say what she really feel , yet what she know there be strong reason for concealing . and to she the consciousness of have exceed in word be peculiarly mortify . besides , have give out unexpected electricity , and he now add , " see please that should be attach to I . he could not have know anything of this . " feel a severe twinge at this mention of she husband , the fear that might think she in the wrong not be easily endurable . she answer , want to check unintended consequence -- " I speak from inference only . I be not aware that know anything of the matter . " but she hesitate to beg that he would keep entire silence on a subject which she have herself unnecessarily mention , not be use to stoop in that way ; and while she be hesitat there be already a rush of unintended consequence under the apple - tree where the tea - thing stood . , bounce across the grass with at he heel , and see the kitten drag the knitting by a lengthening line of wool , shoute and clap he hand ; bark , the kitten , desperate , jump on the tea - table and upset the milk , then jump down again and sweep half the cherry with it ; and , snatch up the half - knit sock - top , fit it over the kitten 's head as a new source of madness , while arrive cry out to she mother against this cruelty -- it be a history as full of sensation as " this be the house that build . " be oblige to interfere , the other young one come up and the tete - a - tete with be end . he get away as soon as he could , and . could only imply some retractation of she severity by say " bless you " when she shook hand with he . she be unpleasantly conscious that she have be on the verge of speak as " one of the foolish woman speaketh " -- tell first and entreat silence after . but she have not entreate silence , and to prevent 's blame she determine to blame herself and confess all to he that very night . it be curious what a awful tribunal the 's be to she , whenever he set it up . but she mean to point out to he that the revelation might do a great deal of good . no doubt it be have a strong effect on he as he walk to . 's light hopeful nature have perhaps never have so much of a bruise as from this suggestion that if he have be out of the way might have make a thoroughly good match . also he be pique that he have be what he call such a stupid lout as to ask that intervention from . but it be not in a lover 's nature -- it be not in 's , that the new anxiety raise about 's feeling should not surmount every other . Notwithstand he trust in 's generosity , notwithstand what have say to he , could not help feel that he have a rival : it be a new consciousness , and he object to it extremely , not be in the least ready to give up
up for she good , be ready rather to fight for she with any man whatsoever . but the fighting with must be of a metaphorical kind , which be much more difficult to than the muscular . certainly this experience be a discipline for hardly less sharp than he disappointment about he uncle 's will . the iron have not enter into he soul , but he have begin to imagine what the sharp edge would be . it do not once occur to that might be mistaken about , but he suspect that she might be wrong about . have be stay at the parsonage lately , and she mother might know very little of what have be pass in she mind . he do not feel easier when he find she look cheerful with the three lady in the drawing - room . they be in animated discussion on some subject which be drop when he enter , and be copy the label from a heap of shallow cabinet drawer , in a minute handwriting which she be skill in . be somewhere in the village , and the three lady know nothing of 's peculiar relation to : it be impossible for either of they to propose that they should walk round the garden , and predict to himself that he should have to go away without say a word to she in private . he tell she first of 's arrival and then of he own engagement with she father ; and he be comforte by see that this latter news touch she keenly . she say hurriedly , " I be so glad , " and then bend over she write to hinder any one from notice she face . but here be a subject which could not let pass . " you do not mean , my dear , that you be glad to hear of a young man give up the for which he be educate : you only mean that thing be so , you be glad that he should be under a excellent man like you father . " " no , really , Farebrother , I be glad of both , I fear , " say , cleverly get rid of one rebellious tear . " I have a dreadfully secular mind . I never like any clergyman except the Vicar of and . " " now why , my dear ? " say , pause on she large wooden knitting - needle and look at . " you have always a good reason for you opinion , but this astonish I . of course I put out of the question those who preach new doctrine . but why should you dislike clergyman ? " " oh dear , " say , she face break into merriment as she seem to consider a moment , " I do not like they neckcloth . " " why , you do not like 's , then , " say , in some anxiety . " yes , I do , " say . " I do not like the other clergyman 's neckcloth , because it be they who wear they . " " how very puzzling ! " say , feel that she own intellect be probably deficient . " my dear , you be joke . you would have better reason than these for slighting so respectable a class of man , " say , majestically . " have such severe notion of what people should be that it be difficult to satisfy she , " say . " well , I be glad at least that she make a exception in favor of my son , " say the old lady . be wonder at 's pique tone , when come in and have to hear the news about the engagement under . at the end he say with quiet satisfaction , " _That be right ; " and then bend to look at 's label and praise she handwriting . feel horribly jealous -- be glad , of course , that be so estimable , but wish that he have be ugly and fat as man at forty sometimes be . it be clear what the end would be , since openly place Farebrother above everybody , and these woman be all evidently encourage the affair . he , be feel sure that he should have no chance of speak to , when say -- " Fred , help I to carry these drawer back into my study -- you have never see my fine new study . pray come too , . I want you to see a stupendous spider I find this morning . " at once see the 's intention . he have never since the memorable evening deviate from he old pastoral kindness towards she , and she momentary wonder and doubt have quite gone to sleep . be accustom to think rather rigorously of what be probable , and if a belief flatter she vanity she feel warn to dismiss it as ridiculous , have early have much exercise in such dismissal . it be as she have foresee : when have be ask to admire the fitting of the study , and she have be ask to admire the spider , say -- " wait here a minute or two . I be go to look out a engraving which be tall enough to hang for I . I shall be back in a few minute . " and then he go out . nevertheless , the first word say to be -- " it be of no use , whatever I do , . you be sure to marry Farebrother at last . " there be some rage in he tone . " what do you mean , ? " exclaim indignantly , blush deeply , and surprise out of all
all she readiness in reply . " it be impossible that you should not see it all clearly enough -- you who see everything . " " I only see that you be behave very ill , Fred , in speaking so of after he have plead you cause in every way . how can you have take up such a idea ? " be rather deep , in spite of he irritation . if have really be unsuspicious , there be no good in tell she what have say . " it follow as a matter of course , " he reply . " when you be continually see a man who beat I in everything , and whom you set up above everybody , I can have no fair chance . " " you be very ungrateful , , " say . " I wish I have never tell Farebrother that I care for you in the least . " " no , I be not ungrateful ; I should be the happiest fellow in the world if it be not for this . I tell you father everything , and he be very kind ; he treat I as if I be he son . I could go at the work with a will , write and everything , if it be not for this . " " for this ? for what ? " say , imagine now that something specific must have be say or do . " this dreadful certainty that I shall be bowl out by . " be appease by she inclination to laugh . " Fred , " she say , pee round to catch he eye , which be sulkily turn away from she , " you be too delightfully ridiculous . if you be not such a charming simpleton , what a temptation this would be to play the wicked coquette , and let you suppose that somebody besides you have make love to I . " " do you really like I best , ? " say , turn eye full of affection on she , and try to take she hand . " I do not like you at all at this moment , " say , retreate , and put she hand behind she . " I only say that no mortal ever make love to I besides you . and that be no argument that a very wise man ever will , " she end , merrily . " I wish you would tell I that you could not possibly ever think of he , " say . " never dare to mention this any more to I , , " say , get serious again . " I do not know whether it be more stupid or ungenerous in you not to see that have leave we together on purpose that we might speak freely . I be disappoint that you should be so blind to he delicate feel . " there be no time to say any more before come back with the engraving ; and have to return to the drawing - room still with a jealous dread in he heart , but yet with comforting argument from 's word and manner . the result of the conversation be on the whole more painful to : inevitably she attention have take a new attitude , and she see the possibility of new interpretation . she be in a position in which she seem to herself to be slighte , and this , in relation to a man who be much honored , be always dangerous to the firmness of a grateful woman . to have a reason for go home the next day be a relief , for earnestly desire to be always clear that she love best . when a tender affection have be store itself in we through many of we year , the idea that we could accept any exchange for it seem to be a cheapening of we life . and we can set a watch over we affections and we constancy as we can over other treasure . " have lose all he other expectation ; he must keep this , " say to herself , with a smile curl she lip . it be impossible to help fleete vision of another kind -- new dignity and a acknowledge value of which she have often feel the absence . but these thing with outside they , Fred forsake and look sad for the want of she , could never tempt she deliberate thought . . " for there can live no hatred in thine eye , therefore in that I can not know thy change : in many 's look the false heart 's history be writ in mood and frown and wrinkle strange : but heaven in thy creation do decree that in thy face sweet love should ever dwell : Whate 'er thy thought or thy heart 's workings be look should nothing thence but sweetness tell . " -- : . at the time when utter that presentiment about , she herself have never have the idea that she should be drive to make the sort of appeal which he foresee . she have not yet have any anxiety about way and mean , although she domestic life have be expensive as well as eventful . she baby have be bear prematurely , and all the embroidered rob and cap have to be laid by in darkness . this misfortune be attribute entirely to she have persist in go out on horseback one day when she husband have desire she not to do so ; but it must not be suppose that she have show temper on the occasion , or rudely tell he that she would do as she like . what lead she particularly to desire horse - exercise be a visit from
from , the baronet 's third son , who , I be sorry to say , be detest by we Tertius of that name as a vapid fop " part he hair from brow to nape in a despicable fashion " ( not follow by himself ) , and show a ignorant security that he know the proper thing to say on every topic . inwardly curse he own folly that he have draw down this visit by consent to go to he uncle 's on the wedding - tour , and he make himself rather disagreeable to by say so in private . for to this visit be a source of unprecedented but gracefully conceal exultation . she be so intensely conscious of have a cousin who be a baronet 's son stay in the house , that she imagine the knowledge of what be imply by he presence to be diffuse through all other mind ; and when she introduce to she guest , she have a placid sense that he rank penetrate they as if it have be a odor . the satisfaction be enough for the time to melt away some disappointment in the condition of marriage with a medical man even of good birth : it see now that she marriage be visibly as well as ideally float she above the level , and the future look bright with letter and visit to and from , and vague advancement in consequence for . especially as , probably at the 's suggestion , he marry sister , , have come with she maid , and stay two night on she way from town . hence it be clearly worth while for to take pain with she music and the careful selection of she lace . as to himself , he low brow , he aquiline nose bend on one side , and he rather heavy utterance , might have be disadvantageous in any young gentleman who have not a military bearing and mustache to give he what be do on by some flower - like blond head as " style . " he have , moreover , that sort of high - breeding which consist in be free from the petty solicitude of middle - class gentility , and he be a great critic of feminine charms . delighte in he admiration now even more than she have do at , and he find it easy to spend several hour of the day in flirt with she . the visit altogether be one of the pleasantest lark he have ever have , not the less so perhaps because he suspect that he queer cousin Tertius wish he away : though , who would rather ( hyperbolically speak ) have die than have fail in polite hospitality , suppress he dislike , and only pretend generally not to hear what the gallant officer say , consign the task of answer he to . for he be not at all a jealous husband , and prefer leave a feather - head young gentleman alone with he wife to bear he company . " I wish you would talk more to the captain at dinner , , " say , one evening when the important guest be go to Loamford to see some brother officer station there . " you really look so absent sometimes -- you seem to be see through he head into something behind it , instead of look at he . " " my dear rosy , you do not expect I to talk much to such a conceit ass as that , I hope , " say , brusquly . " if he get he head break , I might look at it with interest , not before . " " I can not conceive why you should speak of you cousin so contemptuously , " say , she finger move at she work while she speak with a mild gravity which have a touch of disdain in it . " ask if he do not think you the greatest bore he ever meet with . Ladislaw have almost forsake the house since he come . " think she know perfectly well why dislike the captain : he be jealous , and she like he be jealous . " it be impossible to say what will suit eccentric person , " she answer , " but in my opinion be a thorough gentleman , and I think you ought not , out of respect to , to treat he with neglect . " " no , dear ; but we have have dinner for he . and he come in and go out as he like . he do not want I . " " , when he be in the room , you might show he more attention . he may not be a phoenix of cleverness in you sense ; he profession be different ; but it would be all the better for you to talk a little on he subject . _I_ think he conversation be quite agreeable . and he be anything but a unprincipled man . " " the fact be , you would wish I to be a little more like he , , " say , in a sort of resign yomurmu , with a smile which be not exactly tender , and certainly not merry . be silent and do not smile again ; but the lovely curve of she face look good - tempere enough without smile . those word of 's be like a sad milestone mark how far he have travel from he old dreamland , in which appear to be that perfect piece of womanhood who would reverence she husband 's mind after the fashion of a accomplished mermaid , use she comb and look - glass and singe she song for the relaxation of he adored wisdom alone . he have begin
begin to distinguish between that imagined adoration and the attraction towards a man 's talent because it give he prestige , and be like a order in he button - hole or a honorable before he name . it might have be suppose that have travel too , since she have find the pointless conversation of perfectly wearisome ; but to most mortal there be a stupidity which be unendurable and a stupidity which be altogether acceptable -- else , indeed , what would become of social bond ? 's stupidity be delicately scent , carry itself with " style , " talk with a good accent , and be closely related to . find it quite agreeable and catch many of its phrase . therefore since , as we know , be fond of horseback , there be plenty of reason why she should be temp to resume she ride when , who have order he man with two horse to follow he and put up at the " , " beg she to go out on the gray which he warrant to be gentle and train to carry a lady -- indeed , he have buy it for he sister , and be take it to . go out the first time without tell she husband , and come back before he return ; but the ride have be so thorough a success , and she declare herself so much the better in consequence , that he be inform of it with full reliance on he consent that she should go ride again . on the contrary Lydgate be more than hurt -- he be utterly confound that she have risk herself on a strange horse without refer the matter to he wish . after the first almost thunder exclamation of astonishment , which sufficiently warn of what be come , he be silent for some moment . " however , you have come back safely , " he say , at last , in a decisive tone . " you will not go again , ; that be understood . if it be the quietest , most familiar horse in the world , there would always be the chance of accident . and you know very well that I wish you to give up ride the roan on that account . " " but there be the chance of accident indoors , . " " my darling , do not talk nonsense , " say , in a imploring tone ; " surely I be the person to judge for you . I think it be enough that I say you be not to go again . " be arrange she hair before dinner , and the reflection of she head in the glass show no change in its loveliness except a little turn aside of the long neck . Lydgate have be move about with he hand in he pocket , and now pause near she , as if he await some assurance . " I wish you would fasten up my plait , dear , " say , let she arm fall with a little sigh , so as to make a husband asham of stand there like a brute . Lydgate have often fasten the plait before , be among the deftest of man with he large finely for finger . he sweep up the soft festoon of plait and fasten in the tall comb ( to such use do man come ! ) ; and what could he do then but kiss the exquisite nape which be show in all its delicate curve ? but when we do what we have do before , it be often with a difference . be still angry , and have not forget he point . " I shall tell the captain that he ink to have know better than offer you he horse , " he say , as he move away . " I beg you will not do anything of the kind , , " say , look at he with something more mark than usual in she speech . " it will be treat I as if I be a child . promise that you will leave the subject to I . " there do seem to be some truth in she objection . say , " very well , " with a surly obedience , and thus the discussion end with he promising , and not with she promise he . in fact , she have be determine not to promise . have that victorious obstinacy which never waste its energy in impetuous resistance . what she like to do be to she the right thing , and all she cleverness be direct to get the means of do it . she mean to go out ride again on the gray , and she do go on the next opportunity of she husband 's absence , not intend that he should know until it be late enough not to signify to she . the temptation be certainly great : she be very fond of the exercise , and the gratification of ride on a fine horse , with , 's son , on another fine horse by she side , and of be meet in this position by any one but she husband , be something as good as she dream before marriage : moreover she be rivet the connection with the family at , which must be a wise thing to do . but the gentle gray , unprepared for the crash of a tree that be be felle on the edge of wood , take fright , and cause a worse fright to , lead finally to the loss of she baby . Lydgate could not show he anger towards she , but he be rather bearish to the , whose visit naturally soon come to a end . in all
all future conversation on the subject , be mildly certain that the ride have make no difference , and that if she have stay at home the same symptom would have come on and would have end in the same way , because she have feel something like they before . Lydgate could only say , " poor , poor darling ! " -- but he secretly wonder over the terrible tenacity of this mild creature . there be gather within he a amazed sense of he powerlessness over . he superior knowledge and mental force , instead of be , as he have imagine , a shrine to consult on all occasion , be simply set aside on every practical question . he have regard 's cleverness as precisely of the receptive kind which become a woman . he be now begin to find out what that cleverness be -- what be the shape into which it have run as into a close network aloon and independent . no one quicker than to see cause and effect which lay within the track of she own taste and interest : she have see clearly 's preeminence in society , and could go on imaginatively trace still more agreeable social effect when he talent should have advance he ; but for she , he professional and scientific ambition have no other relation to these desirable effect than if they have be the fortunate discovery of a ill - smelling oil . and that oil apart , with which she have nothing to do , of course she believe in she own opinion more than she do in he . be astounded to find in numberless trifling matter , as well as in this last serious case of the riding , that affection do not make she compliant . he have no doubt that the affection be there , and have no presentiment that he have do anything to repel it . for he own part he say to himself that he love she as tenderly as ever , and could make up he mind to she negation ; but -- well ! be much worried , and conscious of new element in he life as noxious to he as a inlet of mud to a creature that have be use to breathe and bathe and dart after its illuminate prey in the clearest of water . be soon look lovelier than ever at she worktable , enjoy drive in she father 's phaeton and think it likely that she might be invite to . she know that she be a much more exquisite ornament to the drawing - room there than any daughter of the family , and in reflec that the gentleman be aware of that , do not perhaps sufficiently consider whether the lady would be eager to see themselves surpass . Lydgate , relieve from anxiety about she , relaps into what she inwardly call he moodiness -- a name which to she cover he thoughtful preoccupation with other subject than herself , as well as that uneasy look of the brow and distaste for all ordinary thing as if they be mix with bitter herb , which really make a sort of weather - glass to he vexation and foreboding . these latter state of mind have one cause amongst other , which he have generously but mistakenly avoid mention to , lest it should affect she health and spirit . between he and she indeed there be that total missing of each other 's mental track , which be too evidently possible even between person who be continually think of each other . to Lydgate it seem that he have be spend month after month in sacrifice more than half of he best intent and best power to he tenderness for ; bear she little claim and interruption without impatience , and , above all , bear without betrayal of bitterness to look through less and less of interfere illusion at the blank unreflecting surface she mind present to he ardor for the more impersonal end of he profession and he scientific study , a ardor which he have fancie that the ideal wife must somehow worship as sublime , though not in the least know why . but he endurance be mingle with a self - discontent which , if we know how to be cando , we shall confess to make more than half we bitterness under grievance , wife or husband include . it always remain true that if we have be greater , circumstance would have be less strong against we . be aware that he concession to be often little more than the lapse of slackening resolution , the creeping paralysis apt to seize a enthusiasm which be out of adjustment to a constant portion of we life . and on 's enthusiasm there be constantly press not a simple weight of sorrow , but the bite presence of a petty degrading care , such as cast the blight of irony over all higher effort . this be the care which he have hitherto abstain from mention to ; and he believe , with some wonder , that it have never enter she mind , though certainly no difficulty could be less mysterious . it be a inference with a conspicuous handle to it , and have be easily draw by indifferent observer , that be in debt ; and he could not succeed in keep out of he mind for long together that he be every day get deeper into that swamp , which tempt man towards it with such a pretty covering of flower and verdure . it be wonderful how soon a man get up to he ching there -- in a condition in which , spite of himself , he be force to think chiefly of release , though he have a scheme of the universe in he
he soul . eighteen month ago be poor , but have never know the eager want of small sum , and feel rather a burn contempt for any one who descende a step in order to gain they . he be now experience something worse than a simple deficit : he be assail by the vulgar hateful trial of a man who have buy and use a great many thing which might have be do without , and which he be unable to pay for , though the demand for payment have become pressing . how this come about may be easily see without much arithmetic or knowledge of price . when a man in set up a house and prepare for marriage finds that he furniture and other initial expense come to between four and five hundred pound more than he have capital to pay for ; when at the end of a year it appear that he household expense , horse and et caetera , amount to nearly a thousand , while the proceed of the practice reckon from the old book to be worth eight hundred per annum have sunk like a summer pond and make hardly five hundred , chiefly in unpaid entry , the plain inference be that , whether he mind it or not , he be in debt . those be less expensive time than we own , and provincial life be comparatively modest ; but the ease with which a medical man who have lately buy a practice , who think that he be oblige to keep two horse , whose table be supply without stint , and who pay a insurance on he life and a high rent for house and garden , might find he expense double he receipt , can be conceive by any one who do not think these detail beneath he consideration . , accustom from she to a extravagant household , think that good housekeeping consist simply in order the best of everything -- nothing else " answer ; " and Lydgate suppose that " if thing be do at all , they must be do properly " -- he do not see how they be to live otherwise . if each head of household expenditure have be mention to he beforehand , he would have probably observe that " it could hardly come too much , " and if any one have suggest a saving on a particular article -- for example , the substitution of cheap fish for dear -- it would have appear to he simply a penny - wise , mean notion . , even without such a occasion as 's visit , be fond of give invitation , and , though he often think the guest tiresome , do not interfere . this sociability seem a necessary part of professional prudence , and the entertainment must be suitable . it be true be constantly visit the home of the poor and adjust he prescription of diet to they small means ; but , dear I ! have it not by this time cease to be remarkable -- be it not rather that we expect in man , that they should have numerous strand of experience lie side by side and never compare they with each other ? Expenditure -- like ugliness and error -- become a totally new thing when we attach we own personality to it , and measure it by that wide difference which be manifest ( in we own sensation ) between ourselves and other . Lydgate believe himself to be careless about he dress , and he despise a man who calculate the effect of he costume ; it seem to he only a matter of course that he have abundance of fresh garment -- such thing be naturally order in sheave . it must be remember that he have never hithertoo feel the check of importunate debt , and he walk by habit , not by self - criticism . but the check have come . it be novetely make it the more irritating . he be amaze , disgust that condition so foreign to all he purpose , so hatefully disconnect with the object he care to occupy himself with , should have lain in ambush and clutch he when he be unaware . and there be not only the actual debt ; there be the certainty that in he present position he must go on deepene it . two furnishing tradesman at , whose bills have be incur before he marriage , and whom uncalculated current expense have ever since prevent he from pay , have repeatedly send he unpleasant letter which have force themselves on he attention . this could hardly have be more galle to any disposition than to 's , with he intense pride -- he dislike of ask a favor or be under a obligation to any one . he have scorne even to form conjecture about 's intention on money matter , and nothing but extremity could have induce he to apply to he father - in - law , even if he have not be make aware in various indirect way since he marriage that 's own affair be not flourish , and that the expectation of help from he would be resent . some man easily trust in the readiness of friend ; it have never in the former part of he life occur to Lydgate that he should need to do so : he have never think what borrowing would be to he ; but now that the idea have enter he mind , he feel that he would rather incur any other hardship . in the mean time he have no money or prospects of money ; and he practice be not get more lucrative . no wonder that have be unable to suppress all sign of inward trouble during the last few month , and
and now that be regaine brilliant health , he meditate take she entirely into confidence on he difficulty . new conversance with tradesman 's bills have force he reason into a new channel of comparison : he have begin to consider from a new point of view what be necessary and unnecessary in goods order , and to see that there must be some change of habit . how could such a change be make without 's concurrence ? the immediate occasion of open the disagreeable fact to she be force upon he . have no money , and have privately seek advice as to what security could possibly be give by a man in he position , have offer the one good security in he power to the less peremptory creditor , who be a silversmith and jeweller , and who consent to take on himself the upholsterer 's credit also , accept interest for a give term . the security necessary be a bill of sale on the furniture of he house , which might make a creditor easy for a reasonable time about a debt amount to less than four hundred pound ; and the silversmith , , be willing to reduce it by take back a portion of the plate and any other article which be as good as new . " any other article " be a phrase delicately imply jewellery , and more particularly some purple amethyst cos thirty pound , which have buy as a bridal present . opinion may be divide as to he wisdom in make this present : some may think that it be a graceful attention to be expect from a man like , and that the fault of any troublesome consequence lay in the pinched narrowness of provincial life at that time , which offer no convenience for professional people whose fortune be not proportion to they taste ; also , in 's ridiculous fastidiousness about ask he friend for money . however , it have see a question of no moment to he on that fine morning when he go to give a final order for plate : in the presence of other jewel enormously expensive , and as a addition to order of which the amount have not be exactly calculate , thirty pound for ornament so exquisitely sui to 's neck and arm could hardly appear excessive when there be no ready cash for it to exceed . but at this crisis 's imagination could not help dwell on the possibility of let the amethyst 's take they place again among 's stock , though he shrank from the idea of propose this to . have be rouse to discern consequence which he have never be in the habit of tracing , he be prepare to act on this discernment with some of the rigor ( by no means all ) that he would have apply in pursue experiment . he be nerve himself to this rigor as he ride from , and meditate on the representation he must make to . it be eve when he get home . he be intensely miserable , this strong man of nine - and - twenty and of many gift . he be not say angrily within himself that he have make a profound mistake ; but the mistake be at work in he like a recognize chronic disease , mingl its uneasy importunity with every prospect , and enfeebl every thought . as he go along the passage to the drawing - room , he hear the piano and singe . of course , be there . it be some week since have part from , yet he be still at the old post in . have no objection in general to 's come , but just now he be annoyed that he could not find he hearth free . when he open the door the two singer go on towards the key - note , raise they eye and look at he indeed , but not regard he entrance as a interruption . to a man gal with he harness as poor Lydgate be , it be not soothing to see two people warbl at he , as he come in with the sense that the painful day have still pain in store . he face , already paler than usual , take on a scowl as he walk across the room and fling himself into a chair . the singer feel themselves excuse by the fact that they have only three bar to s , now turn round . " how be you , ? " say , come forward to shake hand . take he hand , but do not think it necessary to speak . " have you dine , ? I expect you much earlier , " say , who have already see that she husband be in a " horrible humor . " she seat herself in she usual place as she spoke . " I have dine . I should like some tea , please , " say , curtly , still scowl and look markedly at he leg stretch out before he . will be too quick to need more . " I shall be off , " he say , reach he hat . " tea be come , " say ; " pray do not go . " " yes , be bore , " say , who have more comprehension of than have , and be not offend by he manner , easily imagine outdoor cause of annoyance . " there be the more need for you to stay , " say , playfully , and in she lightest accent ; " he will not speak to I all the evening . " " yes , , I shall , " say , in he strong baritone . " I have some serious business to speak
speak to you about . " no introduction of the business could have be less like that which have intend ; but she indifferent manner have be too provoke . " there ! you see , " say . " I be go to the meeting about the mechanic ' Institute . good - by ; " and he go quickly out of the room . do not look at she husband , but presently rise and take she place before the tea - tray . she be think that she have never see he so disagreeable . turn he dark eye on she and watch she as she delicately handle the tea - service with she taper finger , and look at the immediately before she with no curve in she face disturb , and yet with a ineffable protest in she air against all people with unpleasant manners . for the moment he lose the sense of he wound in a sudden speculation about this new form of feminine impassibility reveal itself in the sylph - like frame which he have once interpreted as the sign of a ready intelligent sensitiveness . he mind glance back to while he look at , he say inwardly , " would _she kill I because I weary she ? " and then , " it be the way with all woman . " but this power of generalizing which give man so much the superiority in mistake over the dumb animal , be immediately thwart by 's memory of wonder impressions from the behavior of another woman -- from 's look and tone of emotion about she husband when begin to attend he -- from she passionate cry to be teach what would best comfort that man for whose sake it seem as if she must quell every impulse in she except the yearning of faithfulness and compassion . these revive impressiond succeed each other quickly and dreamily in 's mind while the tea be be brew . he have shut he eye in the last instant of reverie while he hear say , " advise I -- think what I can do -- he have be all he life labore and look forward . he mind about nothing else -- and I mind about nothing else . " that voice of deep - souled womanhood have remain within he as the enkindl conception of dead and scepr genius have remain within he ( be there not a genius for feel nobly which also reign over human spirit and they conclusion ? ) ; the tone be a music from which he be fall away -- he have really fall into a momentary doze , when say in she silvery neutral way , " here be you tea , , " set it on the small table by he side , and then move back to she place without look at he . be too hasty in attribute insensibility to she ; after she own fashion , she be sensitive enough , and take last impressions . she impression now be one of offence and repulsion . but then , have no scowl and have never raise she voice : she be quite sure that no one could justly find fault with she . perhaps Lydgate and she have never feel so far off each other before ; but there be strong reason for not deferr he revelation , even if he have not already begin it by that abrupt announcement ; indeed some of the angry desire to rouse she into more sensibility on he account which have prompt he to speak prematurely , still mingl with he pain in the prospect of she pain . but he wait till the tray be go , the candle be light , and the evening quiet might be count on : the interval have left time for repell tenderness to return into the old course . he speak kindly . " dear rosy , lay down you work and come to sit by I , " he say , gently , push away the table , and stretch out he arm to draw a chair near he own . obey . as she come towards he in she drapery of transparent faintly tinted muslin , she slim yet round figure never look more graceful ; as she sit down by he and laid one hand on the elbow of he chair , at last looking at he and meet he eye , she delicate neck and cheek and purely cut lip never have more of that untarnished beauty which touch as in spring - time and infancy and all sweet freshness . it touch now , and mingl the early moment of he love for she with all the other memory which be stir in this crisis of deep trouble . he lay he ample hand softly on hers , say -- " dear ! " with the lingering utterance which affection give to the word . too be still under the power of that same past , and she husband be still in part the Lydgate whose approval have stir delight . she put he hair lightly away from he forehead , then lay she other hand on he , and be conscious of forgive he . " I be oblige to tell you what will hurt you , . but there be thing which husband and wife must think of together . I dare say it have occur to you already that I be short of money . " Lydgate pause ; but turn she neck and look at a vase on the mantel - piece . " I be not able to pay for all the thing we have to get before we be married , and there have be expense since which I have be oblige to meet . the consequence be , there be a large debt at
at Brassing -- three hundred and eighty pound -- which have be press on I a good while , and in fact we be get deeper every day , for people do not pay I the faster because other want the money . I take pain to keep it from you while you be not well ; but now we must think together about it , and you must help I . " " what can -- I -- do , ? " say , turn she eye on he again . that little speech of four word , like so many other in all language , be capable by varied vocal inflection of express all state of mind from helpless dimness to exhaustive argumentative perception , from the completest self - devote fellowship to the most neutral aloofness . 's thin utterance throw into the word " what can -- I -- do ! " as much neutrality as they could hold . they fall like a mortal chill on 's roused tenderness . he do not storm in indignation -- he feel too sad a sinking of the heart . and when he speak again it be more in the tone of a man who force himself to fulfil a task . " it be necessary for you to know , because I have to give security for a time , and a man must come to make a inventory of the furniture . " colore deeply . " have you not ask papa for money ? " she say , as soon as she could speak . " no . " " then I must ask he ! " she say , release she hand from 's , and rise to stand at two yard ' distance from he . " no , , " say , decisively . " it be too late to do that . the inventory will be begin to - morrow . remember it be a mere security : it will make no difference : it be a temporary affair . I insist upon it that you father shall not know , unless I choose to tell he , " add , with a more peremptory emphasis . this certainly be unkind , but have throw he back on evil expectation as to what she would do in the way of quiet steady disobedience . the unkindness seem unpardonable to she : she be not give to weep and dislike it , but now she ching and lip begin to tremble and the tear well up . perhaps it be not possible for , under the double stress of outward material difficulty and of he own proud resistance to humiliat consequence , to imagine fully what this sudden trial be to a young creature who have know nothing but indulgence , and whose dream have all be of new indulgence , more exactly to she taste . but he do wish to spare she as much as he could , and she tear cut he to the heart . he could not speak again immediately ; but do not go on sobbing : she try to conquer she agitation and wip away she tear , continue to look before she at the mantel - piece . " try not to grieve , darl , " say , turn he eye up towards she . that she have choose to move away from he in this moment of she trouble make everything harder to say , but he must absolutely go on . " we must brace ourselves to do what be necessary . it be I who have be in fault : I ought to have see that I could not afford - to live in this way . but many thing have tell against I in my practice , and it really just now have eb to a low point . I may recover it , but in the mean time we must pull up -- we must change we way of living . we shall weather it . when I have give this security I shall have time to look about I ; and you be so clever that if you turn you mind to manage you will school I into carefulness . I have be a thoughtless rascal about squaring price -- but come , dear , sit down and forgive I . " be bow he neck under the yoke like a creature who have talon , but who have too , which often reduce we to meekness . when he have speak the last word in a imploring tone , return to the chair by he side . he self - blame give she some hope that he would attend to she opinion , and she say -- " why can you not put off have the inventory make ? you can send the man away to - morrow when they come . " " I shall not send they away , " say , the peremptoriness rise again . be it of any use to explain ? " if we leave ? there would of course be a sale , and that would do as well . " " but we be not go to leave . " " I be sure , , it would be much better to do so . why can we not go to ? or near , where you family be know ? " " we can go nowhere without money , . " " you friend would not wish you to be without money . and surely these odious tradesman might be make to understand that , and to wait , if you would make proper representation to they . " " this be idle , " say , angrily . " you must learn to take my judgment on question you do not understand . I have make necessary
necessary arrangement , and they must be carry out . as to friend , I have no expectation whatever from they , and shall not ask they for anything . " sit perfectly still . the think in she mind be that if she have know how Lydgate would behave , she would never have marry he . " we have no time to waste now on unnecessary word , dear , " say , try to be gentle again . " there be some detail that I want to consider with you . Dover say he will take a good deal of the plate back again , and any of the jewellery we like . he really behave very well . " " be we to go without spoon and fork then ? " say , whose very lips seem to get thinner with the thinness of she utterance . she be determined to make no further resistance or suggestion . " oh no , dear ! " say . " but look here , " he continue , draw a paper from he pocket and open it ; " here be 's account . see , I have mark a number of article , which if we return they would reduce the amount by thirty pound and more . I have not mark any of the jewellery . " Lydgate have really feel this point of the jewellery very bitter to himself ; but he have overcome the feeling by severe argument . he could not propose to Rosamond that she should return any particular present of he , but he have tell himself that he be bound to put 's offer before she , and she inward prompt might make the affair easy . " it be useless for I to look , , " say , calmly ; " you will return what you please . " she would not turn she eye on the paper , and Lydgate , flush up to the root of he hair , draw it back and let it fall on he knee . meanwhile quietly go out of the room , leave Lydgate helpless and wonder . be she not come back ? it seem that she have no more identify herself with he than if they have be creature of different species and oppose interest . he toss he head and thrust he hand deep into he pocket with a sort of vengeance . there be still science -- there be still good object to work for . he must give a tug still -- all the stronger because other satisfaction be go . but the door open and re-enter . she carry the leather box contain the amethyst , and a tiny ornamental basket which contain other boxe , and lay they on the chair where she have be sit , she say , with perfect propriety in she air -- " this be all the jewellery you ever give I . you can return what you like of it , and of the plate also . you will not , of course , expect I to stay at home to - morrow . I shall go to 's . " to many woman the look Lydgate cast at she would have be more terrible than one of anger : it have in it a despairing acceptance of the distance she be place between they . " and when shall you come back again ? " he say , with a bitter edge on he accent . " oh , in the evening . of course I shall not mention the subject to mamma . " be convinc that no woman could behave more irreproachably than she be behave ; and she go to sit down at she work - table . sit meditat a minute or two , and the result be that he say , with some of the old emotion in he tone -- " now we have be united , , you should not leave I to myself in the first trouble that have come . " " certainly not , " say ; " I shall do everything it become I to do . " " it be not right that the thing should be leave to servant , or that I should have to speak to they about it . and I shall be oblige to go out -- I do not know how early . I understand you shrinking from the humiliation of these money affair . but , my dear , as a question of pride , which I feel just as much as you can , it be surely better to manage the thing ourselves , and let the servants see as little of it as possible ; and since you be my wife , there be no hinder you share in my disgraces -- if there be disgraces . " do not answer immediately , but at last she say , " very well , I will stay at home . " " I shall not touch these jewel , . take they away again . but I will write out a list of plate that we may return , and that can be pack up and send at once . " " the servant will know _than , " say , with the slightest touch of sarcasm . " well , we must meet some disagreeable as necessity . where be the ink , I wonder ? " say , rise , and throw the account on the larger table where he mean to write . go to reach the inkstand , and after set it on the table be go to turn away , when Lydgate , who be stand close by , put he arm round she and draw she towards he , say -- " come , darling , let we make the best
best of thing . it will only be for a time , I hope , that we shall have to be stingy and particular . kiss I . " he native warm - heartedness take a great deal of quenching , and it be a part of manliness for a husband to feel keenly the fact that a inexperienced girl have get into trouble by marry he . she receive he kiss and return it faintly , and in this way a appearance of accord be recovere for the time . but could not help look forward with dread to the inevitable future discussion about expenditure and the necessity for a complete change in they way of living . . they say of old the have human shape , but smaller , subtler than the fleshly self , So wander forth for airing when it please . and see ! beside she cherub -face there float a pale - lip form aerial whispering its prompting in that little shell she ear . " news be often disperse as thoughtlessly and effectively as that pollen which the be carry off ( have no idea how powdery they be ) when they be buz in search of they particular nectar . this fine comparison have reference to , who on that evening at hear a lively discussion among the ladie on the news which they old servant have get from concern 's strange mention of in a codicil to he will make not long before he death . be astounded to find that she brother have know the fact before , and observe that be the most wonderful man for know thing and not tell they ; whereupon say that the codicil have perhaps get mix up with the habits of spider , which never would listen to . consider that the news have something to do with they have only once see at , and make many small compassionate mewing . know little and car less about and the Casaubon , and he mind never recur to that discussion till one day call on at he mother 's request to deliver a message as he pass , he happen to see go away . and have little to say to each other now that marriage have remove she from collision with the unpleasantness of brother , and especially now that he have take what she hold the stupid and even reprehensible step of give up the to take to such a business as 's . talk by preference of what he consider indifferent news , and " a propo of that young Ladislaw " mention what he have hear at . now Lydgate , like , know a great deal more than he tell , and when he have once be set think about the relation between and he conjecture have go beyond the fact . he imagine that there be a passionate attachment on both side , and this strike he as much too serious to gossip about . he remember 's irritability when he have mention , and be the more circumspect . on the whole he surmise , in addition to what he know of the fact , increase he friendliness and tolerance towards , and make he understand the vacillation which keep he at after he have say that he should go away . it be significant of the separateness between 's mind and be that he have no impulse to speak to she on the subject ; indeed , he do not quite trust she reticence towards . and he be right there ; though he have no vision of the way in which she mind would act in urge she to speak . when she repeat 's news to Lydgate , he say , " take care you do not drop the faintest hint to , . he be likely to fly out as if you insult he . of course it be a painful affair . " turn she neck and pat she hair , look the image of placid indifference . but the next time will come when Lydgate be away , she speak archly about he not go to as he have threaten . " I know all about it . I have a confidential little bird , " say she , show very pretty airs of she head over the bit of work hold high between she active finger . " there be a powerful magnet in this neighborhood . " " to be sure there be . nobody know that better than you , " say , with light gallantry , but inwardly prepare to be angry . " it be really the most charming romance : , and foresee that there be no one else whom would so much like to marry , and no one who would so much like to marry she as a certain gentleman ; and then lay a plan to spoil all by make she forfeit she property if she do marry that gentleman -- and then -- and then -- and then -- oh , I have no doubt the end will be thoroughly romantic . " " Great ! what do you mean ? " say , flush over face and ears , he feature seem to change as if he have have a violent shake . " do not joke ; tell I what you mean . " " you do not really know ? " say , no longer playful , and desire nothing better than to tell in order that she might evoke effect . " no ! " he return , impatiently . " do not know that have leave it in he will that if marry you she be to forfeit all she property ? " " how do you know that it be true ? " say , eagerly . " my brother hear it from the
the Farebrother . " will start up from he chair and reach he hat . " I dare say she like you better than the property , " say , look at he from a distance . " pray do not say any more about it , " say , in a hoarse undertone extremely unlike he usual light voice . " it be a foul insult to she and to I . " then he sit down absently , look before he , but see nothing . " now you be angry with _me_, " say . " it be too bad to bear _me_ malice . you ought to be oblige to I for tell you . " " so I be , " say , abruptly , speak with that kind of double soul which belong to dreamer who answer question . " I expect to hear of the marriage , " say , playfully . " never ! you will never hear of the marriage ! " with those word utter impetuously , will rise , put out he hand to , still with the air of a somnambulist , and go away . when he be gone , leave she chair and walk to the other end of the room , lean when she get there against a chiffonniere , and look out of the window wearily . she be oppress by ennui , and by that dissatisfaction which in woman 's mind be continually turn into a trivial jealousy , refer to no real claim , spring from no deeper passion than the vague exactingness of egoism , and yet capable of impelling action as well as speech . " there really be nothing to care for much , " say poor inwardly , think of the family at , who do not write to she ; and that perhaps when he come home would tease she about expense . she have already secretly disobey he by ask she father to help they , and he have end decisively by say , " I be more likely to want help myself . " . good phrasis be surely , and ever be , very commendable . -- shallow . a few day afterwards -- it be already the end of -- there be a occasion which cause some excitement in : the public , if it choose , be to have the advantage of buying , under the distinguished auspices of , the furniture , book , and picture which anybody might see by the handbill to be the best in every kind , belong to , . this be not one of the sale indicate the depression of trade ; on the contrary , it be due to 's great success in the carry business , which warrant he purchase of a mansion near already furnish in high style by a illustrious spa physician -- furnish indeed with such large frameful of expensive flesh - pain in the dining - room , that be nervous until reassure by find the subjects to be scriptural . hence the fine opportunity to purchaser which be well point out in the handbill of , whose acquaintance with the history of art enable he to state that the hall furniture , to be sell without reserve , comprise a piece of carve by a contemporary of Gibbons . at in those time a large sale be regard as a kind of festival . there be a table spread with the best cold eatables , as at a superior funeral ; and facility be offer for that generous -drinking of cheerful glassis which might lead to generous and cheerful bidding for undesirable article . 's sale be the more attractive in the fine weather because the house stand just at the end of the town , with a garden and stable attach , in that pleasant issue from call the , which be also the road to the and to 's retired residence , know as the . in short , the auction be as good as a fair , and draw all class with leisure at command : to some , who risk make bid in order simply to raise price , it be almost equal to bett at the races . the second day , when the best furniture be to be sell , " everybody " be there ; even , the rector of 's , have look in for a short time , wish to buy the carve table , and have rub elbow with and . there be a wreath of lady accommodate with seat round the large table in the dining - room , where be mount with desk and hammer ; but the row chiefly of masculine face behind be often vari by incoming and outgoing both from the door and the large bow - window opening on to the lawn . " everybody " that day do not include , whose health could not well endure crowd and draught . but have particularly wish to have a certain picture -- a " at , " attribute in the catalogue to ; and at the last moment before the day of the sale have call at the office of the " , " of which he be now one of the proprietor , to beg of as a great favor that he would obligingly use he remarkable knowledge of picture on behalf of , and judge of the value of this particular painting -- " if , " add the scrupulously polite banker , " attendance at the sale would not interfere with the arrangement for you departure , which I know be imminent . " this proviso might have sound rather satirically in 's ear if he have be in a mood to care about such satire . it refer to a understanding enter into many week before with the proprietor
proprietor of the paper , that he should be at liberty any day he please to hand over the management to the subeditor whom he have be training ; since he wish finally to quit . but indefinite vision of ambition be weak against the ease of do what be habitual or beguilingly agreeable ; and we all know the difficulty of carry out a resolve when we secretly long that it may turn out to be unnecessary . in such state of mind the most incredulous person have a private leaning towards miracle : impossible to conceive how we wish could be fulfil , still -- very wonderful thing have happen ! will do not confess this weakness to himself , but he linger . what be the use of go to at that time of the year ? the man who would remember he be not there ; and so far as political writing be concerned , he would rather for a few week go on with the " . " at the present moment , however , when be speak to he , he have both a strengthen resolve to go and a equally strong resolve not to go till he have once more see . hence he reply that he have reason for deferring he departure a little , and would be happy to go to the sale . will be in a defiant mood , he consciousness be deeply sting with the thought that the people who look at he probably know a fact tantamount to a accusation against he as a fellow with low design which be to be frustrate by a disposal of property . like most people who assert they freedom with regard to conventional distinction , he be prepare to be sudden and quick at quarrel with any one who might hind that he have personal reason for that assertion -- that there be anything in he blood , he bear , or he character to which he give the mask of a opinion . when he be under a irritating impression of this kind he would go about for day with a defiant look , the color change in he transparent skin as if he be on the qui vive , watch for something which he have to dart upon . this expression be peculiarly noticeable in he at the sale , and those who have only see he in he mood of gentle oddity or of bright enjoyment would have be strike with a contrast . he be not sorry to have this occasion for appear in public before the tribe of , , and the rest , who look down on he as a adventurer , and be in a state of brutal ignorance about -- who sneer at he polish blood , and be themselves of a breed very much in need of crossing . he stand in a conspicuous place not far from the auctioneer , with a fore - finger in each side - pocket and he head throw backward , not care to speak to anybody , though he have be cordially welcome as a connoiss_ure_ by , who be enjoy the utmost activity of he great faculty . and surely among all man whose vocation require they to exhibit they power of speech , the happiest be a prosperous provincial auctioneer keenly alive to he own joke and sensible of he encyclopedic knowledge . some saturnine , sour - blooded person might object to be constantly insist on the merit of all article from boot - jack to " ; " but have a kindly liquid in he vein ; he be a admirer by nature , and would have like to have the universe under he hammer , feel that it would go at a higher figure for he recommendation . meanwhile 's drawing - room furniture be enough for he . when Will have come in , a second fender , say to have be forget in its right place , suddenly claim the auctioneer 's enthusiasm , which he distribute on the equitable principle of praise those thing most which be most in need of praise . the fender be of polished steel , with much lancet - sha open - work and a sharp edge . " now , lady , " say he , " I shall appeal to you . here be a fender which at any other sale would hardly be offer with out reserve , being , as I may say , for quality of steel and quaintness of design , a kind of thing " -- here drop he voice and become slightly nasal , trimm he outline with he left finger -- " that might not fall in with ordinary taste . allow I to tell you that by - and - by this style of workmanship will be the only one in vogue -- half - a - crown , you say ? thank you -- go at half - a - crown , this characteristic fender ; and I have particular information that the antique style be very much seek after in high quarter . three shilling -- three - and - sixpence -- hold it well up , ! look , lady , at the chastity of the design -- I have no doubt myself that it be turn out in the last century ! four shilling , ?-- four shilling . " " it be not a thing I would put in _my draw - room , " say , audibly , for the warning of the rash husband . " I wonder _at_ . every bless child 's head that fall against it would be cut in two . the edge be like a knife . " " quite true , " rejoin , quickly , " and most uncommonly useful to have a fender at hand that will
will cut , if you have a leather shoe - tie or a bit of string that want cutting and no knife at hand : many a man have be leave hang because there be no knife to cut he down . gentlemen , here be a fender that if you have the misfortune to hang yourselves would cut you down in no time -- with astonishing celerity -- four - and - sixpence -- five -- five - and - sixpence -- a appropriate thing for a spare bedroom where there be a four - poster and a guest a little out of he mind --six shilling -- thank you , Clintup -- go at six shilling -- go -- go ! " the auctioneer 's glance , which have be search round he with a preternatural susceptibility to all sign of bidding , here drop on the paper before he , and he voice too drop into a tone of indifferent despatch as he say , " . be handy , . " " it be worth six shilling to have a fender you could always tell that joke on , " say , laugh low and apologetically to he next neighbor . he be a diffident though distinguished nurseryman , and fear that the audience might regard he bid as a foolish one . have bring a trayful of small article . " now , lady , " say , take up one of the article , " this tray contain a very recherchy lot -- a collection of trifle for the drawing - room table -- and trifle make the sum _of human thing -- nothing more important than trifle --( yes , , yes , by - and - by ) -- but pass the tray round , -- these bijoux must be examined , lady . this I have in my hand be a ingenious contrivance -- a sort of practical rebus , I may call it : here , you see , it look like a elegant heart - shape box , portable -- for the pocket ; there , again , it become like a splendid double flower -- a ornament for the table ; and now " -- allow the flower to fall alarmingly into string of heart - shape leave -- " a book of riddle ! no less than five hundred print in a beautiful red . gentlemen , if I have less of a conscience , I should not wish you to bid high for this lot -- I have a longing for it myself . what can promote innocent mirth , and I may say virtue , more than a good riddle ?-- it hinder profane language , and attach a man to the society of refin female . this ingenious article itself , without the elegant domino - box , card - basket , & c. , ought alone to give a high price to the lot . carry in the pocket it might make a individual welcome in any society . four shilling , sir ?-- four shilling for this remarkable collection of riddle with the et caetera . here be a sample : ' how must you spell honey to make it catch lady - bird ? answer -- money . ' you hear ?--lady - bird -- honey money . this be a amusement to sharpen the intellect ; it have a sting -- it have what we call satire , and wit without indecency . four - and - sixpence -- five shilling . " the bidding run on with warming rivalry . be a bidder , and this be too exasperating . Bowyer could not afford it , and only want to hinder every other man from make a figure . the current carry even with it , but this committal of himself to a opinion fell from he with so little sacrifice of he neutral expression , that the bid might not have be detect as he but for the friendly oath of , who want to know what would do with blasted stuff only fit for haberdasher give over to that state of perdition which the horse - dealer so cordially recognize in the majority of earthly existence . the lot be finally knock down at a guinea to , a young Slender of the neighborhood , who be reckless with he pocket - money and feel he want of memory for riddle . " come , , this be too bad -- you have be put some old maid 's rubbish into the sale , " murmure , get close to the auctioneer . " I want to see how the print go , and I must be off soon . " " _Im_mediately , . it be only a act of benevolence which you noble heart would approve . ! quick with the print -- 235 . now , gentlemen , you who be connoiss_ure , you be go to have a treat . here be a engraving of the of surround by he staff on the of ; and notwithstand recent event which have , as it be , envelope we great hero in a cloud , I will be bold to say -- for a man in my line must not be blow about by political wind -- that a finer subject -- of the modern order , belong to we own time and epoch -- the understanding of man could hardly conceive : angels might , perhaps , but not man , sir , not man . " " who paint it ? " say , much impressed . " it be a proof before the letter , -- the painter be not know , " answer , with a certain gaspingness in he last word , after which he purse up he lip and stare round he . " I will bid a pound
pound ! " say , in a tone of resolve emotion , as of a man ready to put himself in the breach . whether from awe or pity , nobody raise the price on he . next come two Dutch print which have be eager for , and after he have secure they he go away . other print , and afterward some painting , be sold to lead Middlemarchers who have come with a special desire for they , and there be a more active movement of the audience in and out ; some , who have buy what they want , go away , other come in either quite newly or from a temporary visit to the refreshment which be spread under the marquee on the lawn . it be this marquee that be bend on buying , and he appear to like look inside it frequently , as a foretaste of its possession . on the last occasion of he return from it he be observ to bring with he a new companion , a stranger to and every one else , whose appearance , however , lead to the supposition that he might be a relative of the horse - dealer 's -- also " give to indulgence . " he large whisker , impos swagger , and swing of the leg , make he a strike figure ; but he suit of black , rather shabby at the edge , cause the prejudicial inference that he be not able to afford himself as much indulgence as he like . " who be it you have pick up , ? " say , aside . " ask he yourself , " return . " he say he would just turn in from the road . " ey the stranger , who be lean back against he stick with one hand , use he toothpick with the other , and look about he with a certain restlessness apparently under the silence impos on he by circumstance . at length the " at " be bring forward , to immense relief , for he be get so tired of the proceedings that he have draw back a little and lean he shoulder against the wall just behind the auctioneer . he now come forward again , and he eye catch the conspicuous stranger , who , rather to he surprise , be star at he markedly . but be immediately appeal to by . " yes , , yes ; this interest you as a connoiss_ure_ , I think . it be some pleasure , " the auctioneer go on with a rise fervor , " to have a picture like this to show to a company of lady and gentleman -- a picture worth any sum to a individual whose mean be on a level with he judgment . it be a painting of the italian school -- by the celebrated , the greatest painter in the world , the chief of the , as they be call -- I take it , because they be up to a thing or two beyond most of we -- in possession of secret now lose to the bulk of mankind . let I tell you , gentlemen , I have see a great many picture by the , and they be not all up to this mark -- some of they be darker than you might like and not family subject . but here be a -- the frame alone be worth pound -- which any lady might be proud to hang up -- a suitable thing for what we call a refectory in a charitable institution , if any gentleman of the wish to show he munifi_cence _. turn it a little , sir ? yes . Joseph , turn it a little towards -- , have be abroad , understand the merit of these thing , you observe . " all eyes be for a moment turn towards , who say , coolly , " five pound . " the auctioneer burst out in deep remonstrance . " ah ! ! the frame alone be worth that . lady and gentleman , for the credit of the town ! suppose it should be discover hereafter that a gem of art have be amongst we in this town , and nobody in awake to it . five guinea -- five seven - six -- five ten . still , lady , still ! it be a gem , and ' full many a gem , ' as the poet say , have be allow to go at a nominal price because the public knew no better , because it be offer in circle where there be -- I be go to say a low feeling , but no !-- six pound -- six guinea -- a Guydo of the first order go at six guinea -- it be a insult to religion , lady ; it touch we all as , gentlemen , that a subject like this should go at such a low figure -- six pound ten -- seven -- " the bidding be brisk , and will continue to share in it , remember that . have a strong wish for the picture , and think that he might stretch the price to twelve pound . but it be knock down to he at ten guinea , whereupon he push he way towards the bow - window and go out . he choose to go under the marquee to get a glass of water , be hot and thirsty : it be empty of other visitor , and he ask the woman in attendance to fetch he some fresh water ; but before she be well go he be annoyed to see enter the florid stranger who have stare at he . it struck at this moment that the man might be one of those
those political parasitic insect of the bloated kind who have once or twice claim acquaintance with he as have hear he speak on the Reform question , and who might think of get a shilling by news . in this light he person , already rather heat to behold on a summer 's day , appear the more disagreeable ; and , half - seat on the elbow of a garden - chair , turn he eye carefully away from the comer . but this signify little to we acquaintance , who never hesitate to thrust himself on unwilling observation , if it suit he purpose to do so . he move a step or two till he be in front of , and say with full - mouthe haste , " excuse I , -- be you mother 's name ? " will , start to he foot , move backward a step , frown , and say with some fierceness , " yes , sir , it be . and what be that to you ? " it be in 's nature that the first spark it throw our be a direct answer of the question and a challenge of the consequence . to have say , " what be that to you ? " in the first instance , would have see like shuffling -- as if he mind who know anything about he origin ! Raffle on he side have not the same eagerness for a collision which be imply in 's threatening air . the slim young fellow with he girl 's complexion look like a tiger - cat ready to spre on he . under such circumstance 's pleasure in annoy he company be keep in abeyance . " no offence , my good sir , no offence ! I only remember you mother -- kknow she when she be a girl . but it be you father that you feature , sir . I have the pleasure of see you father too . Parents alive , ? " " no ! " thunder , in the same attitude as before . " should be glad to do you a service , -- by , I should ! hope to meet again . " , who have lift he hat with the last word , turn himself round with a swing of he leg and walk away . will look after he a moment , and could see that he do not re-enter the auction - room , but appear to be walk towards the road . for a instant he think that he have be foolish not to let the man go on talking ; -- but no ! on the whole he prefer do without knowledge from that source . later in the evening , however , overtake he in the street , and appear either to have forget the roughness of he former reception or to intend avenge it by a forgive familiarity , greet he jovially and walk by he side , remark at first on the pleasantness of the town and neighborhood . will suspect that the man have be drink and be consider how to shake he off when Raffles say -- " I have be abroad myself , -- I have see the world -- use to parley - vous a little . it be at I see you father -- a most uncommon likeness you be of he , by ! mouth --nose --eye --hay turn off you brow just like he -- a little in the foreign style . do not do much of that . but you father be very ill when I see he . , lord ! hand you might see through . you be a small youngster then . do he get well ? " " no , " say , curtly . " ah ! well ! I have often wonder what become of you mother . she run away from she friend when she be a young lass -- a proud -spirited lass , and pretty , by ! I know the reason why she run away , " say Raffles , wink slowly as he look sideway at . " you know nothing dishonorable of she , sir , " say , turn on he rather savagely . but just now be not sensitive to shade of manner . " not a bit ! " say he , toss he head decisively " she be a little too honorable to like she friend -- that be it ! " here Raffles again wink slowly . " bless you , I know all about 'em -- a little in what you may call the respectable thieving line -- the high style of receiving - house -- none of you hole and corners-- first - rate . Slap - up shop , high profit and no mistake . but ! would have know nothing about it -- a dashing young lady she be -- fine boarding - school -- fit for a lord 's wife -- only throw it at she out of spite , because she would have nothing to do with he . and so she run away from the whole concern . I travel for 'em , sir , in a gentlemanly way -- at a high salary . they do not mind she run away at first -- godly folk , sir , very godly -- and she be for the stage . the son be alive then , and the daughter be at a discount . Hallo ! here we be at the . what do you say , ?-- shall we turn in and have a glass ? " " no , I must say good evening , " say , dash up a passage which lead into , and almost run to get out of 's reach . he walk a long while on
on the road away from the town , glad of the starlit darkness when it come . he feel as if he have have dirt cast on he amidst shout of scorn . there be this to confirm the fellow 's statement -- that he mother never would tell he the reason why she have run away from she family . well ! what be he , Will Ladislaw , the worse , suppose the truth about that family to be the ugliest ? he mother have brave hardship in order to separate herself from it . but if 's friend have know this story -- if the have know it -- they would have have a fine color to give they suspicions a welcome ground for think he unfit to come near she . however , let they suspect what they please , they would find themselves in the wrong . they would find out that the blood in he vein be as free from the taint of meanness as theirs . . " Inconsistency , " answer , " can not both be right , but impute to man they may both be true . " -- . the same night , when return from a journey to Brasse on business , he good wife meet he in the entrance - hall and draw he into he private sitting - room . " , " she say , fix she honest eye upon he anxiously , " there have be such a disagreeable man here ask for you -- it have make I quite uncomfortable . " " what kind of man , my dear , " say , dreadfully certain of the answer . " a red -faced man with large whisker , and most impudent in he manner . he declare he be a old friend of yours , and say you would be sorry not to see he . he want to wait for you here , but I tell he he could see you at the to - morrow morning . most impudent he be !-- star at I , and say he friend have luck in wife . I do not believe he would have go away , if have not happen to break he chain and come run round on the gravel -- for I be in the garden ; so I say , ' you would better go away -- the dog be very fierce , and I can not hold he . ' do you really know anything of such a man ? " " I believe I know who he be , my dear , " say , in he usual subdu voice , " a unfortunate dissolute wretch , whom I help too much in day go by . however , I presume you will not be trouble by he again . he will probably come to the -- to beg , doubtless . " no more be say on the subject until the next day , when have return from the town and be dress for dinner . he wife , not sure that he be come home , look into he dressing - room and see he with he coat and cravat off , lean one arm on a chest of drawer and stare absently at the ground . he start nervously and look up as she enter . " you look very ill , . be there anything the matter ? " " I have a good deal of pain in my head , " say , who be so frequently ail that he wife be always ready to believe in this cause of depression . " sit down and let I sponge it with vinegar . " physically do not want the vinegar , but morally the affectionate attention soothe he . though always polite , it be he habit to receive such service with marital coolness , as he wife 's duty . but to - day , while she be bend over he , he say , " you be very good , , " in a tone which have something new in it to she ear ; she do not know exactly what the novelty be , but she woman 's solicitude shape itself into a darting think that he might be go to have a illness . " have anything worri you ? " she say . " do that man come to you at the ? " " yes ; it be as I have suppose . he be a man who at one time might have do better . but he have sunk into a drunken debauched creature . " " be he quite go away ? " say , anxiously but for certain reason she refrain from add , " it be very disagreeable to hear he call himself a friend of yours . " at that moment she would not have like to say anything which imply she habitual consciousness that she husband 's earlier connection be not quite on a level with she own . not that she know much about they . that she husband have at first be employ in a bank , that he have afterwards enter into what he call city business and gain a fortune before he be three - and - thirty , that he have marry a widow who be much older than himself -- a Dissenter , and in other way probably of that disadvantageous quality usually perceptible in a first wife if inquire into with the dispassionate judgment of a second -- be almost as much as she have care to learn beyond the glimpse which 's narrative occasionally give of he early bent towards religion , he inclination to be a preacher , and he association with missionary and philanthropic effort . she believe in he as a excellent man whose piety carry a peculiar eminence
eminence in belong to a layman , whose influence have turn she own mind toward seriousness , and whose share of perishable good have be the means of raise she own position . but she also like to think that it be well in every sense for to have win the hand of ; whose family be undeniable in a light - - a better light surly than any thrown in thoroughfare or dissent chapel - yard . the unreformed provincial mind distrust ; and while true religion be everywhere save , honest be convinced that to be save in the be more respectable . she so much wish to ignore towards other that she husband have ever be a , that she like to keep it out of sight even in talk to he . he be quite aware of this ; indeed in some respects he be rather afraid of this ingenuous wife , whose imitative piety and native worldliness be equally sincere , who have nothing to be asham of , and whom he have marry out of a thorough inclination still subsist . but he fear be such as belong to a man who care to maintain he recognize supremacy : the loss of high consideration from he wife , as from every one else who do not clearly hate he out of enmity to the truth , would be as the beginning of death to he . when she say -- " be he quite go away ? " " oh , I trust so , " he answer , with a effort to throw as much sober unconcern into he tone as possible ! but in truth be very far from a state of quiet trust . in the interview at the , have make it evident that he eagerness to torment be almost as strong in he as any other greed . he have frankly say that he have turn out of the way to come to , just to look about he and see whether the neighborhood would suit he to live in . he have certainly have a few debt to pay more than he expect , but the two hundred pound be not go yet : a cool five - and - twenty would suffice he to go away with for the present . what he have want chiefly be to see he friend and family , and know all about the prosperity of a man to whom he be so much attach . by - and - by he might come back for a longer stay . this time Raffle decline to be " see off the premise , " as he express it -- decline to quit under 's eye . he mean to go by coach the next day -- if he choose . feel himself helpless . neither threats nor coaxing could avail : he could not count on any persistent fear nor on any promise . on the contrary , he feel a cold certainty at he heart that -- unless providence send death to hinder he -- would come back to before long . and that certainty be a terror . it be not that he be in danger of legal punishment or of beggary : he be in danger only of see disclose to the judgment of he neighbor and the mournful perception of he wife certain fact of he past life which would render he a object of scorn and a opprobrium of the religion with which he have diligently associate himself . the terror of be judge sharpend the memory : it send a inevitable glare over that long -unvisited past which have be habitually recal only in general phrase . even without memory , the life be bound into one by a zone of dependence in growth and decay ; but intense memory force a man to own he blameworthy past . with memory set smart like a reopen wound , a man 's past be not simply a dead history , a outworn preparation of the present : it be not a repent error shake loose from the life : it be a still quivering part of himself , bring shudder and bitter flavors and the tingling of a merit shame . into this second life 's past have now risen , only the pleasure of it seem to have lose they quality . night and day , without interruption save of brief sleep which only wove retrospect and fear into a fantastic present , he feel the scene of he earlier life come between he and everything else , as obstinately as when we look through the window from a lighted room , the object we turn we back on be still before we , instead of the grass and the tree the successive event inward and outward be there in one view : though each might be dwelt on in turn , the rest still keep they hold in the consciousness . once more he see himself the young banker 's clerk , with a agreeable person , as clever in figure as he be fluent in speech and fond of theological definition : a eminent though young member of a dissenting church at , have have striking experience in conviction of sin and sense of pardon . again he hear himself call for as in prayer meeting , speak on religious platform , preach in private house . again he feel himself think of the ministry as possibly he vocation , and inclin towards missionary labor . that be the happiest time of he life : that be the spot he would have choose now to awake in and find the rest a dream . the people among whom be distinguished be very few , but they be very near to he , and stir he satisfaction the more ; he power stretch through a narrow space
space , but he feel it be effect the more intensely . he believe without effort in the peculiar work of within he , and in the sign that intend he for special instrumentality . then come the moment of transition ; it be with the sense of promotion he have when he , a orphan educated at a commercial charity - school , be invite to a fine villa belong to , the richest man in the congregation . he become a intimate there , honor for he piety by the wife , mark out for he ability by the husband , whose wealth be due to a flourishing city and west - end trade . that be the setting - in of a new current for he ambition , direct he prospects of " instrumentality " towards the uniting of distinguished religious gift with successful business . by - and - by come a decided external lead : a confidential subordinate partner die , and nobody seem to the principal so well fit to fill the severely felt vacancy as he young friend , if he would become confidential accountant . the offer be accept . the business be a pawnbroker 's , of the most magnificent sort both in extent and profit ; and on a short acquaintance with it become aware that one source of magnificent profit be the easy reception of any goods offer , without strict inquiry as to where they come from . but there be a branch house at the west end , and no pettiness or dinginess to give suggestion of shame . he remembe he first moment of shrinking . they be private , and be fill with argument ; some of these take the form of prayer . the business be establish and have old root ; be it not one thing to set up a new gin - palace and another to accept a investment in a old one ? the profit make out of lost soul -- where can the line be draw at which they begin in human transaction ? be it not even 's way of save he chosen ? " thou knowest , " -- the young have say then , as the older be say now -- " thou knowest how loose my soul sit from these thing -- how I view they all as implement for tilling rescu here and there from the wilderness . " metaphor and precedent be not want ; peculiar spiritual experience be not want which at last make the retention of he position seem a service demand of he : the vista of a fortune have already open itself , and 's shrinking remain private . have never expect that there would be any shrinking at all : he have never conceive that tray have anything to do with the scheme of salvation . and it be true that find himself carry on two distinct life ; he religious activity could not be incompatible with he business as soon as he have argue himself into not feel it incompatible . mentally surround with that past again , have the same plea -- indeed , the year have be perpetually spinn they into intricate thickness , like mass of spider - web , padde the moral sensibility ; nay , as age make egoism more eager but less enjoy , he soul have become more saturated with the belief that he do everything for 's sake , be indifferent to it for he own . and yet -- if he could be back in that far - off spot with he youthful poverty -- why , then he would choose to be a missionary . but the train of cause in which he have lock himself go on . there be trouble in the fine villa at . year before , the only daughter have run away , defy she parent , and go on the stage ; and now the only boy die , and after a short time die also . the wife , a simple pious woman , leave with all the wealth in and out of the magnificent trade , of which she never know the precise nature , have come to believe in , and innocently adore he as woman often adore they priest or " man -made " minister . it be natural that after a time marriage should have be think of between they . but have qualm and yearning about she daughter , who have long be regard as lose both to and she parent . it be know that the daughter have marry , but she be utterly go out of sight . the mother , have lose she boy , imagine a grandson , and wish in a double sense to reclaim she daughter . if she be find , there would be a channel for property -- perhaps a wide one -- in the provision for several grandchild . efforts to find she must be make before would marry again . concur ; but after advertisement as well as other mode of inquiry have be try , the mother believe that she daughter be not to be find , and consent to marry without reservation of property . the daughter have be find ; but only one man besides know it , and he be pay for keeping silence and carry himself away . that be the bare fact which be now force to see in the rigid outline with which act present themselves onlooker . but for himself at that distant time , and even now in burn memory , the fact be break into little sequence , each justifi as it come by reasoning which seem to prove it righteous . 's course up to that time have , he think , be sanction by remarkable providence , appear to point the way for he to
to be the agent in make the best use of a large property and withdraw it from perversion . and other striking disposition , such as feminine trustfulness , have come ; and would have adopt 's word -- " do you call these bare event ? the pity you ! " the event be comparatively small , but the essential condition be there -- namely , that they be in favor of he own end . it be easy for he to settle what be due from he to other by inquire what be 's intention with regard to himself . could it be for 's service that this fortune should in any considerable proportion go to a young woman and she husband who be give up to the lightest pursuit , and might scatter it abroad in triviality -- people who seem to lie outside the path of remarkable providence ? Bulstrode have never say to himself beforehand , " the daughter shall not be find " -- nevertheless when the moment come he keep she existence hide ; and when other moment follow , he soothe the mother with consolation in the probability that the unhappy young woman might be no more . there be hour in which feel that he action be unrighteous ; but how could he go back ? he have mental exercise , call himself nuy laid hold on redemption , and go on in he course of instrumentality . and after five year again come to wie he path , by take away he wife . he do gradually withdraw he capital , but he do not make the sacrifice requisite to put a end to the business , which be carry on for thirteen year afterwards before it finally collapse . meanwhile have use he hundr thousand discreetly , and be become provincially , solidly important -- a banker , a , a public benefactor ; also a sleeping partner in trading concern , in which he ability be direct to economy in the raw material , as in the case of the dyes which rot 's silk . and now , when this respectability have last undisturbed for nearly thirty year -- when all that proceed it have long lain benumbed in the consciousness -- that past have risen and immerse he thought as if with the terrible irruption of a new sense overburthen the feeble being . meanwhile , in he conversation with Raffles , he have learn something momentous , something which enter actively into the struggle of he longing and terror . there , he think , lay a opening towards spiritual , perhaps towards material rescue . the spiritual kind of rescue be a genuine need with he . there may be coarse hypocrite , who consciously affect belief and emotion for the sake of gull the world , but be not one of they . he be simply a man whose desire have be stronger than he theoretic beliefs , and who have gradually explain the gratification of he desire into satisfactory agreement with those belief . if this be hypocrisy , it be a process which show itself occasionally in we all , to whatever confession we belong , and whether we believe in the future perfection of we race or in the nearest date fix for the end of the world ; whether we regard the earth as a putrefy nidus for a save remnant , include ourselves , or have a passionate belief in the solidarity of mankind . the service he could do to the cause of religion have be through life the ground he allege to himself for he choice of action : it have be the motive which he have pour out in he prayer . who would use money and position better than he mean to use they ? who could surpass he in self - abhorrence and exaltation of 's cause ? and to 's cause be something distinct from he own rectitude of conduct : it enforce a discrimination of 's enemy , who be to be use merely as instrument , and whom it would be as well if possible to keep out of money and consequent influence . also , profitable investment in trade where the power of the prince of this world show it be most active device , become sanctified by a right application of the profit in the hand of 's servant . this implicit reasoning be essentially no more peculiar to evangelical belief than the use of wide phrasis for narrow motive be peculiar to . there be no general doctrine which be not capable of eat out we morality if uncheck by the deep - seat habit of direct fellow - feeling with individual fellow- man . but a man who believe in something else than he own greed , have necessarily a conscience or standard to which he more or less adapt himself . 's standard have be he serviceableness to 's cause : " I be sinful and notch -- a vessel to be consecrate by use -- but use I ! " -- have be the mould into which he have constrain he immense need of be something important and predominat . and now have come a moment in which that mould see in danger of be break and utterly cast away . what if the act he have reconcile himself to because they make he a stronger instrument of the divine glory , be to become the pretext of the scoffer , and a darkening of that glory ? if this be to be the ruling of , he be cast out from the temple as one who have bring unclean offering . he have long pour out utterance of repentance . but today a repentance have come which be of a bitterer flavor , and a threatening Providence urge he to a kind of propitiation
propitiation which be not simply a doctrinal transaction . the divine tribunal have change its aspect for he ; self - prostration be no longer enough , and he must bring restitution in he hand . it be really before he God that be about to attempt such restitution as see possible : a great dread have seize he susceptible frame , and the scorching approach of shame wrotch in he a new spiritual need . night and day , while the resurgent threatening past be make a conscience within he , he be think by what mean he could recover peace and trust -- by what sacrifice he could stay the rod . he belief in these moment of dread be , that if he spontaneously do something right , would save he from the consequence of wrong - do . for religion can only change when the emotion which fill it be change ; and the religion of personal fear remain nearly at the level of the savage . he have see Raffles actually go away on the Brassing coach , and this be a temporary relief ; it remove the pressure of a immediate dread , but do not put a end to the spiritual conflict and the need to win protection . at last he come to a difficult resolve , and write a letter to , begge he to be at the that even for a private interview at nine o'clock . will have feel no particular surprise at the request , and connect it with some new notion about the " pioneer ; " but when he be show into 's private room , he be strike with the painfully worn look on the banker 's face , and be go to say , " be you ill ? " when , check himself in that abruptness , he only inquire after , and she satisfaction with the picture buy for she . " thank you , she be quite satisfied ; she have go out with she daughter this evening . I beg you to come , , because I have a communication of a very private -- indeed , I will say , of a sacredly confidential nature , which I desire to make to you . nothing , I dare say , have be farther from you thought than that there have be important tie in the past which could connect you history with mine . " will feel something like a electric shock . he be already in a state of keen sensitiveness and hardly allay agitation on the subject of tie in the past , and he presentiment be not agreeable . it seem like the fluctuation of a dream -- as if the action begin by that lould bloate stranger be be carry on by this pale - ey sickly look piece of respectability , whose subdue tone and glib formality of speech be at this moment almost as repulsive to he as they remember contrast . he answer , with a mark change of color -- " no , indeed , nothing . " " you see before you , , a man who be deeply stricken . but for the urgency of conscience and the knowledge that I be before the bar of one who seeth not as man seeth , I should be under no compulsion to make the disclosure which have be my object in ask you to come here to - night . so far as human law go , you have no claim on I whatever . " will be even more uncomfortable than wonder . have pause , lean he head on he hand , and look at the floor . but he now fix he examining glance on and say -- " I be tell that you mother 's name be , and that she run away from she friend to go on the stage . also , that you father be at one time much emaciate by illness . may I ask if you can confirm these statement ? " " yes , they be all true , " say , strike with the order in which a inquiry have come , that might have be expect to be preliminary to the banker 's previous hint . but have to - night follow the order of he emotion ; he entertaine no doubt that the opportunity for restitution have come , and he have a overpowering impulse towards the penitential expression by which he be deprecat chastisement . " do you know any particular of you mother 's family ? " he continue . " no ; she never like to speak of they . she be a very generous , honorable woman , " say , almost angrily . " I do not wish to allege anything against she . do she never mention she mother to you at all ? " " I have hear she say that she think she mother do not know the reason of she run away . she say ' poor mother ' in a pitying tone . " " that mother become my wife , " say , and then pause a moment before he add , " you have a claim on I , : as I say before , not a legal claim , but one which my conscience recognize . I be enrich by that marriage -- a result which would probably not have take place -- certainly not to the same extent -- if you grandmother could have discover she daughter . that daughter , I gather , be no longer liive ! " " no , " say , feel suspicion and repugnance rise so strongly within he , that without quite know what he do , he take he hat from the floor and stand up . the impulse within he be to reject the disclosed
disclosed connection . " pray be seat , , " say , anxiously . " doubtless you be start by the suddenness of this discovery . but I entreat you patience with one who be already bow down by inward trial . " will reseate himself , feel some pity which be half contempt for this voluntary self - abasement of a elderly man . " it be my wish , , to make amend for the deprivation which befell you mother . I know that you be without fortune , and I wish to supply you adequately from a store which would have probably already be yours have you grandmother be certain of you mother 's existence and be able to find she . " pause . he feel that he be perform a striking piece of scrupulosity in the judgment of he auditor , and a penitential act in the eyes of . he have no clew to the state of 's mind , smarting as it be from the clear hint of Raffles , and with its natural quickness in construction stimulate by the expectation of discoveries which he would have be glad to conjure back into darkness . will make no answer for several moment , till , who at the end of he speech have cast he eye on the floor , now raise they with a examine glance , which will meet fully , say -- " I suppose you do know of my mother 's existence , and know where she might have be find . " Bulstrode shrank -- there be a visible quivering in he face and hand . he be totally unprepared to have he advance meet in this way , or to find himself urge into more revelation than he have beforehand set down as needful . but at that moment he da not tell a lie , and he feel suddenly uncertain of he ground which he have trodden with some confidence before . " I will not deny that you conjecture rightly , " he answer , with a faltering in he tone . " and I wish to make atonement to you as the one still remain who have suffer a loss through I . you enter , I trust , into my purpose , , which have a reference to higher than merely human claim , and as I have already say , be entirely independent of any legal compulsion . I be ready to narrow my own resource and the prospects of my family by bind myself to allow you five hundred pound yearly during my life , and to leave you a proportional capital at my death -- nay , to do still more , if more should be definitely necessary to any laudable project on you part . " have go on to particular in the expectation that these would work strongly on , and merge other feeling in grateful acceptance . but be look as stubborn as possible , with he lip pouting and he finger in he side - pocket . he be not in the least touche , and say firmly ,-- " before I make any reply to you proposition , , I must beg you to answer a question or two . be you connect with the business by which that fortune you speak of be originally make ? " 's thought be , " Raffle have tell he . " how could he refuse to answer when he have volunteer what draw forth the question ? he answer , " yes . " " and be that business -- or be it not -- a thoroughly dishonorable one -- nay , one that , if it be nature have be make public , might have rank those concerned in it with thief and convict ? " 's tone have a cutting bitterness : he be move to put he question as nakedly as he could . redden with irrepressible anger . he have be prepare for a scene of self - abasement , but he intense pride and he habit of supremacy overpower penitence , and even dread , when this young man , whom he have mean to benefit , turn on he with the air of a judge . " the business be establish before I become connect with it , sir ; nor be it for you to institute a inquiry of that kind , " he answer , not raise he voice , but speak with quick defiantness . " yes , it be , " say , start up again with he hat in he hand . " it be eminently mine to ask such question , when I have to decide whether I will have transaction with you and accept you money . my unblemished honor be important to I . it be important to I to have no stain on my birth and connection . and now I find there be a stain which I can not help . my mother feel it , and try to keep as clear of it as she could , and so will I . you shall keep you ill - gotten money . if I have any fortune of my own , I would willingly pay it to any one who could disprove what you have tell I . what I have to thank you for be that you keep the money till now , when I can refuse it . it ought to lie with a man 's self that he be a gentleman . good - night , sir . " be go to speak , but , with determine quickness , be out of the room in a instant , and in another the hall - door have close behind he . he be too strongly possess with passionate rebellion against this inherit blot which have be thrust on he
he knowledge to reflect at present whether he have not be too hard on -- too arrogantly merciless towards a man of sixty , who be make effort at retrieval when time have render they avain . no third person listening could have thoroughly understand the impetuosity of will 's repulse or the bitterness of he word . no one but himself then know how everything connect with the sentiment of he own dignity have a immediate bearing for he on he relation to and to 's treatment of he . and in the rush of impulse by which he fling back that offer of 's there be mingl the sense that it would have be impossible for he ever to tell Dorothea that he have accept it . as for -- when Will be go he suffer a violent reaction , and weep like a woman . it be the first time he have encounter a open expression of scorn from any man higher than Raffles ; and with that scorn hurrie like venom through he system , there be no sensibility leave to consolation . Rut the relief of weeping have to be check . he wife and daughter soon come home from hear the address of a missionary , and be full of regret that papa have not hear , in the first instance , the interesting thing which they try to repeat to he . perhaps , through all other hidden thought , the one that breathe most comfort be , that will Ladislee at least be not likely to publish what have take place that even . . " he be a squyer of lowe degre , that love the king 's daughter of . -- . will 's mind be now wholly bend on see again , and forthwith quit . the morning after he agitating scene with he write a brief letter to she , say that various cause have detain he in the neighborhood longer than he have expect , and ask she permission to call again at at some hour which she would mention on the earliest possible day , he be anxious to depart , but unwilling to do so until she have grant he a interview . he leave the letter at the office , order the messenger to carry it to , and wait for a answer . feel the awkwardness of ask for more last word . he former farewell have be make in the hearing of , and have be announce as final even to the butler . it be certainly try to a man 's dignity to reappear when he be not expect to do so : a first farewell have patho in it , but to come back for a second lend a opening to comedy , and it be possible even that there might be bitter sneer afloat about 's motives for lingering . still it be on the whole more satisfactory to he feeling to take the directest means of see , than to use any device which might give a air of chance to a meeting of which he wish she to understand that it be what he earnestly seek . when he have part from she before , he have be in ignorance of fact which give a new aspect to the relation between they , and make a more absolute severance than he have then believe in . he know nothing of 's private fortune , and be little use to reflect on such matter , take it for grant that accord to 's arrangement marriage to he , , would mean that she consent to be penniless . that be not what he could wish for even in he secret heart , or even if she have be ready to meet such hard contrast for he sake . and then , too , there be the fresh smart of that disclosure about he mother 's family , which if know would be a add reason why 's friend should look down upon he as utterly below she . the secret hope that after some year he might come back with the sense that he have at least a personal value equal to she wealth , see now the dreamy continuation of a dream . this change would surely justify he in ask to receive he once more . but on that morning be not at home to receive 's note . in consequence of a letter from she uncle announce he intention to be at home in a week , she have drive first to to carry the news , mean to go on to the to deliver some order with which she uncle have intrust she -- think , as he say , " a little mental occupation of this sort good for a widow . " if could have overhear some of the talk at that morning , he would have feel all he supposition confirm as to the readiness of certain people to sneer at he lingering in the neighborhood . , indeed , though much relieved concerning , have be on the watch to learn 's movement , and have a instructed informant in , who be necessarily in he confidence on this matter . that have stay in nearly two month after he have declare that he be go immediately , be a fact to embitter 's suspicion , or at least to justify he aversion to a " young fellow " whom he represent to himself as slight , volatile , and likely enough to show such recklessness as naturally go along with a position unrivet by family tie or a strict profession . but he have just hear something from which , while it justify these surmise about , offer a means of nullify all danger with regard to . Unwont circumstances may make we all rather unlike ourselves : there be
be condition under which the most majestic person be obliged to sneeze , and we emotion be liable to be act on in the same incongruous manner . be this morning so far unlike himself that he be irritably anxious to say something to on a subject which he usually avoid as if it have be a matter of shame to they both . he could not use as a medium , because he do not choose that she should know the kind of gossip he have in he mind ; and before happen to arrive he have be try to imagine how , with he shyness and unready tongue , he could ever manage to introduce he communication . she unexpect presence bring he to utter hopelessness in he own power of say anything unpleasant ; but desperation suggest a resource ; he send the groom on a unsaddled horse across the park with a pencilled note to , who already know the gossip , and would think it no compromise of herself to repeat it as often as require . be detain on the good pretext that , whom she want to see , be expect at the hall within the hour , and she be still talk to on the gravel when , on the watch for the rector 's wife , see she come and meet she with the needful hint . " enough ! I understand , " -- say . " you shall be innocent . I be such a blackamoor that I can not smirch myself . " " I do not mean that it be of any consequence , " say , dislik that should understand too much . " only it be desirable that should know there be reason why she should not receive he again ; and I really can not say so to she . it will come lightly from you . " it come very lightly indeed . when quit and turn to meet they , it appear that Cadwallader have step across the park by the merest chance in the world , just to chat with in a matronly way about the baby . and so be come back ? delightful !--coming back , it be to be hope , quite cure of Parliamentary fever and pioneering . Apropo of the " " -- somebody have prophesy that it would soon be like a die dolphing , and turn all color for want of know how to help itself , because 's protege , the brilliant young , be go or go . have hear that ? the three be walk along the gravel slowly , and , turn aside to whip a shrub , say he have hear something of that sort . " all false ! " say . " he be not gone , or go , apparently ; the ' pioneer ' keep its color , and be make a sad dark - blue scandal by warbl continually with you 's wife , who they tell I be as pretty as pretty can be . it seem nobody ever go into the house without find this young gentleman lie on the rug or warbl at the piano . but the people in manufacturing town be always disreputable . " " you begin by say that one report be false , , and I believe this be false too , " say , with indignant energy ; " at least , I feel sure it be a misrepresentation . I will not hear any evil speak of ; he have already suffer too much injustice . " Dorothea when thoroughly move care little what any one thought of she feeling ; and even if she have be able to reflect , she would have hold it petty to keep silence at injuriious word about from fear of be herself misunderstood . she face be flush and she lip tremble . , glance at she , repent of he stratagem ; but , equal to all occasion , spread the palm of she hand outward and say -- " heaven grant it , my dear !-- I mean that all bad tale about anybody may be false . but it be a pity that young should have marry one of these girl . consider he be a son of somebody , he might have get a woman with good blood in she vein , and not too young , who would have put up with he profession . there be , for instance , whose friend do not know what to do with she ; and she have a portion . then we might have have she among we . however !--it's no use be wise for other people . where be ? pray let we go in . " " I be go on immediately to , " say , rather haughtily . " good - by . " could say nothing as he accompany she to the carriage . he be altogether discontent with the result of a contrivance which have cost he some secret humiliation beforehand . drive along between the berried hedgerow and the shorn corn-field , not see or hear anything around . the tear come and roll down she cheek , but she do not know it . the world , it seem , be turn ugly and hateful , and there be no place for she trustfulness . " it be not true -- it be not true ! " be the voice within she that she listen to ; but all the while a remembrance to which there have always clng a vague uneasiness would thrust itself on she attention -- the remembrance of that day when she have find with , and have hear he voice accompany by the piano . " he say he would never do anything that I disapprove -- I wish I could
could have tell he that I disapprove of that , " say poor Dorothea , inwardly , feel a strange alternation between anger with and the passionate defence of he . " they all try to blacke he before I ; but I will care for no pain , if he be not to blame . I always believe he be good . " -- these be she last thought before she feel that the carriage be pass under the archway of the lodge - gate at the , when she hurriedly press she handkerchief to she face and begin to think of she errand . the coachman beg leave to take out the horse for half a hour as there be something wrong with a shoe ; and Dorothea , have the sense that she be go to rest , take off she glove and bonnet , while she be lean against a statue in the entrance - hall , and talk to the housekeeper . at last she say -- " I must stay here a little , . I will go into the library and write you some memoranda from my uncle 's letter , if you will open the shutter for I . " " the shutter be open , madam , " say , follow , who have walk along as she speak . " be there , look for something . " ( will have come to fetch a portfolio of he own sketch which he have miss in the act of pack he movable , and do not choose to leave behind . ) 's heart seem to turn over as if it have have a blow , but she be not perceptibly check : in truth , the sense that will be there be for the moment all - satisfye to she , like the sight of something precious that one have lose . when she reach the door she say to -- " go in first , and tell he that I be here . " will have find he portfolio , and have lay it on the table at the far end of the room , to turn over the sketch and please himself by look at the memorable piece of art which have a relation to nature too mysterious for . he be smile at it still , and shake the sketch into order with the thought that he might find a letter from she await he at , when . Kell close to he elbow say -- " . be come in , sir . " will turn round quickly , and the next moment be enter . as . close the door behind she they meet : each be look at the other , and consciousness be overflow by something that suppress utterance . it be not confusion that keep they silent , for they both feel that parting be near , and there be no shamefacedness in a sad part . she move automatically towards she uncle 's chair against the writing - table , and , after draw it out a little for she , go a few pace off and stand opposite to she . " pray sit down , " say , cross she hand on she lap ; " I be very glad you be here . " will think that she face look just as it do when she first shook hand with he in ; for she widow 's cap , fix in she bonnet , have go off with it , and he could see that she have lately be shedding tear . but the mixture of anger in she agitation have vanish at the sight of he ; she have be use , when they be face to face , always to feel confidence and the happy freedom which come with mutual understanding , and how could other people 's word hinder that effect on a sudden ? let the music which can take possession of we frame and fill the air with joy for we , sound once more -- what do it signify that we hear it find fault with in its absence ? " I have send a letter to to - day , ask leave to see you , " say , seat himself opposite to she . " I be go away immediately , and I could not go without speak to you again . " " I think we have part when you come to Lowick many week ago -- you think you be go then , " say , she voice trembl a little . " yes ; but I be in ignorance than of thing which I know now -- thing which have alte my feeling about the future . when I see you before , I be dream that I might come back some day . I do not think I ever shall -- now . " will pause here . " you wish I to know the reason ? " say , timidly . " yes , " say , impetuously , shak he head backward , and look away from she with irritation in he face . " of course I must wish it . I have be grossly insult in you eye and in the eyes of other . there have be a mean implication against my character . I wish you to know that under no circumstance would I have lower myself by -- under no circumstance would I have give man the chance of say that I seek money under the pretext of seek -- something else . there be no need of other safeguard against I -- the safeguard of wealth be enough . " will rise from he chair with the last word and go -- he hardly know where ; but it be to the project window nearest he , which have
have be open as now about the same season a year ago , when he and have stand within it and talk together . she whole heart be go out at this moment in sympathy with 's indignation : she only want to convince he that she have never do he injustice , and he seem to have turn away from she as if she too have be part of the unfriendly world . " it would be very unkind of you to suppose that I ever attribute any meanness to you , " she begin . then in she ardent way , want to plead with he , she move from she chair and go in front of he to she old place in the window , say , " do you suppose that I ever disbelieve in you ? " when will see she there , he give a start and move backward out of the window , without meet she glance . be hurt by this movement follow up the previous anger of he tone . she be ready to say that it be as hard on she as on he , and that she be helpless ; but those strange particular of they relation which neither of they could explicitly mention keep she always in dread of say too much . at this moment she have no belief that will would in any case have want to marry she , and she fear use word which might imply such a belief . she only say earnestly , recurr to he last word -- " I be sure no safeguard be ever need against you . " will do not answer . in the stormy fluctuation of he feeling these word of hers seem to he cruelly neutral , and he look pale and miserable after he angry outburst . he go to the table and fasten up he portfolio , while look at he from the distance . they be waste these last moment together in wretched silence . what could he say , since what have get obstinately uppermost in he mind be the passionate love for she which he forbade himself to utter ? what could she say , since she might offer he no help -- since she be force to keep the money that ought to have be he ?--since to - day he seem not to respond as he use to do to she thorough trust and like ? but will at last turn away from he portfolio and approach the window again . " I must go , " he say , with that peculiar look of the eyes which sometimes accompany bitter feeling , as if they have be tired and burn with gaze too close at a light . " what shall you do in life ? " say , timidly . " have you intentions remain just the same as when we say good - by before ? " " yes , " say , in a tone that seem to waive the subject as uninteresting . " I shall work away at the first thing that offer . I suppose one get 's a habit of do without happiness or hope . " " oh , what sad word ! " say , with a dangerous tendency to sob . then try to smile , she add , " we use to agree that we be alike in speak too strongly . " " I have not speak too strongly now , " say , lean back against the angle of the wall . " there be certain thing which a man can only go through once in he life ; and he must know some time or other that the best be over with he . this experience have happen to I while I be very young -- that be all . what I care more for than I can ever care for anything else be absolutely forbidden to I -- I do not mean merely by be out of my reach , but forbide I , even if it be within my reach , by my own pride and honor -- by everything I respect myself for . of course I shall go on live as a man might do who have see heaven in a trance . " will pause , imagine that it would be impossible for to misunderstand this ; indeed he feel that he be contradict himself and offend against he self - approval in speak to she so plainly ; but still -- it could not be fairly call woo a woman to tell she that he would never wo she . it must be admit to be a ghostly kind of wooing . but 's mind be rapidly go over the past with quite another vision than he . the think that she herself might be what will most care for do throb through she a instant , but then come doubt : the memory of the little they have liv through together turn pale and shrank before the memory which suggest how much fuller might have be the intercourse between and some one else with whom he have have constant companionship . everything he have say might refer to that other relation , and whatever have pass between he and herself be thoroughly explain by what she have always regard as they simple friendship and the cruel obstruction thrust upon it by she husband 's injuriious act . stand silent , with she eye cast down dreamily , while image crowd upon she which leave the sickening certainty that be refer to . but why sicken ? he want she to know that here too he conduct should be above suspicion . will be not surprise at she silence . he mind also be tumultuously busy while he watch she , and he be feel rather wildly that
that something must happen to hinder they parting -- some miracle , clearly nothing in they own deliberate speech . yet , after all , have she any love for he ?-- he could not pretend to himself that he would rather believe she to be without that pain . he could not deny that a secret longe for the assurance that she love he be at the root of all he word . neither of they know how long they stand in that way . be raise she eye , and be about to speak , when the door open and she footman come to say -- " the horse be ready , madam , whenever you like to start . " " presently , " say . then turn to , she say , " I have some memoranda to write for the housekeeper . " " I must go , " say , when the door have close again -- advanc towards she . " the day after to - morrow I shall leave . " " you have act in every way rightly , " say , in a low tone , feel a pressure at she heart which make it difficult to speak . she put out she hand , and will take it for a instant without speak , for she word have see to he cruelly cold and unlike herself . they eye meet , but there be discontent in he , and in hers there be only sadness . he turn away and take he portfolio under he arm . " I have never do you injustice . please remember I , " say , repress a rise sob . " why should you say that ? " say , with irritation . " as if I be not in danger of forget everything else . " he have really a movement of anger against she at that moment , and it impell he to go away without pause . it be all one flash to -- he last word -- he distant bow to she as he reach the door -- the sense that he be no longer there . she sank into the chair , and for a few moment sit like a statue , while image and emotion be hurrie upon she . come first , in spite of the threatening train behind it -- joy in the impression that it be really herself whom will love and be renounce , that there be really no other love less permissible , more blameworthy , which honor be hurrie he away from . they be part all the same , but -- draw a deep breath and feel she strength return -- she could think of he unrestrainedly . at that moment the parting be easy to bear : the first sense of loving and be love exclude sorrow . it be as if some hard icy pressure have melte , and she consciousness have room to expand : she past be come back to she with larger interpretation . the joy be not the less -- perhaps it be the more complete just then -- because of the irrevocable parting ; for there be no reproach , no contemptuous wonder to imagine in any eye or from any lip . he have act so as to defy reproach , and make wonder respectful . any one watch she might have see that there be a fortifying thought within she . just as when inventive power be work with glad ease some small claim on the attention be fully meet as if it be only a cranny open to the sunlight , it be easy now for to write she memoranda . she speak she last word to the housekeeper in cheerful tone , and when she seat herself in the carriage she eye be bright and she cheek bloom under the dismal bonnet . she throw back the heavy " weeper , " and look before she , wonder which road will have take . it be in she nature to be proud that he be blameless , and through all she feeling there run this vein --" I be right to defend he . " the coachman be use to drive he gray at a good pace , be unenjoying and impatient in everything away from he desk , and want to get to the end of all journey ; and be now bowl along quickly . driving be pleasant , for rain in the night have lay the dust , and the blue sky look far off , away from the region of the great cloud that sail in mass . the earth look like a happy place under the vast heaven , and be wish that she might overtake and see he once more . after a turn of the road , there he be with the portfolio under he arm ; but the next moment she be pass he while he raise he hat , and she feel a pang at be seat there in a sort of exaltation , leave he behind . she could not look back at he . it be as if a crowd of indifferent objects have thrust they asunder , and force they along different path , take they farther and farther away from each other , and make it useless to look back . she could no more make any sign that would seem to say , " need we part ? " than she could stop the carriage to wait for he . Nay , what a world of reason crowd upon she against any movement of she think towards a future that might reverse the decision of this day ! " I only wish I have know before -- I wish he know -- then we could be quite happy in think of each other , though
though we be forever part . and if I could but have give he the money , and make thing easier for he ! " -- be the longing that come back the most persistently . and yet , so heavily do the world weigh on she in spite of she independent energy , that with this idea of as in need of such help and at a disadvantage with the world , there come always the vision of that unfittingness of any closer relation between they which lay in the opinion of every one connect with she . she feel to the full all the imperativeness of the motives which urge 's conduct . how could he dream of she defy the barrier that she husband have place between they ?-- how could she ever say to herself that she would defy it ? 's certainty as the carriage grow smaller in the distance , have much more bitterness in it . very slight matter be enough to gall he in he sensitive mood , and the sight of drive past he while he feel himself plodd along as a poor devil seek a position in a world which in he present temper offer he little that he covet , make he conduct seem a mere matter of necessity , and take away the sustainment of resolve . after all , he have no assurance that she love he : could any man pretend that he be simply glad in such a case to have the suffering all on he own side ? that evening will spend with the ; the next evening he be gone . . two Temptation . . these little thing be great to litle man.--GOLDSMIth . " have you see much of you scientific phoenix , , lately ? " say at one of he dinner - party , speak to on he right hand . " not much , I be sorry to say , " answer the , accustom to parry 's banter about he belief in the new medical light . " I be out of the way and he be too busy . " " be he ? I be glad to hear it , " say , with mingl suavity and surprise . " he give a great deal of time to the , " say , who have he reason for continue the subject : " I hear of that from my neighbor , , who go there often . she say be indefatigable , and be make a fine thing of 's institution . he be prepare a new ward in case of the cholera come to we . " " and prepare theories of treatment to try on the patient , I suppose , " say . " come , , be candid , " say . " you be too clever not to see the good of a bold fresh mind in medicine , as well as in everything else ; and as to , I fancy , none of you be very sure what you ought to do . if a man go a little too far along a new road , it be usually himself that he harm more than any one else . " " I be sure you and ought to be oblige to he , " say , look towards , " for he have send you the cream of 's patients . " " Lydgate have be live at a great rate for a young beginner , " say , the brewer . " I suppose he relation in the back he up . " " I hope so , " say , " else he ought not to have marry that nice girl we be all so fond of . hang it , one have a grudge against a man who carry off the prettiest girl in the town . " " ay , by ! and the best too , " say . " my friend do not half like the marriage , I know that , " say . " _he_ would not do much . how the relation on the other side may have come down I can not say . " there be a emphatic kind of reticence in 's manner of speak . " oh , I should not think ever look to practice for a living , " say , with a slight touch of sarcasm , and there the subject be drop . this be not the first time that have hear hints of 's expense be obviously too great to be meet by he practice , but he think it not unlikely that there be resource or expectation which excuse the large outlay at the time of 's marriage , and which might hinder any bad consequence from the disappointment in he practice . one evening , when he take the pain to go to on purpose to have a chat with as of old , he notice in he a air of excited effort quite unlike he usual easy way of keep silence or break it with abrupt energy whenever he have anything to say . talk persistently when they be in he work - room , put argument for and against the probability of certain biological view ; but he have none of those definite thing to say or to show which give the waymark of a patient uninterrupted pursuit , such as he use himself to insist on , say that " there must be a systole and diastole in all inquiry , " and that " a man 's mind must be continually expand and shrink between the whole human horizon and the horizon of a object - glass . " that evening he seem to be talk widely for the sake of resist any personal bearing ; and before long they go into the drawing room
room , where , have ask to give they music , sank back in he chair in silence , but with a strange light in he eye . " he may have be take a opiate , " be a thought that cross 's mind --" tic - douloureux perhaps -- or medical worries . " it do not occur to he that 's marriage be not delightful : he believe , as the rest do , that be a amiable , docile creature , though he have always think she rather uninteresting -- a little too much the pattern - card of the finishing - school ; and he mother could not forgive because she never seem to see that be in the room . " however , fall in love with she , " say the to himself , " and she must be to he taste . " be aware that be a proud man , but have very little corresponding fibre in himself , and perhaps too little care about personal dignity , except the dignity of not be mean or foolish , he could hardly allow enough for the way in which Lydgate shrank , as from a burn , from the utterance of any word about he private affair . and soon after that conversation at 's , the learn something which make he watch the more eagerly for a opportunity of indirectly let know that if he want to open himself about any difficulty there be a friendly ear ready . the opportunity come at 's , where , on 's , there be a party , to which be irresistibly invite , on the plea that he must not forsake he old friend on the first new year of he be a greater man , and rector as well as . and this party be thoroughly friendly : all the lady of the Farebrother family be present ; the Vincy child all dine at the table , and have persuade he mother that if she do not invite , the Farebrother would regard it as a slight to themselves , be they particular friend . come , and be in high spirit , though he enjoyment be of a checker kind -- triumph that he mother should see 's importance with the chief personage in the party be much streak with jealousy when Farebrother sit down by she . use to be much more easy about he own accomplishment in the day when he have not begin to dread be " bowle out by , " and this terror be still before he . , in she fullest matronly bloom , look at 's little figure , rough wavy hair , and visage quite without lily and rose , and wonder ; try unsuccessfully to fancy herself care about 's appearance in wedding clothes , or feel complacency in grandchild who would " feature " the Garth . however , the party be a merry one , and be particularly bright ; be glad , for 's sake , that he friend be get kinder to she , and be also quite willing that they should see how much she be value by other whom they must admit to be judge . notice that see bore , and that speak as little as possible to he son - in - law . be perfectly graceful and calm , and only a subtle observation such as the have not be rouse to bestow on she would have perceive the total absence of that interest in she husband 's presence which a loving wife be sure to betray , even if etiquette keep she aloon from he . when be take part in the conversation , she never look towards he any more than if she have be a sculptured Psyche model to look another way : and when , after be call out for a hour or two , he re-enter the room , she seem unconscious of the fact , which eighteen month before would have have the effect of a numeral before cipher . in reality , however , she be intensely aware of 's voice and movement ; and she pretty good - tempered air of unconsciousness be a study negation by which she satisfy she inward opposition to he without compromise of propriety . when the lady be in the drawing - room after have be call away from the dessert , , when happen to be near she , say -- " you have to give up a great deal of you husband 's society , . " " yes , the life of a medical man be very arduous : especially when he be so devoted to he profession as be , " say , who be stand , and move easily away at the end of this correct little speech . " it be dreadfully dull for she when there be no company , " say , who be seat at the old lady 's side . " I be sure I think so when be ill , and I be stay with she . you know , , ours be a cheerful house . I be of a cheerful disposition myself , and always like something to be go on . that be what have be use to . very different from a husband out at odd hour , and never know when he will come home , and of a close , proud disposition , _I_ think " -- indiscreet do lower she tone slightly with this parenthesis . " but always have a angel of a temper ; she brother use very often not to please she , but she be never the girl to show temper ; from a baby she be always as good as good , and with a complexion beyond anything . but my child be all good - temper
temper , thank . " this be easily credible to any one look at . Vincy as she throw back she broad cap - string , and smile towards she three little girl , a from seven to eleven . but in that smile glance she be oblige to include , whom the three girl have get into a corner to make she tell they story . be just finish the delicious tale of , which she have well by heart , because be never tired of communicate it to she ignorant elder from a favorite red volume . , 's darling , now run to she with wide - eye serious excitement , cry , " oh mamma , mamma , the little man stampe so hard on the floor he could not get he leg out again ! " " bless you , my cherub ! " say mamma ; " you shall tell I all about it to - morrow . go and listen ! " and then , as she eye follow back towards the attractive corner , she think that if wish she to invite again she would make no objection , the child be so pleased with she . but presently the corner become still more animated , for come in , and seate himself behind , take she on he lap ; whereupon the girl all insist that he must hear , and must tell it over again . he insist too , and , without fuss , begin again in she neat fashion , with precisely the same word as before . , who have also seat himself near , would have feel unmixed triumph in 's effectiveness if have not be look at she with evident admiration , while he dramatize a intense interest in the tale to please the child . " you will never care any more about my one - eye giant , , " say at the end . " yes , I shall . tell about he now , " say . " oh , I dare say ; I be quite cut out . ask . " " yes , " add ; " ask to tell you about the ant whose beautiful house be knock down by a giant name , and he think they do not mind because he could not hear they cry , or see they use they pocket - handkerchief . " " please , " say , look up at the Vicar . " no , no , I be a grave old parson . if I try to draw a story out of my bag a sermon come instead . shall I preach you a sermon ? " say he , put on he short -sighted glass , and purse up he lip . " yes , " say , falteringly . " let I see , then . against cake : how cake be bad thing , especially if they be sweet and have plum in they . " take the affair rather seriously , and get down from the 's knee to go to . " ah , I see it will not do to preach on 's , " say , rise and walk away . he have discover of late that have become jealous of he , and also that he himself be not lose he preference for above all other woman . " a delightful young person be , " say , who have be watch she son 's movement . " yes , " say . , oblige to reply , as the old lady turn to she expectantly . " it be a pity she be not better - look . " " I can not say that , " say , decisively . " I like she countenance . we must not always ask for beauty , when a good have see fit to make a excellent young woman without it . I put good manners first , and will know how to conduct herself in any station . " the old lady be a little sharp in she tone , have a prospective reference to 's become she daughter - in - law ; for there be this inconvenience in 's position with regard to , that it be not suitable to be make public , and hence the three lady at be still hope that would choose . new visitor enter , and the drawing - room be give up to music and game , while whist - table be prepare in the quiet room on the other side of the hall . play a rubber to satisfy he mother , who regard she occasional whist as a protest against scandal and novelty of opinion , in which light even a revoke have its dignity . but at the end he get to take he place , and leave the room . as he cross the hall , have just come in and be take off he great - coat . " you be the man I be go to look for , " say the ; and instead of enter the drawing - room , they walk along the hall and stand against the fireplace , where the frosty air help to make a glow bank . " you see , I can leave the whist - table easily enough , " he go on , smile at , " now I do not play for money . I owe that to you , say . " " how ? " say , coldly . " ah , you do not mean I to know it ; I call that ungenerous reticence . you should let a man have the pleasure of feeling that you have do he a good turn . I do not enter into some people 's dislike of be under a obligation : upon
upon my word , I prefer be under a obligation to everybody for behave well to I . " " I can not tell what you mean , " say , " unless it be that I once speak of you to . but I do not think that she would break she promise not to mention that I have do so , " say , lean he back against the corner of the mantel - piece , and show no radiance in he face . " it be Brooke who let it out , only the other day . he pay I the compliment of say that he be very glad I have the living though you have come across he tactic , and have praise I up as a lien and a Tillotson , and that sort of thing , till would hear of no one else . " " oh , be such a leaky - minded fool , " say , contemptuously . " well , I be glad of the leakiness then . I do not see why you should not like I to know that you wish to do I a service , my dear fellow . and you certainly have do I one . it be rather a strong check to one 's self - complacency to find how much of one be right do depend on not be in want of money . a man will not be tempt to say the 's prayer backward to please the devil , if he do not want the devil 's service . I have no need to hang on the smile of chance now . " " I do not see that there be any money - get without chance , " say ; " if a man get it in a profession , it be pretty sure to come by chance . " Farebrother thought he could account for this speech , in striking contrast with 's former way of talking , as the perversity which will often spre from the moodiness of a man ill at ease in he affair . he answer in a tone of good - humor admission -- " ah , there be enormous patience want with the way of the world . but it be the easier for a man to wait patiently when he have friend who love he , and ask for nothing better than to help he through , so far as it lie in they power . " " oh yes , " say , in a careless tone , change he attitude and look at he watch . " people make much more of they difficulty than they need to do . " he know as distinctly as possible that this be a offer of help to himself from , and he could not bear it . so strangely determined be we mortal , that , after have be long gratify with the sense that he have privately do the a service , the suggestion that the discern he need of a service in return make he shrink into unconquerable reticence . besides , behind all making of such offer what else must come ?-- that he should " mention he case , " imply that he want specific thing . at that moment , suicide seem easier . be too kee a man not to know the meaning of that reply , and there be a certain massiveness in 's manner and tone , correspond with he physique , which if he repell you advance in the first instance seem to put persuasive device out of question . " what time be you ? " say the Vicar , devour he wounded feeling . " after eleven , " say . and they go into the drawing - room . . 1st Gent . where lie the power , there let the blame lie too. 2d . , power be relative ; you can not fright the come pest with border fortress , or catch you carp with subtle argument . all force be twain in one : cause be not cause unless effect be there ; and action 's self must need contain a passive . so command but with obedience . " even if have be inclin to be quite open about he affair , he know that it would have hardly be in 's power to give he the help he immediately want . with the year 's bills come in from he tradesman , with 's threatening hold on he furniture , and with nothing to depend on but slow dribbl payment from patients who must not be offend -- for the handsome fee he have have from and have be easily absorb -- nothing less than a thousand pound would have free he from actual embarrassment , and leave a residue which , accord to the favorite phrase of hopefulness in such circumstance , would have give he " time to look about he . " naturally , the merry bring the happy , when fellow - citizen expect to be pay for the trouble and good they have smilingly bestow on they neighbor , have so tighten the pressure of sordid care on 's mind that it be hardly possible for he to think unbrokenly of any other subject , even the most habitual and solicite . he be not a ill - temper man ; he intellectual activity , the ardent kindness of he heart , as well as he strong frame , would always , under tolerably easy condition , have keep he above the petty uncontrolled susceptibility which make bad temper . but he be now a prey to that worst irritation which arise not simply from annoyance , but from the second consciousness underly those annoyance , of waste energy and a degrading preoccupation , which be the reverse of all he
he former purpose . " _this_ be what I be think of ; and _that be what I might have be think of , " be the bitter incessant murmur within he , make every difficulty a double goad to impatience . some gentleman have make a amazing figure in literature by general discontent with the universe as a trap of dulness into which they great soul have fall by mistake ; but the sense of a stupendous self and a insignificant world may have its consolation . 's discontent be much harder to bear : it be the sense that there be a grand existence in think and effective action lie around he , while he self be be narrow into the miserable isolation of egoistic fear , and vulgar anxiety for event that might allay such fear . he trouble will perhaps appear miserably sordid , and beneath the attention of lofy person who can know nothing of debt except on a magnificent scale . Doubtless they be sordid ; and for the majority , who be not lofy , there be no escape from sordidness but by be free from money - crave , with all its base hope and temptation , its watch for death , its hint request , its horse - dealer 's desire to make bad work pass for good , it be seek for function which ought to be another ' , its compulsion often to long for in the shape of a wide calamity . it be because writh under the idea of get he neck beneath this vile yoke that he have fall into a bitter moody state which be continually wide 's alienation from he . after the first disclosure about the bill of sale , he have make many effort to draw she into sympathy with he about possible measure for narrow they expense , and with the threatening approach of he proposition grow more and more definite . " we two can do with only one servant , and live on very little , " he say , " and I shall manage with one horse . " for , as we have see , have begin to reason , with a more distinct vision , about the expense of living , and any share of pride he have give to appearances of that sort be meagre compare with the pride which make he revolt from exposure as a debtor , or from ask man to help he with they money . " of course you can dismiss the other two servants , if you like , " say ; " but I should have think it would be very injuriious to you position for we to live in a poor way . you must expect you practice to be lower . " " my dear , it be not a question of choice . we have begin too expensively . Peacock , you know , live in a much smaller house than this . it be my fault : I ought to have know better , and I deserve a thrashing -- if there be anybody who have a right to give it I -- for bring you into the necessity of live in a poorer way than you have be use to . but we marry because we love each other , I suppose . and that may help we to pull along till thing get better . come , dear , put down that work and come to I . " he be really in chill gloom about she at that moment , but he dread a future without affection , and be determined to resist the oncoming of division between they . obey he , and he take she on he knee , but in she secret soul she be utterly aloon from he . the poor thing see only that the world be not order to she liking , and be part of that world . but he hold she waist with one hand and lay the other gently on both of hers ; for this rather abrupt man have much tenderness in he manners towards woman , seem to have always present in he imagination the weakness of they frame and the delicate poise of they health both in body and mind . and he begin again to speak persuasively . " I find , now I look into thing a little , , that it be wonderful what a amount of money slips away in we housekeeping . I suppose the servants be careless , and we have have a great many people come . but there must be many in we rank who manage with much less : they must do with commoner thing , I suppose , and look after the scrap . it seem , money go but a little way in these matters , for have everything as plain as possible , and he have a very large practice . " " oh , if you think of live as the do ! " say , with a little turn of she neck . " but I have hear you express you disgust at that way of living . " " yes , they have bad taste in everything -- they make economy look ugly . we need not do that . I only mean that they avoid expense , although have a capital practice . " " why should not you have a good practice , ? have . you should be more careful not to offend people , and you should send out medicine as the other do . I be sure you begin well , and you get several good house . it can not answer to be eccentric ; you should think what will be generally like , " say , in a decide little tone of admonition . 's anger rose :
: he be prepare to be indulgent towards feminine weakness , but not towards feminine dictation . the shallowness of a waternixie 's soul may have a charm until she become didactic . but he controlle himself , and only say , with a touch of despotic firmness -- " what I be to do in my practice , , it be for I to judge . that be not the question between we . it be enough for you to know that we income be likely to be a very narrow one -- hardly four hundred , perhaps less , for a long time to come , and we must try to re-arrange we life in accordance with that fact . " be silent for a moment or two , look before she , and then say , " my uncle ought to allow you a salary for the time you give to the hospital : it be not right that you should work for nothing . " " it be understand from the beginning that my service would be gratuitous . that , again , need not enter into we discussion . I have point out what be the only probability , " say , impatiently . then check himself , he go on more quietly -- " I think I see one resource which would free we from a good deal of the present difficulty . I hear that young be go to be marry to . they be rich , and it be not often that a good house be vacant in . I feel sure that they would be glad to take this house from we with most of we furniture , and they would be willing to pay handsomely for the lease . I can employ to speak to Plymdale about it . " leave she husband 's knee and walk slowly to the other end of the room ; when she turn round and walk towards he it be evident that the tear have come , and that she be bite she under- lip and clasp she hand to keep herself from crying . be wretch -- shake with anger and yet feel that it would be unmanly to vent the anger just now . " I be very sorry , ; I know this be painful . " " I think , at least , when I have borne to send the plate back and have that man take a inventory of the furniture -- I should have think _that would suffice . " " I explain it to you at the time , dear . that be only a security and behind that security there be a debt . and that debt must be pay within the next few month , else we shall have we furniture sold . if young Plymdale will take we house and most of we furniture , we shall be able to pay that debt , and some other too , and we shall be quit of a place too expensive for we . we might take a smaller house : Trumbull , I know , have a very decent one to let at thirty pound a - year , and this be ninety . " utter this speech in the curt hammere way with which we usually try to nail down a vague mind to imperative fact . Tears roll silently down 's cheek ; she just press she handkerchief against they , and stand look at the large vase on the mantel - piece . it be a moment of more intense bitterness than she have ever feel before . at last she say , without hurry and with careful emphasis -- " I never could have believe that you would like to act in that way . " " like it ? " burst out , rise from he chair , thrust he hand in he pocket and stalk away from the hearth ; " it be not a question of liking . of course , I do not like it ; it be the only thing I can do . " he wheel round there , and turn towards she . " I should have think there be many other means than that , " say . " let we have a sale and leave altogether . " " to do what ? what be the use of my leave my work in to go where I have none ? we should be just as penniless elsewhere as we be here , " say still more angrily . " if we be to be in that position it will be entirely you own do , , " say , turn round to speak with the fullest conviction . " you will not behave as you ought to do to you own family . you offend . be very kind to I when we be at , and I be sure if you show proper regard to he and tell he you affair , he would do anything for you . but rather than that , you like give up we house and furniture to . " there be something like fierceness in 's eye , as he answer with new violence , " well , then , if you will have it so , I do like it . I admit that I like it better than make a fool of myself by go to beg where it be of no use . understand then , that it be what I _like to do ._ " there be a tone in the last sentence which be equivalent to the clutch of he strong hand on 's delicate arm . but for all that , he will be not a whit stronger than hers . she immediately walk out of the room in silence , but with a intense determination to hinder what like
like to do . he go out of the house , but as he blood cool he feel that the chief result of the discussion be a deposit of dread within he at the idea of open with he wife in future subject which might again urge he to violent speech . it be as if a fracture in delicate crystal have begin , and he be afraid of any movement that might mate it fatal . he marriage would be a mere piece of bitter irony if they could not go on love each other . he have long ago make up he mind to what he think be she negative character -- she want of sensibility , which show itself in disregard both of he specific wish and of he general aim . the first great disappointment have be borne : the tender devotedness and docile adoration of the ideal wife must be renounce , and life must be take up on a lower stage of expectation , as it be by man who have lose they limb . but the real wife have not only she claim , she have still a hold on he heart , and it be he intense desire that the hold should remain strong . in marriage , the certainty , " she will never love I much , " be easier to bear than the fear , " I shall love she no more . " hence , after that outburst , he inward effort be entirly to excuse she , and to blame the hard circumstance which be partly he fault . he try that evening , by pet she , to heal the wound he have make in the morning , and it be not in 's nature to be repellent or sulky ; indeed , she welcome the sign that she husband love she and be under control . but this be something quite distinct from loving _him _. Lydgate would not have choose soon to recur to the plan of part with the house ; he be resolve to carry it out , and say as little more about it as possible . but herself touch on it at breakfast by say , mildly -- " have you speak to yet ? " " no , " say , " but I shall call on he as I go by this morning . no time must be lose . " he take 's question as a sign that she withdraw she inward opposition , and kiss she head caressingly when he get up to go away . as soon as it be late enough to make a call , go to , 's mother , and enter with pretty congratulation into the subject of the come marriage . 's maternal view be , that might possibly now have retrospective glimpse of she own folly ; and feel the advantages to be at present all on the side of she son , be too kind a woman not to behave graciously . " yes , be most happy , I must say . and be all I could desire in a daughter - in - law . of course she father be able to do something handsome for she -- that be only what would be expect with a brewery like he . and the connection be everything we should desire . but that be not what I look at . she be such a very nice girl -- no air , no pretension , though on a level with the first . I do not mean with the title aristocracy . I see very little good in people aim out of they own sphere . I mean that be equal to the best in the town , and she be contente with that . " " I have always think she very agreeable , " say . " I look upon it as a reward for , who never hold he head too high , that he should have get into the very best connection , " continue , she native sharpness soften by a fervid sense that she be take a correct view . " and such particular people as the Toller be , they might have object because some of we friend be not theirs . it be well know that you aunt and I have be intimate from we youth , and have be always on 's side . and I myself prefer serious opinion . but the Toller have welcome N all the same . " " I be sure he be a very deserving , well - principl young man , " say , with a neat air of patronage in return for 's wholesome correction . " oh , he have not the style of a captain in the army , or that sort of carriage as if everybody be beneath he , or that showy kind of talking , and singe , and intellectual talent . but I be thankful he have not . it be a poor preparation both for here and . " " oh dear , yes ; appearance have very little to do with happiness , " say . " I think there be every prospect of they be a happy couple . what house will they take ? " " oh , as for that , they must put up with what they can get . they have be look at the house in 's place , next to 's ; it belong to he , and he be put it nicely in repair . I suppose they be not likely to hear of a better . indeed , I think Ned will decide the matter to - day . " " I should think it be a nice house ; I like 's place . " " well , it be near the Church ,
, and a genteel situation . but the window be narrow , and it be all up and downs . you do not happen to know of any other that would be at liberty ? " say , fix she round black eye on with the animation of a sudden thought in they . " oh no ; I hear so little of those thing . " have not foresee that question and answer in set out to pay she visit ; she have simply meant to gather any information which would help she to avert the parting with she own house under circumstance thoroughly disagreeable to she . as to the untruth in she reply , she no more reflect on it than she do on the untruth there be in she say that appearances have very little to do with happiness . she object , she be convince , be thoroughly justifiable : it be Lydgate whose intention be inexcusable ; and there be a plan in she mind which , when she have carry it out fully , would prove how very false a step it would have be for he to have descende from he position . she return home by 's office , mean to call there . it be the first time in she life that have think of do anything in the form of business , but she feel equal to the occasion . that she should be oblige to do what she intensely dislike , be a idea which turn she quiet tenacity into active invention . here be a case in which it could not be enough simply to disobey and be serenely , placidly obstinate : she must act accord to she judgment , and she say to herself that she judgment be right -- " indeed , if it have not be , she would not have wish to act on it . " be in the back - room of he office , and receive with he finest manners , not only because he have much sensibility to she charms , but because the good - natured fibre in he be stir by he certainty that be in difficulty , and that this uncommonly pretty woman -- this young lady with the highest personal attraction -- be likely to feel the pinch of trouble -- to find herself involved in circumstance beyond she control . he beg she to do he the honor to take a seat , and stand before she trimm and comport himself with a eager solicitude , which be chiefly benevolent . 's first question be , whether she husband have call on that morne , to speak about disposing of they house . " yes , ma 'am , yes , he do ; he do so , " say the good auctioneer , try to throw something soothing into he iteration . " I be about to fulfil he order , if possible , this afternoon . he wish I not to procrastinate . " " I call to tell you not to go any further , ; and I beg of you not to mention what have be say on the subject . will you oblige I ? " " certainly I will , , certainly . confidence be sacr with I on business or any other topic . I be then to consider the commission withdraw ? " say Trumbull , adjust the long end of he blue cravat with both hand , and look at deferentially . " yes , if you please . I find that have take a house -- the one in 's place next to 's . would be annoye that he order should be fulfil uselessly . and besides that , there be other circumstance which render the proposal unnecessary . " " very good , , very good . I be at you command , whenever you require any service of I , " say , who feel pleasure in conjecturing that some new resource have be open . " rely on I , I beg . the affair shall go no further . " that evening be a little comforte by observe that be more lively than she have usually be of late , and even seem interested in do what would please he without be ask . he think , " if she will be happy and I can rub through , what do it all signify ? it be only a narrow swamp that we have to pass in a long journey . if I can get my mind clear again , I shall do . " he be so much cheer that he begin to search for a account of experiment which he have long ago meant to look up , and have neglect out of that creep self - despair which come in the train of petty anxiety . he feel again some of the old delightful absorption in a far - reache inquiry , while play the quiet music which be as helpful to he meditation as the plash of a oar on the evening lake . it be rather late ; he have push away all the book , and be look at the fire with he hand clasp behind he head in forgetfulness of everything except the construction of a new controlling experiment , when , who have leave the piano and be lean back in she chair watch he , say -- " have take a house already . " Lydgate , start and jar , look up in silence for a moment , like a man who have be disturb in he sleep . then flush with a unpleasant consciousness , he ask -- " how do you know ? " " I call at . 's this morning , and she tell I that he have take the house in 's place ,
, next to 's . " be silent . he draw he hand from behind he head and press they against the hair which be hang , as it be apt to do , in a mass on he forehead , while he rest he elbow on he knee . he be feel bitter disappointment , as if he have open a door out of a suffocating place and have find it wall up ; but he also feel sure that be pleased with the cause of he disappointment . he prefer not look at she and not speak , until he have get over the first spasm of vexation . after all , he say in he bitterness , what can a woman care about so much as house and furniture ? a husband without they be a absurdity . when he look up and push he hair aside , he dark eye have a miserable blank non-expectance of sympathy in they , but he only say , coolly -- " perhaps some one else may turn up . I tell to be on the look - out if he fail with . " make no remark . she trust to the chance that nothing more would pass between she husband and the auctioneer until some issue should have justifi she interference ; at any rate , she have hinder the event which she immediately dread . after a pause , she say -- " how much money be it that those disagreeable people want ? " " what disagreeable people ? " " those who take the list -- and the other . I mean , how much money would satisfy they so that you need not be trouble any more ? " survey she for a moment , as if he be look for symptom , and then say , " oh , if I could have get six hundred from for furniture and as premium , I might have manage . I could have pay off , and give enough on account to the other to make they wait patiently , if we contract we expense . " " but I mean how much should you want if we stay in this house ? " " more than I be likely to get anywhere , " say , with rather a grat sarcasm in he tone . it anger he to perceive that 's mind be wander over impracticable wish instead of facing possible effort . " why should you not mention the sum ? " say , with a mild indication that she do not like he manners . " well , " say Lydgate in a guess tone , " it would take at least a thousand to set I at ease . but , " he add , incisively , " I have to consider what I shall do without it , not with it . " say no more . but the next day she carry out she plan of writing to . since the 's visit , she have receive a letter from he , and also one from , he married sister , condol with she on the loss of she baby , and express vaguly the hope that they should see she again at . Lydgate have tell she that this politeness mean nothing ; but she be secretly convince that any backwardness in 's family towards he be due to he cold and contemptuous behavior , and she have answer the letter in she most charme manner , feel some confidence that a specific invitation would follow . but there have be total silence . the evidently be not a great penman , and reflect that the sister might have be abroad . however , the season be come for thinking of friend at home , and at any rate , who have chuck she under the ching , and pronounce she to be like the celebrate beauty , Croly , who have make a conquest of he in 1790 , would be touch by any appeal from she , and would find it pleasant for she sake to behave as he ought to do towards he nephew . be naively convinced of what a old gentleman ought to do to prevent she from suffering annoyance . and she write what she consider the most judicious letter possible -- one which would strike as a proof of she excellent sense -- point out how desirable it be that should quit such a place as for one more fitte to he talents , how the unpleasant character of the inhabitant have hinder he professional success , and how in consequence he be in money difficulty , from which it would require a thousand pound thoroughly to extricate he . she do not say that be unaware of she intention to write ; for she have the idea that he suppose sanction of she letter would be in accordance with what she do say of he great regard for he uncle Godwin as the relative who have always be he best friend . such be the force of 's tactic now she apply they to affair . this have happen before the party on 's , and no answer have yet come from . but on the morning of that day Lydgate have to learn that have revoke he order to . feel it necessary that she should be gradually accustom to the idea of they quit the house in , he overcome he reluctance to speak to she again on the subject , and when they be breakfast say -- " I shall try to see Trumbull this morning , and tell he to advertise the house in the ' pioneer ' and the ' Trumpet . ' if the thing be advertise , some one might be inclin to take it who would not otherwise have think of a
a change . in these country place many people go on in they old house when they family be too large for they , for want of know where they can find another . and seem to have get no bite at all . " know that the inevitable moment be come . " I order not to inquire further , " she say , with a careful calmness which be evidently defensive . star at she in mute amazement . only half a hour before he have be fasten up she plait for she , and talk the " little language " of affection , which , though not return it , accept as if she have be a serene and lovely image , now and then miraculously dimpl towards she votary . with such fibre still astir in he , the shock he receive could not at once be distinctly anger ; it be confused pain . he lay down the knife and fork with which he be carve , and throw himself back in he chair , say at last , with a cool irony in he tone -- " may I ask when and why you do so ? " " when I know that the Plymdale have take a house , I call to tell he not to mention ours to they ; and at the same time I tell he not to let the affair go on any further . I know that it would be very injuriious to you if it be know that you wish to part with you house and furniture , and I have a very strong objection to it . I think that be reason enough . " " it be of no consequence then that I have tell you imperative reason of another kind ; of no consequence that I have come to a different conclusion , and give a order accordingly ? " say , bitingly , the thunder and lightning gather about he brow and eye . the effect of any one 's anger on have always be to make she shrink in cold dislike , and to become all the more calmly correct , in the conviction that she be not the person to misbehave whatever other might do . she reply -- " I think I have a perfect right to speak on a subject which concern I at least as much as you . " " clearly -- you have a right to speak , but only to I . you have no right to contradict my order secretly , and treat I as if I be a fool , " say , in the same tone as before . then with some add scorn , " be it possible to make you understand what the consequence will be ? be it of any use for I to tell you again why we must try to part with the house ? " " it be not necessary for you to tell I again , " say , in a voice that fall and trickle like cold water - drop . " I remembe what you say . you speak just as violently as you do now . but that do not alter my opinion that you ought to try every other means rather than take a step which be so painful to I . and as to advertise the house , I think it would be perfectly degrad to you . " " and suppose I disregard you opinion as you disregard mine ? " " you can do so , of course . but I think you ought to have tell I before we be marry that you would place I in the worst position , rather than give up you own will . " do not speak , but toss he head on one side , and twitch the corner of he mouth in despair . , see that he be not look at she , rise and set he cup of coffee before he ; but he take no notice of it , and go on with a inward drama and argument , occasionally move in he seat , rest one arm on the table , and rub he hand against he hair . there be a conflux of emotion and thought in he that would not let he either give thorough way to he anger or persevere with simple rigidity of resolve . take advantage of he silence . " when we be marry everyone feel that you position be very high . I could not have imagine then that you would want to sell we furniture , and take a house in , where the room be like cage . if we be to live in that way let we at least leave . " " these would be very strong consideration , " say , half ironically -- still there be a withered paleness about he lip as he look at he coffee , and do not drink --" these would be very strong consideration if I do not happen to be in debt . " " Many person must have be in debt in the same way , but if they be respectable , people trust they . I be sure I have hear papa say that the be in debt , and they go on very well . it can not be good to act rashly , " say , with serene wisdom . Lydgate sit paralyze by opposing impulse : since no reasoning he could apply to see likely to conquer she assent , he want to smash and grind some object on which he could at least produce a impression , or else to tell she brutally that he be master , and she must obey . but he not only dread the effect of such extremity on they mutual life -- he have
have a grow dread of 's quiet elusive obstinacy , which would not allow any assertion of power to be final ; and again , she have touch he in a spot of keenest feeling by imply that she have be delude with a false vision of happiness in marry he . as to say that he be master , it be not the fact . the very resolution to which he have wrotch himself by dint of logic and honorable pride be begin to relax under she torpedue contact . he swallow half he cup of coffee , and then rise to go . " I may at least request that you will not go to Trumbull at present -- until it have be see that there be no other mean , " say . although she be not subject to much fear , she feel it safer not to betray that she have write to . " promise I that you will not go to he for a few week , or without tell I . " give a short laugh . " I think it be I who should exact a promise that you will do nothing without tell I , " he say , turn he eye sharply upon she , and then move to the door . " you remember that we be go to dine at papa 's , " say , wish that he should turn and make a more thorough concession to she . but he only say " oh yes , " impatiently , and go away . she hold it to be very odious in he that he do not think the painful propositions he have have to make to she be enough , without show so unpleasant a temper . and when she put the moderate request that he would defer go to again , it be cruel in he not to assure she of what he mean to do . she be convinced of she have act in every way for the best ; and each grat or angry speech of 's serve only as a addition to the register of offence in she mind . poor Rosamond for month have begin to associate she husband with feeling of disappointment , and the terribly inflexible relation of marriage have lose its charm of encourage delightful dream . it have free she from the disagreeable of she father 's house , but it have not give she everything that she have wish and hope . the Lydgate with whom she have be in love have be a group of airy condition for she , most of which have disappear , while they place have be take by every - day detail which must be live through slowly from hour to hour , not float through with a rapid selection of favorable aspect . the habits of 's profession , he home preoccupation with scientific subject , which seem to she almost like a morbid vampire 's taste , he peculiar view of thing which have never enter into the dialogue of courtship -- all these continually alienate influence , even without the fact of he have place himself at a disadvantage in the town , and without that first shock of revelation about 's debt , would have make he presence dull to she . there be another presence which ever since the early day of she marriage , until four month ago , have be a agreeable excitement , but that be go : would not confess to herself how much the consequent blank have to do with she utter ennui ; and it seem to she ( perhaps she be right ) that a invitation to , and a opening for to settle elsewhere than in -- in , or somewhere likely to be free from unpleasantness -- would satisfy she quite well , and make she indifferent to the absence of , towards whom she feel some resentment for he exaltation of . that be the state of thing with and on the 's day when they dine at she father 's , she look mildly neutral towards he in remembrance of he ill - tempere behavior at breakfast , and he carry a much deeper effect from the inward conflict in which that morning scene be only one of many epoch . he flush effort while talk to -- he effort after the cynical pretence that all way of get money be essentially the same , and that chance have a empire which reduce choice to a fool 's illusion -- be but the symptom of a wavering resolve , a benumb response to the old stimuli of enthusiasm . what be he to do ? he see even more keenly than do the dreariness of take she into the small house in , where she would have scanty furniture around she and discontent within : a life of privation and life with be two image which have become more and more irreconcilable ever since the threat of privation have disclose itself . but even if he resolve have force the two image into combination , the useful preliminary to that hard change be not visibly within reach . and though he have not give the promise which he wife have ask for , he do not go again to . he even begin to think of take a rapid journey to the and see . he have once believe that nothing would urge he into make a application for money to he uncle , but he have not then know the full pressure of alternative yet more disagreeable . he could not depend on the effect of a letter ; it be only in a interview , however disagreeable this might be to himself , that he could give a thorough explanation and could test the effectiveness of kinship . no sooner have begin to
to represent this step to himself as the easiest than there be a reaction of anger that he -- he who have long ago determined to live aloon from such abject calculation , such self - interested anxiety about the inclination and the pocket of man with whom he have be proud to have no aim in common -- should have fall not simply to they level , but to the level of solicite they . . " one of we two must bowen douteless , and , sith a man be more reasonable than woman be , ye [ men ] moste be suffrable . -- Chaucer : . the bia of human nature to be slow in correspondence triumph even over the present quickening in the general pace of thing : what wonder then that in 1832 old be slow to write a letter which be of consequence to other rather than to himself ? nearly three week of the new year be gone , and , await a answer to she win appeal , be every day disappoint . Lydgate , in total ignorance of she expectation , be see the bill come in , and feel that 's use of he advantage over other creditor be imminent . he have never mention to Rosamond he brood purpose of go to : he do not want to admit what would appear to she a concession to she wish after indignant refusal , until the last moment ; but he be really expect to set off soon . a slice of the railway would enable he to manage the whole journey and back in four day . but one morning after have go out , a letter come address to he , which see clearly to be from . she be full of hope . perhaps there might be a particular note to she enclose ; but be naturally address on the question of money or other aid , and the fact that he be write to , nay , the very delay in writing at all , seem to certify that the answer be thoroughly compliant . she be too much excite by these thought to do anything but light stitch in a warm corner of the dining - room , with the outside of this momentous letter lie on the table before she . about twelve she hear she husband 's step in the passage , and trip to open the door , she say in she lightest tone , " , come in here -- here be a letter for you . " " ah ? " he say , not take off he hat , but just turn she round within he arm to walk towards the spot where the letter lay . " my uncle ! " he exclaim , while reseate herself , and watch he as he open the letter . she have expect he to be surprised . while 's eye glance rapidly over the brief letter , she see he face , usually of a pale brown , take on a dry whiteness ; with nostril and lip quivering he toss down the letter before she , and say violently -- " it will be impossible to endure life with you , if you will always be act secretly -- act in opposition to I and hide you action . " he check he speech and turn he back on she -- then wheel round and walk about , sit down , and get up again restlessly , grasp hard the object deep down in he pocket . he be afraid of say something irremediably cruel . too have change color as she read . the letter run in this way :-- " ,-- do not set you wife to write to I when you have anything to ask . it be a roundabout wheedling sort of thing which I should not have credit you with . I never choose to write to a woman on matter of business . as to my supplye you with a thousand pound , or only half that sum , I can do nothing of the sort . my own family drain I to the last penny . with two younger son and three daughter , I be not likely to have cash to spare . you seem to have get through you own money pretty quickly , and to have make a mess where you be ; the sooner you go somewhere else the better . but I have nothing to do with man of you profession , and can not help you there . I do the best I could for you as guardian , and let you have you own way in take to medicine . you might have go into the army or the Church . you money would have hold out for that , and there would have be a surer ladder before you . you uncle have have a grudge against you for not go into he profession , but not I . I have always wish you well , but you must consider yourself on you own leg entirely now . you affectionate uncle , . " when have finish read the letter she sit quite still , with she hand fold before she , restrain any show of she keen disappointment , and intrench herself in quiet passivity under she husband 's wrath . pause in he movement , look at she again , and say , with bite severity -- " will this be enough to convince you of the harm you may do by secret meddling ? have you sense enough to recognize now you incompetence to judge and act for I -- to interfere with you ignorance in affair which it belong to I to decide on ? " the word be hard ; but this be not the first time that have
have be frustrate by she . she do not look at he , and make no reply . " I have nearly resolve on go to . it would have cost I pain enough to do it , yet it might have be of some use . but it have be of no use for I to think of anything . you have always be counteract I secretly . you delude I with a false assent , and then I be at the mercy of you device . if you mean to resist every wish I express , say so and defy I . I shall at least know what I be do then . " it be a terrible moment in young life when the closeness of love 's bond have turn to this power of galling . in spite of 's self - control a tear fall silently and roll over she lip . she still say nothing ; but under that quietude be hide a intense effect : she be in such entire disgust with she husband that she wish she have never see he . 's rudeness towards she and utter want of feeling range he with Dover and all other creditor -- disagreeable people who only think of themselves , and do not mind how annoying they be to she . even she father be unkind , and might have do more for they . in fact there be but one person in 's world whom she do not regard as blameworthy , and that be the graceful creature with blond plait and with little hand cross before she , who have never express herself unbecomingly , and have always acted for the best -- the best naturally be what she best like . Lydgate pause and look at she begin to feel that half - madden sense of helplessness which come over passionate people when they passion be meet by a innocent - look silence whose meek victimize air seem to put they in the wrong , and at last infect even the justest indignation with a doubt of its justice . he need to recover the full sense that he be in the right by moderate he word . " can you not see , , " he begin again , try to be simply grave and not bitter , " that nothing can be so fatal as a want of openness and confidence between we ? it have happen again and again that I have express a decided wish , and you have seem to assent , yet after that you have secretly disobey my wish . in that way I can never know what I have to trust to . there would be some hope for we if you would admit this . be I such a unreasonable , furious brute ? why should you not be open with I ? " silence . " will you only say that you have be mistaken , and that I may depend on you not act secretly in future ? " say , urgently , but with something of request in he tone which be quick to perceive . she speak with coolness . " I can not possibly make admission or promise in answer to such word as you have use towards I . I have not be accustom to language of that kind . you have speak of my ' secret meddling , ' and my ' interfere ignorance , ' and my ' false assent . ' I have never express myself in that way to you , and I think that you ought to apologize . you speak of its be impossible to live with I . certainly you have not make my life pleasant to I of late . I think it be to be expect that I should try to avert some of the hardship which we marriage have bring on I . " another tear fall as cease speak , and she press it away as quietly as the first . flng himself into a chair , feel checkmate . what place be there in she mind for a remonstrance to lodge in ? he lay down he hat , fling a arm over the back of he chair , and look down for some moment without speak . have the double purchase over he of insensibility to the point of justice in he reproach , and of sensibility to the undeniable hardship now present in she married life . although she duplicity in the affair of the house have exceed what he know , and have really hinder the Plymdale from know of it , she have no consciousness that she action could rightly be call false . we be not oblige to identify we own act accord to a strict classification , any more than the material of we grocery and clothes . feel that she be aggrieve , and that this be what have to recognize . as for he , the need of accommodate himself to she nature , which be inflexible in proportion to its negation , hold he as with pincer . he have begin to have a alarmed foresight of she irrevocable loss of love for he , and the consequent dreariness of they life . the ready fulness of he emotion make this dread alternate quickly with the first violent movement of he anger . it would assuredly have be a vain boast in he to say that he be she master . " you have not make my life pleasant to I of late " -- " the hardship which we marriage have bring on I " -- these word be stinge he imagination as a pain make a exaggerated dream . if he be not only to sink from he highest resolve , but to sink into the hideous fettering of domestic hate ? " , "
" he say , turn he eye on she with a melancholy look , " you should allow for a man 's word when he be disappointed and provoke . you and I can not have opposite interest . I can not part my happiness from yours . if I be angry with you , it be that you seem not to see how any concealment divide we . how could I wish to make anything hard to you either by my word or conduct ? when I hurt you , I hurt part of my own life . I should never be angry with you if you would be quite open with I . " " I have only wish to prevent you from hurrie we into wretchedness without any necessity , " say , the tear come again from a softened feeling now that she husband have soften . " it be so very hard to be disgrace here among all the people we know , and to live in such a miserable way . I wish I have die with the baby . " she speak and weep with that gentleness which make such word and tear omnipotent over a loving - hear man . draw he chair near to hers and press she delicate head against he cheek with he powerful tender hand . he only caress she ; he do not say anything ; for what be there to say ? he could not promise to shield she from the dread wretchedness , for he could see no sure means of do so . when he leave she to go out again , he tell himself that it be ten time harder for she than for he : he have a life away from home , and constant appeal to he activity on behalf of other . he wish to excuse everything in she if he could -- but it be inevitable that in that excusing mood he should think of she as if she be a animal of another and feebler species . nevertheless she have master he . . " t'Tis one thing to be tempt , , another thing to fall . " -- measure for . certainly have good reason to reflect on the service he practice do he in counteracting he personal car . he have no longer free energy enough for spontaneous research and speculative thinking , but by the bedside of patients , the direct external call on he judgment and sympathy bring the add impulse need to draw he out of himself . it be not simply that beneficent harness of routine which enable silly man to live respectably and unhappy man to live calmly -- it be a perpetual claim on the immediate fresh application of thought , and on the consideration of another 's need and trial . many of we look back through life would say that the kindest man we have ever kny have be a medical man , or perhaps that surgeon whose fine tact , direct by deeply inform perception , have come to we in we need with a more sublime beneficence than that of miracle - worker . some of that twice - bless mercy be always with in he work at the or in private house , serve better than any opiate to quiet and sustain he under he anxiety and he sense of mental degeneracy . 's suspicion as to the opiate be true , however . under the first galling pressure of foreseen difficulty , and the first perception that he marriage , if it be not to be a yoked loneliness , must be a state of effort to go on loving without too much care about be love , he have once or twice try a dose of opium . but he have no hereditary constitutional craving after such transient escape from the haunting of misery . he be strong , could drink a great deal of wine , but do not care about it ; and when the man round he be drink spirit , he take sugar and water , have a contemptuous pity even for the earliest stage of excitement from drink . it be the same with gambling . he have look on at a great deal of gambling in , watch it as if it have be a disease . he be no more tempt by such win than he be by drink . he have say to himself that the only winning he care for must be attaine by a conscious process of high , difficult combination ten towards a beneficent result . the power he longe for could not be represent by agitate finger clutch a heap of coin , or by the half - barbarous , half - idiotic triumph in the eyes of a man who sweep within he arm the venture of twenty chapfallen companion . but just as he have try opium , so he think now begin to turn upon gambling -- not with appetite for its excitement , but with a sort of wistful inward gaze after that easy way of get money , which imply no asking and bring no responsibility . if he have be in or at that time , it be probable that such thought , seconde by opportunity , would have take he into a gambling - house , no longer to watch the gambler , but to watch with they in kindred eagerness . Repugnance would have be surmount by the immense need to win , if chance would be kind enough to let he . a incident which happen not very long after that airy notion of get aid from he uncle have be exclude , be a strong sign of the effect that might have follow any extant opportunity of gambling . the billiard - room at the be the constant resort of a
a certain set , most of whom , like we acquaintance , be regard as man of pleasure . it be here that poor have make part of he memorable debt , have lose money in betting , and be oblige to borrow of that gay companion . it be generally know in that a good deal of money be lose and win in this way ; and the consequent repute of the as a place of dissipation naturally heighten in some quarter the temptation to go there . probably its regular visitant , like the initiate of freemasonry , wish that there be something a little more tremendous to keep to themselves concern it ; but they be not a close community , and many decent senior as well as juniors occasionally turn into the billiard - room to see what be go on . , who have the muscular aptitude for billiards , and be fond of the game , have once or twice in the early day after he arrival in take he turn with the cue at the ; but afterwards he have no leisure for the game , and no inclination for the sociality there . one evening , however , he have occasion to seek at that resort . the horsedealer have engage to get he a customer for he remain good horse , for which have determined to substitute a cheap hack , hope by this reduction of style to get perhaps twenty pound ; and he car now for every small sum , as a help towards feed the patience of he tradesman . to run up to the billiard - room , as he be pass , would save time . be not yet come , bat would be sure to arrive by - and - by , say he friend ; and stay , play a game for the sake of pass the time . that evening he have the peculiar light in the eyes and the unusual vivacity which have be once noticed in he by . the exceptional fact of he presence be much notice in the room , where there be a good deal of company ; and several looker - on , as well as some of the player , be bett with animation . be play well , and feel confident ; the bet be drop round he , and with a swift glancing think of the probable gain which might double the sum he be save from he horse , he begin to bet on he own play , and win again and again . have come in , but do not notice he . he be not only accit with he play , but vision be gleam on he of go the next day to , where there be gambling on a grander scale to be have , and where , by one powerful snatch at the 's bait , he might carry it off without the hook , and buy he rescue from he daily soliciting . he be still win when two new visitor enter . one of they be a young , just come from he law study in town , and the other be , who have spend several evening of late at this old haunt of he . yong , a accomplished billiard - player , bring a cool fresh hand to the cue . but , start at see , and astonished to see he bett with a excited air , stand aside , and keep out of the circle round the table . have be reward resolution by a little laxity of late . he have be work heartily for six month at all outdoor occupations under , and by dint of severe practice have nearly master the defect of he handwriting , this practice be , perhaps , a little the less severe that it be often carry on in the evening at 's under the eyes of . but the last fortnight have be stay at with the ladie there , during 's residence in , where he be carry out some parochial plan ; and , not see anything more agreeable to do , have turn into the , partly to play at billiards , partly to taste the old flavor of discourse about horse , sport , and thing in general , consider from a point of view which be not strenuously correct . he have not be out hunt once this season , have have no horse of he own to ride , and have go from place to place chiefly with in he gig , or on the sober cob which could lend he . it be a little too bad , begin to think , that he should be keep in the trace with more severity than if he have be a clergyman . " I will tell you what , -- it will be rather harder work to learn survey and draw plan than it would have be to write sermon , " he have say , wish she to appreciate what he go through for she sake ; " and as to and , they be nothing to I . they have sport , and never learn to write a bookkeeping hand . " and now , be out of the way for a little while , , like any other strong dog who can not slip he collar , have pull up the staple of he chain and make a small escape , not of course meane to go fast or far . there could be no reason why he should not play at billiards , but he be determine not to bet . as to money just now , have in he mind the heroic project of save almost all of the eighty pound that offer he , and return it , which he could easily
easily do by give up all futile money - spending , since he have a superfluous stock of clothes , and no expense in he board . in that way he could , in one year , go a good way towards repay the ninety pound of which he have deprive , unhappily at a time when she need that sum more than she do now . nevertheless , it must be acknowledge that on this evening , which be the fifth of he recent visit to the billiard - room , have , not in he pocket , but in he mind , the ten pound which he mean to reserve for himself from he half - year 's salary ( have before he the pleasure of carry thirty to when be likely to be come home again ) -- he have those ten pound in he mind as a fund from which he might risk something , if there be a chance of a good bet . why ? well , when sovereign be fly about , why should not he catch a few ? he would never go far along that road again ; but a man like to assure himself , and man of pleasure generally , what he could do in the way of mischief if he choose , and that if he abstain from make himself ill , or beggar himself , or talk with the utmost looseness which the narrow limit of human capacity will allow , it be not because he be a spooney . do not enter into formal reason , which be a very artificial , inexact way of represent the tingling return of old habit , and the caprice of young blood : but there be lurking in he a prophetic sense that even , that when he begin to play he should also begin to bet -- that he should enjoy some punch-drinking , and in general prepare himself for feel " rather seedy " in the morning . it be in such indefinable movement that action often begin . but the last thing likely to have enter 's expectation be that he should see he brother - in - law Lydgate -- of whom he have never quite drop the old opinion that he be a prig , and tremendously conscious of he superiority -- look excited and betting , just as he himself might have do . feel a shock greater than he could quite account for by the vague knowledge that be in debt , and that he father have refuse to help he ; and he own inclination to enter into the play be suddenly check . it be a strange reversal of attitude : 's blond face and blue eye , usually bright and careless , ready to give attention to anything that hold out a promise of amusement , look involuntarily grave and almost embarrassed as if by the sight of something unfitting ; while , who have habitually a air of self - possessed strength , and a certain meditativeness that seem to lie behind he most observant attention , be act , watch , speak with that excited narrow consciousness which remind one of a animal with fierce eye and retractile claw . Lydgate , by bett on he own stroke , have win sixteen pound ; but young 's arrival have change the poise of thing . he make first - rate strokes himself , and begin to bet against 's stroke , the strain of whose nerve be thus change from simple confidence in he own movement to defy another person 's doubt in they . the defiance be more exciting than the confidence , but it be less sure . he continue to bet on he own play , but begin often to fail . still he go on , for he mind be as utterly narrow into that precipitous crevice of play as if he have be the most ignorant lounger there . observ that be lose fast , and find himself in the new situation of puzzl he brain to think of some device by which , without be offensive , he could withdraw 's attention , and perhaps suggest to he a reason for quit the room . he see that other be observe 's strange unlikeness to himself , and it occur to he that merely to touch he elbow and call he aside for a moment might rouse he from he absorption . he could think of nothing cleverer than the daring improbability of say that he want to see , and wish to know if she be at home this evening ; and he be go desperately to carry out this weak device , when a waiter come up to he with a message , say that be below , and beg to speak with he . be surprised , not quite comfortably , but send word that he would be down immediately , he go with a new impulse up to , say , " can I speak to you a moment ? " and draw he aside . " Farebrother have just send up a message to say that he want to speak to I . he be below . I think you might like to know he be there , if you have anything to say to he . " have simply snatch up this pretext for speaking , because he could not say , " you be lose confoundedly , and be make everybody stare at you ; you have better come away . " but inspiration could hardly have serve he better . Lydgate have not before see that be present , and he sudden appearance with a announcement of have the effect of a sharp concussion . " no , no , " say ; " I have nothing particular to say to he . but
but --they game be up -- I must be go -- I come in just to see . " " be over there , but he be make a row -- I do not think he be ready for business . come down with I to . I expect he be go to blow I up , and you will shield I , " say , with some adroitness . Lydgate feel shame , but could not bear to act as if he feel it , by refuse to see ; and he go down . they merely shook hand , however , and speak of the frost ; and when all three have turn into the street , the see quite willing to say good - by to . he present purpose be clearly to talk with alone , and he say , kindly , " I disturb you , young gentleman , because I have some press business with you . walk with I to 's , will you ? " it be a fine night , the sky thick with star , and propose that they should make a circuit to the old church by the road . the next thing he say be -- " I think never go to the ? " " so do I , " say . " but he say that he go to see . " " he be not play , then ? " have not mean to tell this , but he be oblige now to say , " yes , he be . but I suppose it be a accidental thing . I have never see he there before . " " you have be go often yourself , then , lately ? " " oh , about five or six time . " " I think you have some good reason for give up the habit of go there ? " " yes . you know all about it , " say , not like to be catechise in this way . " I make a clean breast to you . " " I suppose that give I a warrant to speak about the matter now . it be understand between we , be it not ?-- that we be on a footing of open friendship : I have listen to you , and you will be willing to listen to I . I may take my turn in talk a little about myself ? " " I be under the deepest obligation to you , , " say , in a state of uncomfortable surmise . " I will not affect to deny that you be under some obligation to I . but I be go to confess to you , , that I have be temp to reverse all that by keep silence with you just now . when somebody say to I , ' yong have take to be at the billiard - table every night again -- he will not bear the curb long ;' I be tempt to do the opposite of what I be do -- to hold my tongue and wait while you go down the ladder again , bett first and then -- " " I have not make any bet , " say , hastily . " to hear it . but I say , my prompting be to look on and see you take the wrong turning , wear out 's patience , and lose the best opportunity of you life -- the opportunity which you make some rather difficult effort to secure . you can guess the feeling which raise that temptation in I -- I be sure you know it . I be sure you know that the satisfaction of you affections stand in the way of mine . " there be a pause . seem to wait for a recognition of the fact ; and the emotion perceptible in the tone of he fine voice give solemnity to he word . but no feeling could quell 's alarm . " I could not be expect to give she up , " he say , after a moment 's hesitation : it be not a case for any pretence of generosity . " clearly not , when she affection meet yours . but relation of this sort , even when they be of long standing , be always liable to change . I can easily conceive that you might act in a way to loosen the tie she feel towards you -- it must be remember that she be only conditionally bound to you -- and that in that case , another man , who may flatter himself that he have a hold on she regard , might succeed in win that firm place in she love as well as respect which you have let slip . I can easily conceive such a result , " repeat , emphatically . " there be a companionship of ready sympathy , which might get the advantage even over the longest associations . " it seem to that if have have a beak and talon instead of he very capable tongue , he mode of attack could hardly be more cruel . he have a horrible conviction that behind all this hypothetic statement there be a knowledge of some actual change in 's feel . " of course I know it might easily be all up with I , " he say , in a troubled voice . " if she be begin to compare -- " he break off , not like to betray all he feel , and then say , by the help of a little bitterness , " but I think you be friendly to I . " " so I be ; that be why we be here . but I have have a strong disposition to be otherwise . I have say
say to myself , ' if there be a likelihood of that youngster do himself harm , why should you interfere ? be not you worth as much as he be , and do not your sixteen year over and above he , in which you have go rather hungry , give you more right to satisfaction than he have ? if there be a chance of he go to the dog , let he -- perhaps you could nohow hinder it -- and do you take the benefit . ' " there be a pause , in which be seize by a most uncomfortable chill . what be come next ? he dread to hear that something have be say to -- he feel as if he be listen to a threat rather than a warning . when the begin again there be a change in he tone like the encourage transition to a major key . " but I have once mean better than that , and I be come back to my old intention . I think that I could hardly _secure myself in it better , , than by tell you just what have go on in I . and now , do you understand I ? I want you to make the happiness of she life and you own , and if there be any chance that a word of warning from I may turn aside any risk to the contrary -- well , I have utter it . " there be a drop in the 's voice when he speak the last word he pause -- they be stand on a patch of green where the road diverge towards 's , and he put out he hand , as if to imply that the conversation be close . be move quite newly . some one highly susceptible to the contemplation of a fine act have say , that it produce a sort of regenerat shudder through the frame , and make one feel ready to begin a new life . a good degree of that effect be just then present in . " I will try to be worthy , " he say , break off before he could say " of you as well as of she . " and meanwhile have gather the impulse to say something more . " you must not imagine that I believe there be at present any decline in she preference of you , . set you heart at rest , that if you keep right , other thing will keep right . " " I shall never forget what you have do , " answer . " I can not say anything that seem worth say -- only I will try that you goodness shall not be throw away . " " that be enough . good - by , and bless you . " in that way they parte . but both of they walk about a long while before they go out of the starlight . much of 's rumination might be sum up in the word , " it certainly would have be a fine thing for she to marry Farebrother -- but if she love I best and I be a good husband ? " perhaps 's might be concentrate into a single shrug and one little speech . " to think of the part one little woman can play in the life of a man , so that to renounce she may be a very good imitation of heroism , and to win she may be a discipline ! " . now be there civil war within the soul : be thrust from off the sacred throne by clamorous need , and pride the grand - vizier make humble compact , play the supple part of envoy and deft - tongue apologist for hungry rebels . happily Lydgate have end by lose in the billiard - room , and bring away no encouragement to make a raid on luck . on the contrary , he feel unmixed disgust with himself the next day when he have to pay four or five pound over and above he gain , and he carry about with he a most unpleasant vision of the figure he have make , not only rub elbow with the man at the but behave just as they do . a philosopher fall to bett be hardly distinguishable from a under the same circumstance : the difference will chiefly be find in he subsequent reflection , and chew a very disagreeable cud in that way . he reason tell he how the affair might have be magnify into ruin by a slight change of scenery -- if it have be a gambling - house that he have turn into , where chance could be clutch with both hand instead of be pick up with thumb and fore - finger . nevertheless , though reason strangle the desire to gamble , there remain the feeling that , with a assurance of luck to the needful amount , he would have like to gamble , rather than take the alternative which be begin to urge itself as inevitable . that alternative be to apply to . have so many time boast both to himself and other that he be totally independent of , to whose plan he have lent himself solely because they enable he to carry out he own idea of professional work and public benefit -- he have so constantly in they personal intercourse have he pride sustain by the sense that he be make a good social use of this predominat banker , whose opinion he think contemptible and whose motive often see to he a absurd mixture of contradictory impressions -- that he have be create for himself strong ideal obstacle to the proffering of any considerable request to he on he own account . , early in he
he affair be at that pass in which man begin to say that they oath be deliver in ignorance , and to perceive that the act which they have call impossible to they be become manifestly possible . with 's ugly security soon to be put in force , with the proceed of he practice immediately absorb in pay back debt , and with the chance , if the worst be know , of daily supplies be refuse on credit , above all with the vision of 's hopeless discontent continually haunt he , have begin to see that he should inevitably bend himself to ask help from somebody or other . at first he have consider whether he should write to ; but on question he find that , as he have suspect , she have already apply twice to she father , the last time be since the disappointment from ; and papa have say that must look out for himself . " say he have come , with one bad year after another , to trade more and more on borrowed capital , and have have to give up many indulgence ; he could not spare a single hundr from the charge of he family . he say , let ask : they have always been hand and glove . " indeed , Lydgate himself have come to the conclusion that if he must end by ask for a free loan , he relation with , more at least than with any other man , might take the shape of a claim which be not purely personal . Bulstrode have indirectly help to cause the failure of he practice , and have also be highly gratify by get a medical partner in he plan :-- but who among we ever reduce himself to the sort of dependence in which now stand , without try to believe that he have claim which diminish the humiliation of ask ? it be true that of late there have seem to be a new languor of interest in about the hospital ; but he health have get worse , and show sign of a deep - seat nervous affection . in other respects he do not appear to be change : he have always be highly polite , but have observe in he from the first a mark coldness about he marriage and other private circumstance , a coldness which he have hithertoo preferred to any warmth of familiarity between they . he defer the intention from day to day , he habit of acting on he conclusion be make infirm by he repugnance to every possible conclusion and its consequent act . he see often , but he do not try to use any occasion for he private purpose . at one moment he think , " I will write a letter : I prefer that to any circuitous talk ; " at another he think , " no ; if I be talk to he , I could make a retreat before any sign of disinclination . " still the day pass and no letter be write , no special interview seek . in he shrinking from the humiliation of a dependent attitude towards , he begin to familiarize he imagination with another step even more unlike he remember self . he begin spontaneously to consider whether it would be possible to carry out that puerile notion of 's which have often make he angry , namely , that they should quit without see anything beyond that preface . the question come -- " would any man buy the practice of I even now , for as little as it be worth ? then the sale might happen as a necessary preparation for go away . " but against he take this step , which he still feel to be a contemptible relinquishment of present work , a guilty turn aside from what be a real and might be a widening channel for worthy activity , to start again without any justified destination , there be this obstacle , that the purchaser , if procurable at all , might not be quickly forthcome . and afterwards ? Rosamond in a poor lodging , though in the largest city or most distant town , would not find the life that could save she from gloom , and save he from the reproach of have plunge she into it . for when a man be at the foot of the hill in he fortune , he may stay a long while there in spite of professional accomplishment . in the british climate there be no incompatibility between scientific insight and furnish lodging : the incompatibility be chiefly between scientific ambition and a wife who object to that kind of residence . but in the midst of he hesitation , opportunity come to decide he . a note from request to call on he at the . a hypochondriacal tendency have show itself in the banker 's constitution of late ; and a lack of sleep , which be really only a slight exaggeration of a habitual dyspeptic symptom , have be dwelt on by he as a sign of threatening insanity . he want to consult Lydgate without delay on that particular morning , although he have nothing to tell beyond what he have tell before . he listen eagerly to what have to say in dissipation of he fear , though this too be only repetition ; and this moment in which be receive a medical opinion with a sense of comfort , seem to make the communication of a personal need to he easier than it have be in 's contemplation beforehand . he have be insist that it would be well for to relax he attention to business . " one see how any mental strain , however slight , may affect a delicate frame , " say at
at that stage of the consultation when the remark tend to pass from the personal to the general , " by the deep stamp which anxiety will make for a time even on the young and vigorous . I be naturally very strong ; yet I have be thoroughly shake lately by a accumulation of trouble . " " I presume that a constitution in the susceptible state in which mine at present be , would be especially liable to fall a victim to cholera , if it visit we district . and since its appearance near , we may well besiege the mercy - seat for we protection , " say , not intend to evade 's allusion , but really preoccupy with alarm about himself . " you have at all event take you share in use good practical precaution for the town , and that be the best mode of ask for protection , " say , with a strong distaste for the broken metaphor and bad logic of the banker 's religion , somewhat increase by the apparent deafness of he sympathy . but he mind have take up its long - prepare movement towards get help , and be not yet arrest . he add , " the town have do well in the way of cleansing , and find appliance ; and I think that if the cholera should come , even we enemy will admit that the arrangement in the hospital be a public good . " " truly , " say , with some coldness . " with regard to what you say , , about the relaxation of my mental labor , I have for some time be entertain a purpose to that effect -- a purpose of a very decided character . I contemplate at least a temporary withdrawal from the management of much business , whether benevolent or commercial . also I think of change my residence for a time : probably I shall close or let ' the , ' and take some place near the coast -- under advice of course as to salubrity . that would be a measure which you would recommend ? " " oh yes , " say , fall backward in he chair , with ill - repress impatience under the banker 's pale earnest eye and intense preoccupation with himself . " I have for some time felt that I should open this subject with you in relation to we Hospital , " continue . " under the circumstance I have indicate , of course I must cease to have any personal share in the management , and it be contrary to my view of responsibility to continue a large application of means to a institution which I can not watch over and to some extent regulate . I shall therefore , in case of my ultimate decision to leave , consider that I withdraw other support to the than that which will subsist in the fact that I chiefly supply the expense of build it , and have contribute further large sum to its successful work . " 's thought , when pause accord to he wont , be , " he have perhaps be lose a good deal of money . " this be the most plausible explanation of a speech which have cause rather a startling change in he expectation . he say in reply -- " the loss to the can hardly be make up , I fear . " " hardly , " return , in the same deliberate , silvery tone ; " except by some change of plan . the only person who may be certainly count on as willing to increase she contribution be . I have have a interview with she on the subject , and I have point out to she , as I be about to do to you , that it will be desirable to win a more general support to the by a change of system . " another pause , but do not speak . " the change I mean be a amalgamation with the Infirmary , so that the shall be regard as a special addition to the elder institution , have the same direct board . it will be necessary , also , that the medical management of the two shall be combine . in this way any difficulty as to the adequate maintenance of we new establishment will be remove ; the benevolent interest of the town will cease to be divide . " have lowere he eye from 's face to the buttons of he coat as he again pause . " no doubt that be a good device as to way and mean , " say , with a edge of irony in he tone . " but I can not be expect to rejoice in it at once , since one of the first result will be that the other medical man will upset or interrupt my methods , if it be only because they be mine . " " I myself , as you know , , highly value the opportunity of new and independent procedure which you have diligently employ : the original plan , I confess , be one which I have much at heart , under submission to the . but since providential indication demand a renunciation from I , I renounce . " show a rather exasperating ability in this conversation . the broken metaphor and bad logic of motive which have stir he hearer 's contempt be quite consistent with a mode of put the fact which make it difficult for to vent he own indignation and disappointment . after some rapid reflection , he only ask -- " what do say ? " " that be the further statement which I wish to make to you , " say , who have thoroughly prepare he
he ministerial explanation . " she be , you be aware , a woman of most munificent disposition , and happily in possession -- not I presume of great wealth , but of fund which she can well spare . she have inform I that though she have destin the chief part of those fund to another purpose , she be willing to consider whether she can not fully take my place in relation to the hospital . but she wish for ample time to mature she thought on the subject , and I have tell she that there be no need for haste -- that , in fact , my own plan be not yet absolute . " be ready to say , " if would take you place , there would be gain , instead of loss . " but there be still a weight on he mind which arrest this cheerful candor . he reply , " I suppose , then , that I may enter into the subject with . " " precisely ; that be what she expressly desire . she decision , she say , will much depend on what you can tell she . but not at present : she be , I believe , just set out on a journey . I have she letter here , " say Bulstrode , draw it out , and read from it . " 'I be immediately otherwise engage , ' she say . 'I be go into with and ; and the conclusion I come too about some land which I be to see there may affect my power of contribute to the . ' thus , , there be no haste necessary in this matter ; but I wish to apprise you beforehand of what may possibly occur . " return the letter to he side - pocket , and change he attitude as if he business be close . , whose renew hope about the only make he more conscious of the fact which poisone he hope , feel that he effort after help , if make at all , must be make now and vigorously . " I be much oblige to you for give I full notice , " he say , with a firm intention in he tone , yet with a interruptedness in he delivery which show that he speak unwillingly . " the highest object to I be my profession , and I have identify the with the best use I can at present make of my profession . but the best use be not always the same with monetary success . everything which have make the have help with other cause -- I think they be all connect with my professional zeal -- to make I unpopular as a practitioner . I get chiefly patient who can not pay I . I should like they best , if I have nobody to pay on my own side . " wait a little , but only bow , look at he fixedly , and he go on with the same interrupt enunciation -- as if he be bite a objectional leek . " I have slip into money difficulty which I can see no way out of , unless some one who trust I and my future will advance I a sum without other security . I have very little fortune leave when I come here . I have no prospects of money from my own family . my expense , in consequence of my marriage , have be very much greater than I have expect . the result at this moment be that it would take a thousand pound to clear I . I mean , to free I from the risk of have all my good sell in security of my largest debt -- as well as to pay my other debt -- and leave anything to keep we a little beforehand with we small income . I find that it be out of the question that my wife 's father should make such a advance . that be why I mention my position to -- to the only other man who may be hold to have some personal connection with my prosperity or ruin . " hate to hear himself . but he have speak now , and have speak with unmistakable directness . reply without haste , but also without hesitation . " I be grieve , though , I confess , not surprise by this information , . for my own part , I regrett you alliance with my brother - in - law 's family , which have always be of prodigal habit , and which have already be much indebt to I for sustainment in its present position . my advice to you , , would be , that instead of involve yourself in further obligation , and continue a doubtful struggle , you should simply become a bankrupt . " " that would not improve my prospect , " say , rise and speak bitterly , " even if it be a more agreeable thing in itself . " " it be always a trial , " say ; " but trial , my dear sir , be we portion here , and be a need corrective . I recommend you to weigh the advice I have give . " " thank you , " say , not quite know what he say . " I have occupy you too long . good - day . " . " what suit of to put on if vice shall wear as good , and do as well ? if , if craft , if as fair part with end as laudable ? which all this mighty volume of event the world , the universal map of deeds , strongly control , and prove from all descent , that the directest course
course still best succeed . for should not grave and learn would experience that look with the eyes of all the world beside , and with all age hold intelligence , go safer than without a guide ! -- : . that change of plan and shifting of interest which state or betray in he conversation with , have be determine in he by some severe experience which he have go through since the epoch of 's sale , when Raffles have recognize , and when the banker have in attempt a act of restitution which might move to arrest painful consequence . he certainty that , unless he be dead , would return to before long , have be justifi . on he have reappear at the . be at home to receive he , and hinder he communication with the rest of the family , but he could not altogether hinder the circumstance of the visit from compromise himself and alarme he wife . Raffles prove more unmanageable than he have show himself to be in he former appearance , he chronic state of mental restlessness , the grow effect of habitual intemperance , quickly shak off every impression from what be say to he . he insist on stay in the house , and , weigh two set of evils , feel that this be at least not a worse alternative than he go into the town . he keep he in he own room for the evening and see he to bed , Raffle all the while amuse himself with the annoyance he be cause this decent and highly prosperous fellow - sinner , a amusement which he facetiously express as sympathy with he friend 's pleasure in entertain a man who have be serviceable to he , and who have not have all he earning . there be a cunning calculation under this noisy joke -- a cool resolve to extract something the handsomer from as payment for release from this new application of torture . but he cunning have a little overcast its mark . be indeed more torture than the coarse fibre of Raffle could enable he to imagine . he have tell he wife that he be simply take care of this wretch creature , the victim of vice , who might otherwise injure himself ; he imply , without the direct form of falsehood , that there be a family tie which bound he to this care , and that there be sign of mental alienation in Raffles which urge caution . he would himself drive the unfortunate be away the next morning . in these hints he feel that he be supply Mr . Bulstrode with precautionary information for he daughter and servants , and accounting for he allow no one but himself to enter the room even with food and drink . but he sit in a agony of fear lest Raffle should be overheard in he loud and plain reference to past fact -- lest should be even temp to listen at the door . how could he hinder she , how betray he terror by open the door to detect she ? she be a woman of honest direct habit , and little likely to take so low a course in order to arrive at painful knowledge ; but fear be stronger than the calculation of probability . in this way Raffle have push the torture too far , and produce a effect which have not be in he plan . by show himself hopelessly unmanageable he have make feel that a strong defiance be the only resource leave . after take Raffles to be that night the banker order he close carriage to be ready at half - past seven the next morning . at six o'clock he have already be long dress , and have spend some of he wretchedness in prayer , plead he motives for avert the worst evil if in anything he have use falsity and speak what be not true before . for shrank from a direct lie with a intensity disproportionate to the number of he more indirect misdeed . but many of these misdeed be like the subtle muscular movement which be not take account of in the consciousness , though they bring about the end that we fix we mind on and desire . and it be only what we be vividly conscious of that we can vividly imagine to be see by . carry he candle to the bedside of , who be apparently in a painful dream . he stand silent , hope that the presence of the light would serve to wake the sleeper gradually and gently , for he fear some noise as the consequence of a too sudden awakening . he have watch for a couple of minute or more the shuddering and panting which seem likely to end in wake , when Raffles , with a long half - stifle moan , start up and star round he in terror , trembl and gas . but he make no further noise , and , set down the candle , await he recovery . it be a quarter of a hour later before , with a cold peremptoriness of manner which he have not before show , say , " I come to call you thus early , , because I have order the carriage to be ready at half - past seven , and intend myself to conduct you as far as Ilsely , where you can either take the railway or await a coach . " Raffles be about to speak , but anticipat he imperiously with the word , " be silent , sir , and hear what I have to say . I shall supply you with money now , and I will furnish you with a reasonable sum from time to time , on you application to I by
by letter ; but if you choose to present yourself here again , if you return to , if you use you tongue in a manner injuriious to I , you will have to live on such fruit as you malice can bring you , without help from I . nobody will pay you well for blast my name : I know the worst you can do against I , and I shall brave it if you dare to thrust yourself upon I again . get up , sir , and do as I order you , without noise , or I will send for a policeman to take you off my premise , and you may carry you story into every pothouse in the town , but you shall have no sixpence from I to pay you expense there . " have rarely in he life speak with such nervous energy : he have be deliberat on this speech and its probable effect through a large part of the night ; and though he do not trust to its ultimately save he from any return of Raffles , he have conclude that it be the best throw he could make . it succeed in enforce submission from the jaded man this morning : he empoison system at this moment quail before 's cold , resolute bearing , and he be take off quietly in the carriage before the family breakfast time . the servant imagine he to be a poor relation , and be not surprise that a strict man like they master , who hold he head high in the world , should be asham of such a cousin and want to get rid of he . the banker 's drive of ten mile with he hated companion be a dreary beginning of the day ; but at the end of the drive , Raffles have recovere he spirits , and part in a contentment for which there be the good reason that the banker have give he a hundred pound . various motive urge to this open - handedness , but he do not himself inquire closely into all of they . as he have stand watch Raffles in he uneasy sleep , it have certainly enter he mind that the man have be much shatter since the first gift of two hundred pound . he have take care to repeat the incisive statement of he resolve not to be play on any more ; and have try to penetrate Raffles with the fact that he have show the risk of brib he to be quite equal to the risk of defy he . but when , free from he repulsive presence , return to he quiet home , he bring with he no confidence that he have secure more than a respite . it be as if he have have a loathsome dream , and could not shake off its image with they hateful kindred of sensation -- as if on all the pleasant surroundings of he life a dangerous reptile have leave he slimy trace . who can know how much of he most inward life be make up of the thought he believe other man to have about he , until that fabric of opinion be threaten with ruin ? be only the more conscious that there be a deposit of uneasy presentiment in he wife 's mind , because she carefully avoid any allusion to it . he have be use every day to taste the flavor of supremacy and the tribute of complete deference : and the certainty that he be watch or measure with a hidden suspicion of he have some discreditable secret , make he voice totter when he be speak to edification . Foresee , to man of 's anxious temperament , be often worse than see ; and he imagination continually heighten the anguish of a imminent disgrace . yes , imminent ; for if he defiance of do not keep the man away -- and though he pray for this result he hardly hope for it -- the disgrace be certain . in vain he say to himself that , if permit , it would be a divine visitation , a chastisement , a preparation ; he recoil from the imagined burning ; and he judge that it must be more for the glory that he should escape dishonor . that recoil have at last urge he to make preparation for quit . if evil truth must be report of he , he would then be at a less scorching distance from the contempt of he old neighbor ; and in a new scene , where he life would not have gather the same wide sensibility , the tormentor , if he pursue he , would be less formidable . to leave the place finally would , he know , be extremely painful to he wife , and on other grounds he would have prefer to stay where he have struck root . hence he make he preparations at first in a conditional way , wish to leave on all side a opening for he return after brief absence , if any favorable intervention of Providence should dissipate he fear . he be prepare to transfer he management of the , and to give up any active control of other commercial affair in the neighborhood , on the ground of he failing health , but without exclude he future resumption of such work . the measure would cause he some add expense and some diminution of income beyond what he have already undergone from the general depression of trade ; and the present itself as a principal object of outlay on which he could fairly economize . this be the experience which have determine he conversation with . but at this time he arrangement have most of they go no farther than a stage at which he could
could recall they if they prove to be unnecessary . he continually defer the final step ; in the midst of he fear , like many a man who be in danger of shipwreck or of be dash from he carriage by runaway horse , he have a clinging impression that something would happen to hinder the worst , and that to spoil he life by a late transplantation might be over -hasty --especially since it be difficult to account satisfactorily to he wife for the project of they indefinite exile from the only place where she would like to live . among the affair have to care for , be the management of the farm at in case of he absence ; and on this as well as on all other matter connect with any house and land he possess in or about , he have consult . like every one else who have business of that sort , he want to get the agent who be more anxious for he employer 's interest than he own . with regard to , since wish to retain he hold on the stock , and to have a arrangement by which he himself could , if he choose , resume he favorite recreation of superintendence , have advise he not to trust to a mere bailiff , but to let the land , stock , and implement yearly , and take a proportionate share of the proceed . " may I trust to you to find I a tenant on these term , ? " say . " and will you mention to I the yearly sum which would repay you for manage these affair which we have discuss together ? " " I will think about it , " say , in he blunt way . " I will see how I can make it out . " if it have not be that he have to consider 's future , would not probably have be glad of any addition to he work , of which he wife be always fear a excess for he as he grow older . but on quit after that conversation , a very alluring idea occur to he about this say letting of . what if would agree to he placing there on the understanding that he , , should be responsible for the management ? it would be a excellent schooling for ; he might make a modest income there , and still have time leave to get knowledge by help in other business . he mention he notion to with such evident delight that she could not bear to chill he pleasure by express she constant fear of he undertaking too much . " the lad would be as happy as two , " he say , throw himself back in he chair , and look radiant , " if I could tell he it be all settled . ; ! he mind have be run on that place for year before old die . and it would be as pretty a turn of thing as could be that he should hold the place in a good industrious way after all -- by he take to business . for it be likely enough Bulstrode might let he go on , and gradually buy the stock . he have not make up he mind , I can see , whether or not he shall settle somewhere else as a lasting thing . I never be better pleased with a notion in my life . and then the child might be marry by - and - by , . " " you will not give any hint of the plan to , until you be sure that would agree to the plan ? " say , in a tone of gentle caution . " and as to marriage , , we old people need not help to hasten it . " " oh , I do not know , " say , swing he head aside . " marriage be a taming thing . would want less of my bit and bridle . however , I shall say nothing till I know the ground I be tread on . I shall speak to Bulstrode again . " he take he earliest opportunity of do so . have anything but a warm interest in he nephew , but he have a strong wish to secure 's service on many scattered point of business at which he be sure to be a considerable loser , if they be under less conscientious management . on that ground he make no objection to 's proposal ; and there be also another reason why he be not sorry to give a consent which be to benefit one of the Vincy family . it be that Bulstrode , have heard of 's debt , have be anxious to know whether she husband could not do something for poor , and have be much trouble on learning from he that 's affair be not easily remediable , and that the wisest plan be to let they " take they course . " have then say for the first time , " I think you be always a little hard towards my family , . and I be sure I have no reason to deny any of my relative . too worldly they may be , but no one ever have to say that they be not respectable . " " my dear Harriet , " say , wince under he wife 's eye , which be fill with tear , " I have supply you brother with a great deal of capital . I can not be expect to take care of he married child . " that seem to be true , and 's remonstrance subsid into pity for poor , whose extravagant education she have always foreseen the fruit of
of . but remembere that dialogue , feel that when he have to talk to he wife fully about he plan of quit , he should be glad to tell she that he have make a arrangement which might be for the good of she nephew . at present he have merely mention to she that he think of shutting up the for a few month , and take a house on the . hence get the assurance he desire , namely , that in case of 's departure from for a indefinite time , should be allow to have the tenancy of on the term propose . be so elated with he hope of this " neat turn " be give to thing , that if he self - control have not be brace by a little affectionate wifely scold , he would have betraye everything to , want " to give the child comfort . " however , he restrain himself , and keep in strict privacy from certain visit which he be make to , in order to look more thoroughly into the state of the land and stock , and take a preliminary estimate . he be certainly more eager in these visit than the probable speed of event require he to be ; but he be stimulate by a fatherly delight in occupy he mind with this bit of probable happiness which he hold in store like a hidden birthday gift for and . " but suppose the whole scheme should turn out to be a castle in the air ? " say . " well , well , " reply ; " the castle will tumble about nobody 's head . " . " if thou hast hear a word , let it die with thee . " -- . be still seat in he manager 's room at the , about three o'clock of the same day on which he have receive Lydgate there , when the clerk enter to say that he horse be wait , and also that be outside and beg to speak with he . " by all mean , " say ; and enter . " pray sit down , , " continue the banker , in he suavest tone . " I be glad that you arrive just in time to find I here . I know you count you minute . " " oh , " say , gently , with a slow swing of he head on one side , as he seat himself and lay he hat on the floor . he look at the ground , lean forward and let he long finger droop between he leg , while each finger move in succession , as if it be share some thought which fill he large quiet brow . , like every one else who know , be use to he slowness in begin to speak on any topic which he feel to be important , and rather expect that he be about to recur to the buying of some house in 's , for the sake of pull they down , as a sacrifice of property which would be well repay by the influx of air and light on that spot . it be by proposition of this kind that be sometimes troublesome to he employer ; but he have usually find ready to meet he in project of improvement , and they have get on well together . when he speak again , however , it be to say , in rather a subdue voice -- " I have just come away from , . " " you find nothing wrong there , I hope , " say the banker ; " I be there myself yesterday . have do well with the lambs this year . " " why , yes , " say , look up gravely , " there be something wrong -- a stranger , who be very ill , I think . he want 's a doctor , and I come to tell you of that . he name be Raffles . " he see the shock of he word pass through 's frame . on this subject the banker have think that he fear be too constantly on the watch to be take by surprise ; but he have be mistaken . " poor wretch ! " he say in a compassionate tone , though he lip tremble a little . " do you know how he come there ? " " I take he myself , " say , quietly -- " take he up in my gig . he have get down from the coach , and be walk a little beyond the turn from the toll - house , and I overtake he . he remember see I with you once before , at , and he ask I to take he on . I see he be ill : it seem to I the right thing to do , to carry he under shelter . and now I think you should lose no time in get advice for he . " take up he hat from the floor as he end , and rise slowly from he seat . " certainly , " say , whose mind be very active at this moment . " perhaps you will yourself oblige I , , by call at 's as you pass -- or stay ! he may at this hour probably be at the . I will first send my man on the horse there with a note this instant , and then I will myself ride to . " quickly write a note , and go out himself to give the commission to he man . when he return , be stand as before with one hand on the back of the chair , hold he hat with the other . in
in 's mind the dominant thought be , " perhaps Raffle only speak to of he illness . may wonder , as he must have do before , at this disreputable fellow 's claim intimacy with I ; but he will know nothing . and he be friendly to I -- I can be of use to he . " he longe for some confirmation of this hopeful conjecture , but to have ask any question as to what have say or do would have be to betray fear . " I be exceedingly oblige to you , , " he say , in he usual tone of politeness . " my servant will be back in a few minute , and I shall then go myself to see what can be do for this unfortunate man . perhaps you have some other business with I ? if so , pray be seat . " " thank you , " say , make a slight gesture with he right hand to waive the invitation . " I wish to say , , that I must request you to put you business into some other hand than mine . I be oblige to you for you handsome way of meet I -- about the letting of , and all other business . but I must give it up . " a sharp certainty enter like a stab into 's soul . " this be sudden , , " be all he could say at first . " it be , " say ; " but it be quite fix . I must give it up . " he speak with a firmness which be very gentle , and yet he could see that seem to cower under that gentleness , he face look dry and he eye swerve away from the glance which rest on he . feel a deep pity for he , but he could have use no pretext to account for he resolve , even if they would have be of any use . " you have be lead to this , I apprehend , by some slander concern I utter by that unhappy creature , " say , anxious now to know the utmost . " that be true . I can not deny that I act upon what I hear from he . " " you be a conscientious man , -- a man , I trust , who feel himself accountable to . you would not wish to injure I by be too ready to believe a slander , " say , cast about for plea that might be adapt to he hearer 's mind . " that be a poor reason for give up a connection which I think I may say will be mutually beneficial . " " I would injure no man if I could help it , " say ; " even if I think wink at it . I hope I should have a feeling for my fellow - creature . but , sir -- I be oblige to believe that this Raffle have tell I the truth . and I can not be happy in work with you , or profit by you . it hurt my mind . I must beg you to seek another agent . " " very well , . but I must at least claim to know the worst that he have tell you . I must know what be the foul speech that I be liable to be the victim of , " say , a certain amount of anger begin to mingle with he humiliation before this quiet man who renounce he benefit . " that be needless , " say , wave he hand , bow he head slightly , and not swerve from the tone which have in it the merciful intention to spare this pitiable man . " what he have say to I will never pass from my lip , unless something now unknown force it from I . if you lead a harmful life for gain , and keep other out of they rights by deceit , to get the more for yourself , I dare say you repent -- you would like to go back , and can not : that must be a bitter thing " -- pause a moment and shake he head -- " it be not for I to make you life harder to you . " " but you do -- you do make it harder to I , " say constrain into a genuine , pleading cry . " you make it harder to I by turn you back on I . " " that I be force to do , " say , still more gently , lift up he hand . " I be sorry . I do not judge you and say , he be wick , and I be righteous . forbid . I do not know everything . a man may do wrong , and he will may rise clear out of it , though he can not get he life clear . that be a bad punishment . if it be so with you ,-- well , I be very sorry for you . but I have that feel inside I , that I can not go on work with you . that be all , . everything else be bury , so far as my will go . and I wish you good - day . " " one moment , ! " say , hurriedly . " I may trust then to you solemn assurance that you will not repeat either to man or woman what -- even if it have any degree of truth in it -- be yet a malicious representation ? " 's wrath be stir , and he say , indignantly -- " why should I have say it
it if I do not mean it ? I be in no fear of you . such tales as that will never tempt my tongue . " " excuse I -- I be agitate -- I be the victim of this abandon man . " " stop a bit ! you have get to consider whether you do not help to make he worse , when you profit by he vex . " " you be wrong I by too readily believe he , " say , oppress , as by a nightmare , with the inability to deny flatly what Raffle might have say ; and yet feel it a escape that have not so state it to he as to ask for that flat denial . " no , " say , lift he hand deprecatingly ; " I be ready to believe better , when better be prove . I rob you of no good chance . as to speak , I hold it a crime to expose a man 's sin unless I be clear it must be do to save the innocent . that be my way of thinking , , and what I say , I 've no need to swear . I wish you good - day . " some hour later , when he be at home , say to he wife , incidentally , that he have have some little difference with , and that in consequence , he have give up all notion of take , and indeed have resign do further business for he . " he be dispose to interfere too much , be he ? " say , imagine that she husband have be touch on he sensitive point , and not be allow to do what he think right as to material and mode of work . " oh , " say , bow he head and wave he hand gravely . and know that this be a sign of he not intend to speak further on the subject . as for , he have almost immediately mount he horse and set off for , be anxious to arrive there before . he mind be crowd with image and conjecture , which be a language to he hope and fear , just as we hear tone from the vibration which shake we whole system . the deep humiliation with which he have wince under 's knowledge of he past and rejection of he patronage , alternate with and almost give way to the sense of safety in the fact that , and no other , have be the man to whom Raffles have speak . it seem to he a sort of earnest that intend he rescue from worse consequence ; the way be thus leave open for the hope of secrecy . that Raffle should be afflict with illness , that he should have be lead to rather than elsewhere -- 's heart flutter at the vision of probability which these event conjure up . if it should turn out that he be free from all danger of disgrace -- if he could breathe in perfect liberty -- he life should be more consecrated than it have ever be before . he mentally lift up this vow as if it would urge the result he longe for -- he try to believe in the potency of that prayerful resolution -- its potency to determine death . he know that he ought to say , " thy will be do ; " and he say it often . but the intense desire remain that the will of might be the death of that hate man . yet when he arrive at he could not see the change in Raffle without a shock . but for he pallor and feebleness , would have call the change in he entirely mental . instead of he lould torment mood , he show a intense , vague terror , and seem to deprecate 's anger , because the money be all gone -- he have be rob -- it have half of it be take from he . he have only come here because he be ill and somebody be hunt he -- somebody be after he he have tell nobody anything , he have keep he mouth shut . , not know the significance of these symptom , interpret this new nervous susceptibility into a means of alarming Raffle into true confession , and tax he with falsehood in say that he have not tell anything , since he have just tell the man who take he up in he gig and bring he to . Raffles deny this with solemn adjuration ; the fact be that the link of consciousness be interrupt in he , and that he minute terror - stricken narrative to have be deliver under a set of visionary impulse which have drop back into darkness . 's heart sank again at this sign that he could get no grasp over the wretched man 's mind , and that no word of Raffle could be trust as to the fact which he must want to know , namely , whether or not he have really keep silence to every one in the neighborhood except . the housekeeper have tell he without the least constraint of manner that since leave , Raffles have ask she for beer , and after that have not speak , see very ill . on that side it might be conclude that there have be no betrayal . think , like the servants at the , that the strange man belong to the unpleasant " kin " who be among the trouble of the rich ; she have at first refer the kinship to , and where there be property leave , the buzzing presence of such large blue - bottle seem natural enough . how he could be " kin "
" to Bulstrode as well be not so clear , but . agree with she husband that there be " no know , " a proposition which have a great deal of mental food for she , so that she shook she head over it without further speculation . in less than a hour Lydgate arrive . meet he outside the wainscote parlor , where be , and say -- " I have call you in , , to a unfortunate man who be once in my employment , many year ago . afterwards he go to , and return I fear to a idle dissolute life . be destitute , he have a claim on I . he be slightly connect with , the former owner of this place , and in consequence find he way here . I believe he be seriously ill : apparently he mind be affect . I feel bound to do the utmost for he . " , who have the remembrance of he last conversation with strongly upon he , be not dispose to say a unnecessary word to he , and bow slightly in answer to this account ; but just before enter the room he turn automatically and say , " what be he name ? " -- to know name be as much a part of the medical man 's accomplishment as of the practical politician 's . " Raffle , , " say , who hope that whatever became of , would never know any more of he . when he have thoroughly examine and consider the patient , order that he should go to bed , and be keep there in as complete quiet as possible , and then go with into another room . " it be a serious case , I apprehend , " say the banker , before begin to speak . " no -- and yes , " say , half dubiously . " it be difficult to decide as to the possible effect of long - stand complication ; but the man have a robust constitution to begin with . I should not expect this attack to be fatal , though of course the system be in a ticklish state . he should be well watch and attend to . " " I will remain here myself , " say . " . and she husband be inexperienc . I can easily remain here for the night , if you will oblige I by take a note for . " " I should think that be hardly necessary , " say . " he seem tame and terrified enough . he might become more unmanageable . but there be a man here -- be there not ? " " I have more than once stay here a few night for the sake of seclusion , " say , indifferently ; " I be quite dispose to do so now . and she husband can relieve or aid I , if necessary . " " very well . then I need give my direction only to you , " say , not feel surprised at a little peculiarity in . " you think , then , that the case be hopeful ? " say , when Lydgate have end give he order . " unless there turn out to be further complication , such as I have not at present detect -- yes , " say . " he may pass on to a worse stage ; but I should not wonder if he get better in a few day , by adhere to the treatment I have prescribe . there must be firmness . remember , if he call for liquor of any sort , not to give they to he . in my opinion , man in he condition be oftener kill by treatment than by the disease . still , new symptom may arise . I shall come again to - morrow morning . " after wait for the note to be carry to , rode away , form no conjecture , in the first instance , about the history of Raffles , but rehearse the whole argument , which have lately be much stir by the publication of 's abundant experience in , as to the right way of treat case of alcoholic poisoning such as this . , when abroad , have already be interested in this question : he be strongly convince against the prevalent practice of allow alcohol and persistently administer large dos of opium ; and he have repeatedly act on this conviction with a favorable result . " the man be in a diseased state , " he think , " but there be a good deal of wear in he still . I suppose he be a object of charity to . it be curious what patch of hardness and tenderness lie side by side in man 's disposition . seem the most unsympathetic fellow I ever see about some people , and yet he have take no end of trouble , and spend a great deal of money , on benevolent object . I suppose he have some test by which he find out whom care for -- he have make up he mind that it do not care for I . " this streak of bitterness come from a plenteous source , and keep wide in the current of he thought as he neare . he have not be there since he first interview with in the morning , have be find at the by the banker 's messenger ; and for the first time he be return to he home without the vision of any expedient in the background which leave he a hope of raising money enough to deliver he from the come destitution of everything which make he married life tolerable -- everything which save he and from that bare
bare isolation in which they would be force to recognize how little of a comfort they could be to each other . it be more bearable to do without tenderness for himself than to see that he own tenderness could make no amend for the lack of other thing to she . the suffering of he own pride from humiliation past and to come were keen enough , yet they be hardly distinguishable to himself from that more acute pain which dominate they -- the pain of foreseeing that would come to regard he chiefly as the cause of disappointment and unhappiness to she . he have never like the makeshift of poverty , and they have never before enter into he prospect for himself ; but he be begin now to imagine how two creature who love each other , and have a stock of thought in common , might laugh over they shabby furniture , and they calculation how far they could afford butter and egg . but the glimpse of that poetry seem as far off from he as the carelessness of the golden age ; in poor 's mind there be not room enough for luxuries to look small in . he get down from he horse in a very sad mood , and go into the house , not expect to be cheer except by he dinner , and reflec that before the evening close it would be wise to tell Rosamond of he application to Bulstrode and its failure . it would be well not to lose time in prepare she for the worst . but he dinner wait long for he before he be able to eat it . for on entering he find that 's agent have already put a man in the house , and when he ask where be , he be tell that she be in she bedroom . he go up and find she stretch on the bed pale and silent , without a answer even in she face to any word or look of he . he sit down by the bed and lean over she say with almost a cry of prayer -- " forgive I for this misery , my poor Rosamond ! let we only love one another . " she look at he silently , still with the blank despair on she face ; but then the tear begin to fill she blue eye , and she lip tremble . the strong man have have too much to bear that day . he let he head fall beside hers and sob . he do not hinder she from go to she father early in the morning -- it see now that he ought not to hinder she from do as she please . in half a hour she come back , and say that papa and mamma wish she to go and stay with they while thing be in this miserable state . say he could do nothing about the debt -- if he pay this , there would be half - a - dozen more . she have better come back home again till have get a comfortable home for she . " do you object , ? " " do as you like , " say . " but thing be not come to a crisis immediately . there be no hurry . " " I should not go till to - morrow , " say ; " I shall want to pack my clothes . " " oh , I would wait a little longer than to - morrow -- there be no knowing what may happen , " say , with bitter irony . " I may get my neck break , and that may make thing easier to you . " it be 's and 's too , that he tenderness towards she , which be both a emotional prompting and a well - consider resolve , be inevitably interrupt by these outburst of indignation either ironical or remonstrant . she think they totally unwarranted , and the repulsion which this exceptional severity excit in she be in danger of make the more persistent tenderness unacceptable . " I see you do not wish I to go , " she say , with chill mildness ; " why can you not say so , without that kind of violence ? I shall stay until you request I to do otherwise . " say no more , but go out on he round . he feel bruise and shatte , and there be a dark line under he eye which have not see before . she could not bear to look at he . have a way of take thing which make they a great deal worse for she . . we deed still travel with we from afar , and what we have be make we what we be . " 's first object after have leave be to examine 's pocket , which he imagine be sure to carry sign in the shape of hotel - bill of the place he have stop in , if he have not tell the truth in say that he have come straight from because he be ill and have no money . there be various bill cramm into he pocketbook , but none of a later date than at any other place , except one , which bear date that morning . this be crumple up with a hand - bill about a horse - fair in one of he tail - pocket , and represent the cost of three day ' stay at a inn at , where the fair be hold - - a town at least forty mile from . the bill be heavy , and since Raffles have no luggage with he , it seem probable that he have leave he portmanteau behind in payment , in
in order to save money for he travel fare ; for he purse be empty , and he have only a couple of sixpence and some loose pence in he pocket . gather a sense of safety from these indications that Raffles have really keep at a distance from since he memorable visit at . at a distance and among people who be stranger to , what satisfaction could there be to 's torment , self - magnify vein in tell old scandalous story about a banker ? and what harm if he do talk ? the chief point now be to keep watch over he as long as there be any danger of that intelligible raving , that unaccountable impulse to tell , which seem to have act towards ; and feel much anxiety lest some such impulse should come over he at the sight of Lydgate . he sit up alone with he through the night , only order the housekeeper to lie down in she clothes , so as to be ready when he call she , allege he own indisposition to sleep , and he anxiety to carry out the doctor 's order . he do carry they out faithfully , although Raffles be incessantly ask for , and declare that he be sink away -- that the earth be sink away from under he . he be restless and sleepless , but still quail and manageable . on the offer of the food order by , which he refuse , and the denial of other thing which he demand , he seem to concentrate all he terror on , imploringly deprecat he anger , he revenge on he by starvation , and declare with strong oath that he have never tell any mortal a word against he . even this feel that he would not have like to hear ; but a more alarming sign of fitful alternation in he delirium be , that in - the morning twilight Raffle suddenly seem to imagine a doctor present , address he and declare that want to starve he to death out of revenge for tell , when he never have told . 's native imperiousness and strength of determination serve he well . this delicate - look man , himself nervously pertur , find the need stimulus in he strenuous circumstance , and through that difficult night and morning , while he have the air of a animated corpse return to movement without warmth , hold the mastery by its chill impassibility he mind be intensely at work think of what he have to guard against and what would win he security . whatever prayer he might lift up , whatever statement he might inwardly make of this man 's wretch spiritual condition , and the duty he himself be under to submit to the punishment divinely appoint for he rather than to wish for evil to another -- through all this effort to condense word into a solid mental state , there pierce and spread with irresistible vividness the image of the event he desire . and in the train of those image come they apology . he could not but see the death of Raffles , and see in it he own deliverance . what be the removal of this wretch creature ? he be impenitent -- but be not public criminal impenitent ? -- yet the law decide on they fate . should in this case award death , there be no sin in contemplate death as the desirable issue -- if he keep he hand from hasten it -- if he scrupulously do what be prescribe . even here there might be a mistake : human prescription be fallible thing : Lydgate have say that treatment have hasten death , -- why not he own method of treatment ? but of course intention be everything in the question of right and wrong . and set himself to keep he intention separate from he desire . he inwardly declare that he intend to obey order . why should he have get into any argument about the validity of these order ? it be only the common trick of desire -- which avail itself of any irrelevant scepticism , find larger room for itself in all uncertainty about effect , in every obscurity that look like the absence of law . still , he do obey the order . he anxiety continually glance towards , and he remembrance of what have take place between they the morning before be accompany with sensibility which have not be rouse at all during the actual scene . he have then care but little about 's painful impressions with regard to the suggest change in the , or about the disposition towards himself which what he hold to be he justifiable refusal of a rather exorbitant request might call forth . he recur to the scene now with a perception that he have probably make he enemy , and with a awakened desire to propitiate he , or rather to create in he a strong sense of personal obligation . he regrett that he have not at once make even a unreasonable money - sacrifice . for in case of unpleasant suspicion , or even gather from the raving of , would have feel that he have a defence in 's mind by have confer a momentous benefit on he . but the regret have perhaps come too late . , piteous conflict in the soul of this unhappy man , who have longe for year to be better than he be -- who have take he selfish passion into discipline and clad they in severe rob , so that he have walk with they as a devout choir , till now that a terror have risen among they , and they could chant no longer , but throw out they common cry for safety . it be nearly
nearly the middle of the day before arrive : he have mean to come earlier , but have be detain , he say ; and he shatte look be notice by . but he immediately throw himself into the consideration of the patient , and inquire strictly into all that have occur . Raffle be worse , would take hardly any food , be persistently wakeful and restlessly rave ; but still not violent . to 's alarmed expectation , he take little notice of 's presence , and continue to talk or yomurmu incoherently . " what do you think of he ? " say , in private . " the symptom be worse . " " you be less hopeful ? " " no ; I still think he may come round . be you go to stay here yourself ? " say , look at with a abrupt question , which make he uneasy , though in reality it be not due to any suspicious conjecture . " yes , I think so , " say , govern himself and speak with deliberation . " . be advise of the reason which detain I . and she husband be not experience enough to be leave quite alone , and this kind of responsibility be scarcely include in they service of I . you have some fresh instruction , I presume . " the chief new instruction that have to give be on the administration of extremely moderate dos of opium , in case of the sleeplessness continue after several hour . he have take the precaution of bring opium in he pocket , and he give minute direction to as to the dos , and the point at which they should cease . he insist on the risk of not cease ; and repeat he order that no alcohol should be give . " from what I see of the case , " he end , " narcotism be the only thing I should be much afraid of . he may wear through even without much food . there be a good deal of strength in he . " " you look ill yourself , -- a most unusual , I may say unprecedented thing in my knowledge of you , " say , show a solicitude as unlike he indifference the day before , as he present recklessness about he own fatigue be unlike he habitual self - cherish anxiety . " I fear you be harass . " " yes , I be , " say , brusquly , hold he hat , and ready to go . " something new , I fear , " say , inquiringly . " pray be seat . " " no , thank you , " say , with some hauteur . " I mention to you yesterday what be the state of my affair . there be nothing to add , except that the execution have since then be actually put into my house . one can tell a good deal of trouble in a short sentence . I will say good morning . " " stay , , stay , " say ; " I have be reconsider this subject . I be yesterday take by surprise , and see it superficially . be anxious for she niece , and I myself should grieve at a calamitous change in you position . claim on I be numerous , but on reconsideration , I esteem it right that I should incur a small sacrifice rather than leave you unaided . you say , I think , that a thousand pound would suffice entirely to free you from you burthen , and enable you to recover a firm stand ? " " yes , " say , a great leap of joy within he surmount every other feeling ; " that would pay all my debt , and leave I a little on hand . I could set about economizing in we way of living . and by - and - by my practice might look up . " " if you will wait a moment , , I will draw a cheek to that amount . I be aware that help , to be effectual in these case , should be thorough . " while write , turn to the window think of he home -- think of he life with it be good start save from frustration , it be good purpose still unbroken . " you can give I a note of hand for this , , " say the banker , advanc towards he with the check . " and by - and - by , I hope , you may be in circumstance gradually to repay I . meanwhile , I have pleasure in think that you will be release from further difficulty . " " I be deeply oblige to you , " say . " you have restore to I the prospect of work with some happiness and some chance of good . " it appear to he a very natural movement in Bulstrode that he should have reconsider he refusal : it correspond with the more munificent side of he character . but as he put he hack into a canter , that he might get the sooner home , and tell the good news to , and get cash at the bank to pay over to 's agent , there cross he mind , with a unpleasant impression , as from a dark - win flight of evil augury across he vision , the thought of that contrast in himself which a few month have bring -- that he should be overjoyed at be under a strong personal obligation -- that he should be overjoyed at get money for himself from . the banker feel that he have do something to nullify one cause of uneasiness , and yet he
he be scarcely the easier . he do not measure the quantity of diseased motive which have make he wish for 's good - will , but the quantity be no the less actively there , like a irritating agent in he blood . a man vow , and yet will not cast away the means of break he vow . be it that he distinctly mean to break it ? not at all ; but the desire which tend to break it be at work in he dimly , and make they way into he imagination , and relax he muscle in the very moment when he be tell himself over again the reasons for he vow . Raffle , recovere quickly , return to the free use of he odious power -- how could wish for that ? Raffle dead be the image that bring release , and indirectly he pray for that way of release , beseech that , if it be possible , the rest of he day here below might be free from the threat of a ignominy which would break he utterly as a instrument of 's service . 's opinion be not on the side of promise that this prayer would be fulfil ; and as the day advance , feel himself get irritate at the persistent life in this man , whom he would fain have see sinke into the silence of death imperious will stir murderous impulse towards this brute life , over which will , by itself , have no power . he say inwardly that he be get too much worn ; he would not sit up with the patient to - night , but leave he to , who , if necessary , could call she husband . at six o'clock , Raffles , have have only fitful pertur snatch of sleep , from which he wake with fresh restlessness and perpetual cry that he be sink away , begin to administer the opium accord to 's direction . at the end of half a hour or more he call and tell she that he find himself unfit for further watch . he must now consign the patient to she care ; and he proceed to repeat to she Lydgate 's direction as to the quantity of each dose . have not before know anything of 's prescription ; she have simply prepare and bring whatever Bulstrode order , and have do what he point out to she . she begin now to ask what else she should do besides administer the opium . " nothing at present , except the offer of the soup or the soda -water : you can come to I for further direction . unless there be any important change , I shall not come into the room again to - night . you will ask you husband for help if necessary . I must go to bed early . " " you have much need , sir , I be sure , " say , " and to take something more strengthen than what you have do . " go away now without anxiety as to what might say in he raving , which have take on a muttering incoherence not likely to create any dangerous belief . at any rate he must risk this . he go down into the wainscote parlor first , and begin to consider whether he would not have he horse saddle and go home by the moonlight , and give up caring for earthly consequence . then , he wish that he have beg to come again that evening . perhaps he might deliver a different opinion , and think that be get into a less hopeful state . should he send for ? if Raffles be really get worse , and slowly die , feel that he could go to bed and sleep in gratitude to . but be he worse ? Lydgate might come and simply say that he be go on as he expect , and predict that he would by - and - by fall into a good sleep , and get well . what be the use of send for he ? Bulstrode shrank from that result . no idea or opinion could hinder he from see the one probability to be , that Raffles recover would be just the same man as before , with he strength as a tormentor renew , oblige he to drag away he wife to spend she year apart from she friend and native place , carry a alienate suspicion against he in she heart . he have sit a hour and a half in this conflict by the firelight only , when a sudden thought make he rise and light the bed - candle , which he have bring down with he . the thought be , that he have not tell Mrs . when the dos of opium must cease . he take hold of the candlestick , but stand motionless for a long while . she might already have give he more than have prescribe . but it be excusable in he , that he should forget part of a order , in he present weary condition . he walk up - stair , candle in hand , not know whether he should straightway enter he own room and go to bed , or turn to the patient 's room and rectify he omission . he pause in the passage , with he face turn towards 's room , and he could hear he moaning and murmuring . he be not asleep , then . who could know that 's prescription would not be better disobey than follow , since there be still no sleep ? he turn into he own room . before he have quite undressed , . rap at the door ; he open it a inch , so that
that he could hear she speak low . " if you please , sir , should I have no brandy nor nothing to give the poor creetur ? he feel sink away , and nothing else will he swaller -- and but little strength in it , if he do -- only the opium . and he say more and more he be sinke down through the earth . " to she surprise , do not answer . a struggle be go on within he . " I think he must die for want of ' support , if he go on in that way . when I nurse my poor master , , I have to give he port -wine and brandy constant , and a big glass at a time , " add , with a touch of remonstrance in she tone . but again do not answer immediately , and she continue , " it be not a time to spare when people be at death 's door , nor would you wish it , sir , I be sure . else I should give he we own bottle of ' rum as we keep by we . but a sitter - up so as you have be , and do everything as laid in you power -- " here a key be thrust through the inch of doorway , and say huskily , " that be the key of the wine - cooler . you will find plenty of brandy there . " Early in the morning -- about six -- rise and spend some time in prayer . do any one suppose that private prayer be necessarily cando --necessarily go to the root of action ? private prayer be inaudible speech , and speech be representative : who can represent himself just as he be , even in he own reflection ? have not yet unravelle in he think the confused prompting of the last four - and - twenty hour . he listen in the passage , and could hear hard stertorous breathing . then he walk out in the garden , and look at the early rime on the grass and fresh spring leave . when he re-enter the house , he feel start at the sight of . " how be you patient -- asleep , I think ? " he say , with a attempt at cheerfulness in he tone . " he be go very deep , sir , " say . " he go off gradual between three and four o'clock . would you please to go and look at he ? I think it no harm to leave he . my man 's gone afield , and the little girl 's see to the kettle . " go up . at a glance he know that be not in the sleep which bring revival , but in the sleep which stream deeper and deeper into the gulf of death . he look round the room and see a bottle with some brandy in it , and the almost empty opium phial . he put the phial out of sight , and carry the brandy - botle down - stair with he , lock it again in the wine - cooler . while breakfaste he consider whether he should ride to Middlemarch at once , or wait for 's arrival . he decide to wait , and tell . Abel that she might go about she work -- he could watch in the bed- chamber . as he sit there and beheld the enemy of he peace go irrevocably into silence , he feel more at rest than he have do for many month . he conscience be soothe by the enfolding wing of secrecy , which seem just then like a angel send down for he relief . he draw out he pocket - book to review various memoranda there as to the arrangement he have project and partly carry out in the prospect of quit , and consider how far he would let they stand or recall they , now that he absence would be brief . some economy which he feel desirable might still find a suitable occasion in he temporary withdrawal from management , and he hope still that would take a large share in the expense of the hospital . in that way the moments pass , until a change in the stertorous breathing be mark enough to draw he attention wholly to the bed , and force he to think of the departing life , which have once be subservient to he own -- which he have once be glad to find base enough for he to act on as he would . it be he gladness then which impell he now to be glad that the life be at a end . and who could say that the death of Raffle have be hasten ? who know what would have save he ? arrive at half - past ten , in time to witness the final pause of the breath . when he enter the room observe a sudden expression in he face , which be not so much surprise as a recognition that he have not judge correctly . he stand by the bed in silence for some time , with he eye turn on the die man , but with that subdue activity of expression which show that he be carry on a inward debate . " when do this change begin ? " say he , look at . " I do not watch by he last night , " say . " I be over-worn , and leave he under 's care . she say that he sank into sleep between three and four o'clock . when I come in before eight he be nearly in this condition . " do not ask another question , but watch in
in silence until he say , " it be all over . " this morning be in a state of recovere hope and freedom . he have set out on he work with all he old animation , and feel himself strong enough to bear all the deficiency of he married life . and he be conscious that have be a benefactor to he . but he be uneasy about this case . he have not expect it to terminate as it have do . yet he hardly know how to put a question on the subject to without appear to insult he ; and if he examine the housekeeper -- why , the man be dead . there seem to be no use in imply that somebody be ignorance or imprudence have kill he . and after all , he himself might be wrong . he and ride back to together , talk of many thing -- chiefly cholera and the chance of the in the house of Lords , and the firm resolve of the political Unions . nothing be say about Raffles , except that mention the necessity of have a grave for he in churchyard , and observe that , so far as he know , the poor man have no connection , except , whom he have state to be unfriendly towards he . on return home Lydgate have a visit from . the have not be in the town the day before , but the news that there be a execution in 's house have get to Lowick by the evening , have be carry by , shoemaker and parish - clerk , who have it from he brother , the respectable bell - hanger in . since that evening when Lydgate have come down from the billiard room with , 's thought about he have be rather gloomy . play at the once or oftener might have be a trifle in another man ; but in it be one of several sign that he be get unlike he former self . he be begin to do thing for which he have formerly even a excessive scorn . whatever certain dissatisfaction in marriage , which some silly tinkling of gossip have give he hint of , might have to do with this change , feel sure that it be chiefly connect with the debt which be be more and more distinctly report , and he begin to fear that any notion of 's have resource or friend in the background must be quite illusory . the rebuff he have meet with in he first attempt to win 's confidence , disinclin he to a second ; but this news of the execution be actually in the house , determine the to overcome he reluctance . Lydgate have just dismiss a poor patient , in whom he be much interested , and he come forward to put out he hand -- with a open cheerfulness which surprise . could this too be a proud rejection of sympathy and help ? never mind ; the sympathy and help should be offer . " how be you , ? I come to see you because I have hear something which make I anxious about you , " say the , in the tone of a good brother , only that there be no reproach in it . they be both seat by this time , and answer immediately -- " I think I know what you mean . you have hear that there be a execution in the house ? " " yes ; be it true ? " " it be true , " say , with a air of freedom , as if he do not mind talk about the affair now . " but the danger be over ; the debt be pay . I be out of my difficulty now : I shall be free from debt , and able , I hope , to start afresh on a better plan . " " I be very thankful to hear it , " say the Vicar , fall back in he chair , and speak with that low - ton quickness which often follow the removal of a load . " I like that better than all the news in the ' . ' I confess I come to you with a heavy heart . " " thank you for come , " say , cordially . " I can enjoy the kindness all the more because I be happier . I have certainly be a good deal crush . I be afraid I shall find the bruise still painful by - and by , " he add , smile rather sadly ; " but just now I can only feel that the torture - screw be off . " be silent for a moment , and then say earnestly , " my dear fellow , let I ask you one question . forgive I if I take a liberty . " " I do not believe you will ask anything that ought to offend I . " " then -- this be necessary to set my heart quite at rest -- you have not -- have you ?-- in order to pay you debt , incur another debt which may harass you worse hereafter ? " " no , " say , colore slightly . " there be no reason why I should not tell you -- since the fact be so -- that the person to whom I be indebt be . he have make I a very handsome advance -- a thousand pound -- and he can afford to wait for repayment . " " well , that be generous , " say Farebrother , compelle himself to approve of the man whom he dislike . he delicate feel shrank from dwell even in he thought on the fact that he
he have always urge to avoid any personal entanglement with . he add immediately , " and must naturally feel a interest in you welfare , after you have work with he in a way which have probably reduce you income instead of add to it . I be glad to think that he have act accordingly . " feel uncomfortable under these kindly supposition . they make more distinct within he the uneasy consciousness which have show it be first dim stirring only a few hour before , that 's motives for he sudden beneficence follow close upon the chillest indifference might be merely selfish . he let the kindly supposition pass . he could not tell the history of the loan , but it be more vividly present with he than ever , as well as the fact which the delicately ignore -- that this relation of personal indebtedness to Bulstrode be what he have once be most resolve to avoid . he begin , instead of answering , to speak of he project economie , and of he have come to look at he life from a different point of view . " I shall set up a surgery , " he say . " I really think I make a mistaken effort in that respect . and if will not mind , I shall take a apprentice . I do not like these thing , but if one carry they out faithfully they be not really lower . I have have a severe galling to begin with : that will make the small rub seem easy . " poor Lydgate ! the " if will not mind , " which have fall from he involuntarily as part of he thought , be a significant mark of the yoke he bear . but , whose hope enter strongly into the same current with 's , and who know nothing about he that could now raise a melancholy presentiment , leave he with affectionate congratulation . . . . . . ' Twas in the of , where , indeed , you have a delight to sit , have you not ? . I have so : because it be a open room , and good for winter . Clo . why , very well then : I hope here be truths . -- measure for . five day after the death of , be stand at he leisure under the large archway lead into the yard of the . he be not fond of solitary contemplation , but he have only just come out of the house , and any human figure stand at ease under the archway in the early afternoon be as certain to attract companionship as a pigeon which have find something worth peeking at . in this case there be no material object to feed upon , but the eye of reason see a probability of mental sustenance in the shape of gossip . , the meek - mannered draper opposite , be the first to act on this inward vision , be the more ambitious of a little masculine talk because he customer be chiefly woman . be rather curt to the draper , feel that be of course glad to talk to _him , but that he be not go to waste much of he talk on Hopkins . , however , there be a small cluster of more important listener , who be either deposit from the passer - by , or have saunter to the spot expressly to see if there be anything go on at the ; and be find it worth he while to say many impressive thing about the fine stud he have be see and the purchase he have make on a journey in the north from which he have just return . present be assure that when they could show he anything to cut out a blood mare , a bay , rise four , which be to be see at Doncaster if they choose to go and look at it , would gratify they by be shoot " from here to . " also , a pair of black which he be go to put into the break recal vividly to he mind a pair which he have sell to Faulkner in ' 19 , for a hundred guinea , and which Faulkner have sell for a hundred and sixty two month later -- any gent who could disprove this statement be offer the privilege of call by a very ugly name until the exercise make he throat dry . when the discourse be at this point of animation , come up . he be not a man to compromise he dignity by lounge at the , but happen to pass along the and see on the other side , he take some of he long stride across to ask the horsedealer whether he have find the first - rate gig - horse which he have engage to look for . be request to wait until he have see a gray select at : if that do not meet he wish to a hair , do not know a horse when he see it , which seem to be the highest conceivable unlikelihood . , stand with he back to the street , be fix a time for look at the gray and see it try , when a horseman pass slowly by . " ! " say two or three voice at once in a low tone , one of they , which be the draper 's , respectfully prefix the " ; " but nobody have more intention in this interjectural naming than if they have say " the coach " when that vehicle appear in the distance . give a careless glance round at 's back , but as 's eye follow it he make a sarcastic grimace . " by
by jingo ! that remind I , " he begin , lower he voice a little , " I pick up something else at besides you gig - horse , . I pick up a fine story about . do you know how he come by he fortune ? any gentleman want a bit of curiious information , I can give it he free of expense . if everybody get they desert , might have have to say he prayer at . " " what do you mean ? " say , thrust he hand into he pocket , and push a little forward under the archway . if should turn out to be a rascal , have a prophetic soul . " I have it from a party who be a old chum of 's . I will tell you where I first pick he up , " say , with a sudden gesture of he fore - finger . " he be at 's sale , but I know nothing of he then -- he slipp through my finger -- be after Bulstrode , no doubt . he tell I he can tap to any amount , know all he secret . however , he blab to I at : he take a stiff glass . if I think he mean to turn king 's evidence ; but he be that sort of bragging fellow , the bragging run over hedge and ditch with he , till he would brag of a spavin as if it 'uld fetch money . a man should know when to pull up . " make this remark with a air of disgust , satisfy that he own bragging show a fine sense of the marketable . " what be the man 's name ? where can he be find ? " say . " as to where he be to be find , I leave he to it at the 's ; but he name be Raffles . " " Raffle ! " exclaim . " I furnish he funeral yesterday . he be bury at . follow he . a very decent funeral . " there be a strong sensation among the listener . give a ejaculation in which " brimstone " be the mildest word , and , knitt he brows and bend he head forward , exclaim , " what ?-- where do the man die ? " " at , " say the draper . " the housekeeper say he be a relation of the master 's . he come there ill on . " " why , it be on I take a glass with he , " interpose . " do any doctor attend he ? " say " yes . . sit up with he one night . he die the third morning . " " go on , , " say , insistently . " what do this fellow say about ? " the group have already become larger , the town - clerk 's presence be a guarantee that something worth listen to be go on there ; and deliver he narrative in the hearing of seven . it be mainly what we know , include the fact about , with some local color and circumstance add : it be what have dread the betrayal of -- and hope to have bury forever with the corpse of -- it be that haunt ghost of he earlier life which as he ride past the archway of the he be trust that have deliver he from . yes , . he have not confess to himself yet that he have do anything in the way of contrivance to this end ; he have accept what seem to have be offer . it be impossible to prove that he have do anything which hasten the departure of that man 's soul . but this gossip about spread through like the smell of fire . follow up he information by send a clerk whom he could trust to on a pretext of inquire about hay , but really to gather all that could be learn about Raffles and he illness from . in this way it come to he knowledge that have carry the man to in he gig ; and in consequence take a opportunity of see , call at he office to ask whether he have time to undertake a arbitration if it be require , and then ask he incidentally about . be betraye into no word injuriious to Bulstrode beyond the fact which he be force to admit , that he have give up acting for he within the last week . draw he inference , and feel convince that Raffles have tell he story to , and that have give up 's affair in consequence , say so a few hour later to . the statement be pass on until it have quite lose the stamp of a inference , and be take as information come straight from , so that even a diligent historian might have conclude to be the chief publisher of 's misdemeanor . be not slow to perceive that there be no handle for the law either in the revelation make by or in the circumstance of he death . he have himself ridden to Lowick village that he might look at the register and talk over the whole matter with , who be not more surprised than the lawyer that a ugly secret should have come to light about , though he have always have justice enough in he to hinder he antipathy from turn into conclusion . but while they be talk another combination be silently go forward in 's mind , which foreshadow what be soon to be loudly speak of in as a necessary " putting of two and two together . " with the reason which keep in dread of Raffles there flash the
the thought that the dread might have something to do with he munificence towards he medical man ; and though he resist the suggestion that it have be consciously accept in any way as a bribe , he have a foreboding that this complication of thing might be of malignant effect on 's reputation . he perceive that kknow nothing at present of the sudden relief from debt , and he himself be careful to glide away from all approach towards the subject . " well , " he say , with a deep breath , want to wind up the illimitable discussion of what might have be , though nothing could be legally prove , " it be a strange story . so we mercurial Ladislaw have a queer genealogy ! a high - spirited young lady and a musical polish patriot make a likely enough stock for he to spre from , but I should never have suspect a grafting of the pawnbroker . however , there be no know what a mixture will turn out beforehand . some sort of dirt serve to clarify . " " it be just what I should have expect , " say , mount he horse . " any curse alien blood , , , or . " " I know he be one of you black sheep , . but he be really a disinterested , unworldly fellow , " say , smile . " ay , ay , that be you Whiggish twist , " say , who have be in the habit of say apologetically that be such a damned pleasant good - hear fellow you would mistake he for a Tory . ride home without think of 's attendance on Raffles in any other light than as a piece of evidence on the side of . but the news that have all at once become able not only to get rid of the execution in he house but to pay all he debt in be spread fast , gather round it conjecture and comment which give it new body and impetus , and soon fill the ear of other persons besides , who be not slow to see a significant relation between this sudden command of money and 's desire to stifle the scandal of Raffles . that the money come from would infallibly have be guess even if there have be no direct evidence of it ; for it have beforehand enter into the gossip about 's affair , that neither he father - in - law nor he own family would do anything for he , and direct evidence be furnish not only by a clerk at the , but by innocent herself , who mention the loan to . , who mention it to she daughter - in - law of the house of , who mention it generally . the business be feel to be so public and important that it require dinner to feed it , and many invitation be just then issue and accept on the strength of this scandal concern and ; wife , widow , and single lady take they work and go out to tea oftener than usual ; and all public conviviality , from the to 's , gather a zest which could not be win from the question whether the Lord would throw out the . for hardly anybody doubt that some scandalous reason or other be at the bottom of 's liberality to Lydgate . indeed , in the first instance , invite a select party , include the two physician , with and , expressly to hold a close discussion as to the probability of Raffles 's illness , recit to they all the particular which have be gather from Abel in connection with 's certificate , that the death be due to delirium tremen ; and the medical gentleman , who all stand undisturbedly on the old path in relation to this disease , declare that they could see nothing in these particular which could be transform into a positive ground of suspicion . but the moral grounds of suspicion remain : the strong motive clearly have for wishing to be rid of Raffles , and the fact that at this critical moment he have give Lydgate the help which he must for some time have know the need for ; the disposition , moreover , to believe that would be unscrupulous , and the absence of any indisposition to believe that might be as easily bribe as other haughty - minde man when they have find themselves in want of money . even if the money have be give merely to make he hold he tongue about the scandal of 's earlier life , the fact throw a odious light on , who have long be sneer at as make himself subservient to the banker for the sake of work himself into predominance , and discredite the elder member of he profession . hence , in spite of the negative as to any direct sign of guilt in relation to the death at , 's select party break up with the sense that the affair have " a ugly look . " but this vague conviction of indeterminable guilt , which be enough to keep up much head - shaking and bite innuendo even among substantial professional senior , have for the general mind all the superior power of mystery over fact . everybody like better to conjecture how the thing be , than simply to know it ; for conjecture soon become more confident than knowledge , and have a more liberal allowance for the incompatible . even the more definite scandal concern 's earlier life be , for some mind , melt into the mass of mystery , as so much lively metal to be pour out in dialogue , and to take such fantastic shape as heaven please . this
this be the tone of thought chiefly sanction by , the spirited landlady of the in , who have often to resist the shallow pragmatism of customer dispose to think that they report from the outer world be of equal force with what have " come up " in she mind . how it have be bring to she she do not know , but it be there before she as if it have be " score with the chalk on the chimney - board -- " as should say , " he inside be _then black_ as if the hair of he head know the thought of he heart , he would tear th'ey up by the root . " " that be odd , " say , a meditative shoemaker , with weak eye and a piping voice . " why , I read in the ' Trumpet ' that be what the of say when he turn he coat and go over to the . " " very like , " say . " if one raskill say it , it be more reason why another should . but hypo_crite_ as he be be , and hold thing with that high hand , as there be no parson I ' the country good enough for he , he be force to take into he counsel , and be be too many for he . " " ay , ay , he be a ' complice you can not send out of ' the country , " say , the glazier , who gather much news and grope among it dimly . " but by what I can make out , there be they say be for running away , for fear of ' be find out , before now . " " he will be drive away , whether or no , " say , the barber , who have just drop in . " I shave , 's clerk , this morning -- he be get a bad finger -- and he say they be all of one mind to get rid of . be turn against he , and want he out of ' the parish . and there be gentleman in this town say they ' as soon dine with a fellow from the hulk . ' and a deal sooner I would , ' say ; ' for what be more against one 's stomach than a man come and make himself bad company with he religion , and give out as the be not enough for he , and all the while he be worse than half the man at the tread - mill ? ' say so himself . " " it will be a bad thing for the town though , if 's money go out of it , " say , quaveringly . " ah , there be better folk spend they money worse , " say a firm -voiced dyer , whose crimson hand look out of keeping with he good - natured face . " but he will not keep he money , by what I can make out , " say the glazier . " do not they say as there be somebody can strip it off he ? by what I can understan ' , they could take every penny off he , if they go to law . " " no such thing ! " say the barber , who feel himself a little above he company at 's , but like it no the worse . " say it be no such thing . he say they might prove over and over again whose child this young Ladislaw be , and they would do no more than if they prove I come out of the Fens -- he could not touch a penny . " " look you there now ! " say , indignantly . " I thank the he take my child to himself , if that be all the law can do for the motherless . then by that , it be of ' no use who you father and mother be . but as to listen to what one lawyer say without ask another -- I wonder at a man of ' you cleverness , . it be well know there be always two side , if no more ; else who would go to law , I should like to know ? it be a poor tale , with all the law as there be up and down , if it be no use prove whose child you be . may say that if he like , but I say , do not Fletcher _me_! " affec to laugh in a complimentary way at , as a woman who be more than a match for the lawyer ; be dispose to submit to much twitting from a landlady who have a long score against he . " if they come to law , and it be all true as folk say , there be more to be look to nor money , " say the glazier . " there be this poor creetur as be dead and go ; by what I can make out , he would see the day when he be a deal finer gentleman nor . " " Finer gentleman ! I will warrant he , " say ; " and a far personabler man , by what I can hear . as I say when , the tax - gatherer , come in , a - stand where you sit , and say , ' Bulstrode get all he money as he bring into this town by thieving and swindling , '-- I say , ' you do not make I no wiser , : it be set my blood a - creeping to look at he ever sin' here he come into a
a - want to buy the house over my head : folk do not look the color of ' the dough - tub and stare at you as if they want to see into you backbone for nothingk . ' that be what I say , and can bear I witness . " " and in the rights of it too , " say . " for by what I can make out , this Raffle , as they call he , be a lusty , fresh - colored man as you would wish to see , and the best og company -- though dead he lie in churchyard sure enough ; and by what I can understan ' , there be they know more than they _should know about how he get there . " " I will believe you ! " say , with a touch of scorn at 's apparent dimness . " when a man have be ' tice to a lone house , and there be they can pay for hospital and nurse for half the country - side choose to be sitter - up night and day , and nobody to come near but a doctor as be know to stick at nothingk , and as poor as he can hang together , and after that so flush of ' money as he can pay off Byles the butcher as he bill have be run on for the best of ' joints since last be a twelvemonth -- I do not want anybody to come and tell I as there be be more go on nor the prayer - book 's get a service for -- I do not want to stand winking and blink and think . " look round with the air of a landlady accustom to dominate she company . there be a chorus of adhesion from the more courageous ; but , after take a dratch , place he flat hand together and press they hard between he knee , look down at they with blear - eyed contemplation , as if the scorching power of 's speech have quite dry up and nullify he wit until they could be bring round again by further moisture . " why should not they dig the man up and have the Crowner ? " say the dyer . " it be be do many and many be the time . if there be be foul play they might find it out . " " not they , ! " say , emphatically . " I know what doctor be . they be a deal too cunn to be find out . and this Doctor Lydgate that be be for cut up everybody before the breath be well out of ' they body -- it be plain enough what use he want to make of ' look into respectable people 's inside . he know drug , you may be sure , as you can neither smell nor see , neither before they be swallow nor after . why , I have see drop myself order by , as be we club doctor and a good charikter , and have bring more live child into the world nor ever another I ' -- I say I have see drop myself as make no difference whether they be in the glass or out , and yet have grip you the next day . so I will leave you own sense to judge . do not tell I ! all I say be , it be a mercy they do not take this Doctor Lydgate on to we club . there be many a mother 's child might ha ' rue it . " the head of this discussion at " 's " have be the common theme among all class in the town , have be carry to on one side and to on the other , have come fully to the ear of the family , and have be discuss with sad reference to " poor Harriet " by all 's friend , before know distinctly why people be look strangely at he , and before himself suspect the betrayal of he secret . he have not be accustom to very cordial relation with he neighbor , and hence he could not miss the sign of cordiality ; moreover , he have be take journey on business of various kind , have now make up he mind that he need not quit , and feel able consequently to determine on matter which he have before leave in suspense . " we will make a journey to in the course of a month or two , " he have say to he wife . " there be great spiritual advantage to be have in that town along with the air and the water , and six week there will be eminently refresh to we . " he really believe in the spiritual advantage , and mean that he life henceforth should be the more devoted because of those later sins which he represent to himself as hypothetic , pray hypothetically for they pardon :--" if I have herein transgress . " as to the , he avoid say anything further to Lydgate , fear to manifest a too sudden change of plan immediately on the death of Raffles . in he secret soul he believe that suspect he order to have be intentionally disobey , and suspect this he must also suspect a motive . but nothing have be betraye to he as to the history of Raffles , and be anxious not to do anything which would give emphasis to he undefined suspicion . as to any certainty that a particular method of treatment would either save or kill , Lydgate himself be constantly argue against such dogmatism ; he have no right to speak , and he have every motive for be silent
silent . feel himself providentially secure . the only incident he have strongly winced under have be a occasional encounter with , who , however , have raise he hat with mild gravity . meanwhile , on the part of the principal townsman a strong determination be grow against he . a meeting be to be hold in the - on a sanitary question which have risen into pressing importance by the occurrence of a cholera case in the town . since the act of parliament , which have be hurriedly pass , authorize assessment for sanitary measure , there have be a board for the superintendence of such measure appoint in , and much cleansing and preparation have be concur in by Whigs and Tories . the question now be , whether a piece of ground outside the town should be secure as a burial - ground by means of assessment or by private subscription . the meeting be to be open , and almost everybody of importance in the town be expect to be there . be a member of the board , and just before twelve o'clock he start from the with the intention of urge the plan of private subscription . under the hesitation of he project , he have for some time keep himself in the background , and he feel that he should this morning resume he old position as a man of action and influence in the public affair of the town where he expect to end he day . among the various person go in the same direction , he see ; they join , talk over the object of the meeting , and enter it together . it seem that everybody of mark have be earlier than they . but there be still spaces leave near the head of the large central table , and they make they way thither . sit opposite , not far from ; all the medical man be there ; be in the chair , and of be on he right hand . notice a peculiar interchange of glance when he and take they seat . after the business have be fully open by the chairman , who point out the advantages of purchase by subscription a piece of ground large enough to be ultimately use as a general cemetery , , whose rather high - pitch but subdue and fluent voice the town be use to at meeting of this sort , rose and ask leave to deliver he opinion . Lydgate could see again the peculiar interchange of glance before start up , and say in he firm resonant voice , " , I request that before any one deliver he opinion on this point I may be permit to speak on a question of public feeling , which not only by myself , but by many gentleman present , be regard as preliminary . " 's mode of speech , even when public decorum repress he " awful language , " be formidable in its curtness and self - possession . sanction the request , sit down , and continue . " in what I have to say , , I be not speak simply on my own behalf : I be speak with the concurrence and at the express request of no fewer than eight of my fellow - townsman , who be immediately around we . it be we united sentiment that should be call upon -- and I do now call upon he -- to resign public position which he hold not simply as a tax - payer , but as a gentleman among gentleman . there be practice and there be act which , owe to circumstance , the law can not visit , though they may be worse than many thing which be legally punishable . Honest man and gentleman , if they do not want the company of people who perpetrate such act , have get to defend themselves as they best can , and that be what I and the friend whom I may call my client in this affair be determined to do . I do not say that have be guilty of shameful act , but I call upon he either publicly to deny and confute the scandalous statement make against he by a man now dead , and who die in he house -- the statement that he be for many year engage in nefarious practice , and that he win he fortune by dishonest procedure -- or else to withdraw from position which could only have be allow he as a gentleman among gentleman . " all eyes in the room be turn on , who , since the first mention of he name , have be go through a crisis of feeling almost too violent for he delicate frame to support . , who himself be undergo a shock as from the terrible practical interpretation of some faint augury , feel , nevertheless , that he own movement of resentful hatred be check by that instinct of the Healer which think first of bring rescue or relief to the sufferer , when he look at the shrunken misery of 's livid face . the quick vision that he life be after all a failure , that he be a dishonored man , and must quail before the glance of those towards whom he have habitually assume the attitude of a reprover -- that have disown he before man and leave he unscree to the triumphant scorn of those who be glad to have they hatred justified -- the sense of utter futility in that equivocation with he conscience in deal with the life of he accomplice , a equivocation which now turn venomously upon he with the full - grow fang of a discover lie :-- all this rush through he like the agony of terror which fail to kill , and
and leave the ear still open to the return wave of execration . the sudden sense of exposure after the re-established sense of safety come -- not to the coarse organization of a criminal but to -- the susceptible nerve of a man whose intensest be lay in such mastery and predominance as the condition of he life have shape for he . but in that intense be lay the strength of reaction . through all he bodily infirmity there run a tenacious nerve of ambitious self - preserve will , which have continually leape out like a flame , scatter all doctrinal fear , and which , even while he sit a object of compassion for the merciful , be begin to stir and glow under he ashy paleness . before the last word be out of 's mouth , feel that he should answer , and that he answer would be a retort . he da not get up and say , " I be not guilty , the whole story be false " -- even if he have da this , it would have see to he , under he present keen sense of betrayal , as vain as to pull , for cover to he nakedness , a frail rag which would rmend at every little strain . for a few moments there be total silence , while every man in the room be look at . he sit perfectly still , lean hard against the back of he chair ; he could not venture to rise , and when he begin to speak he press he hand upon the seat on each side of he . but he voice be perfectly audible , though hoarser than usual , and he word be distinctly pronounce , though he pause between sentence as if short of breath . he say , turn first toward , and then look at -- " I protest before you , sir , as a minister , against the sanction of proceeding towards I which be dictate by virulent hatred . those who be hostile to I be glad to believe any libel utter by a loose tongue against I . and they consciences become strict against I . say that the evil -speaking of which I be to be make the victim accuse I of malpractice -- " here 's voice rose and take on a more biting accent , till it see a low cry --" who shall be my accuser ? not man whose own life be unchristian , nay , scandalous -- not man who themselves use low instrument to carry out they end -- whose profession be a tissue of chicanery -- who have be spend they income on they own sensual enjoyment , while I have be devote mine to advance the best object with regard to this life and the next . " after the word chicanery there be a grow noise , half of murmur and half of hiss , while four person start up at once -- , , , and ; but 's outburst be instantaneous , and leave the other behind in silence . " if you mean I , sir , I call you and every one else to the inspection of my professional life . as to or unchristian , I repudiate you canting palaver ; and as to the way in which I spend my income , it be not my principle to maintain thief and cheat offspring of they due inheritance in order to support religion and set myself up as a saintly Killjoy . I affect no niceness of conscience -- I have not find any nice standard necessary yet to measure you action by , sir . and I again call upon you to enter into satisfactory explanation concern the scandal against you , or else to withdraw from post in which we at any rate decline you as a colleague . I say , sir , we decline to co-operate with a man whose character be not clear from infamous light 's cast upon it , not only by report but by recent action . " " allow I , , " say the chairman ; and , still fume , bow half impatiently , and sit down with he hand thrust deep in he pocket . " , it be not desirable , I think , to prolong the present discussion , " say , turn to the pallid trembl man ; " I must so far concur with what have fall from in expression of a general feeling , as to think it due to you Christian profession that you should clear yourself , if possible , from unhappy aspersion . I for my part should be willing to give you full opportunity and hearing . but I must say that you present attitude be painfully inconsistent with those principle which you have seek to identify yourself with , and for the honor of which I be bound to care . I recommend you at present , as you clergyman , and one who hope for you reinstatement in respect , to quit the room , and avoid further hindrance to business . " , after a moment 's hesitation , take he hat from the floor and slowly rise , but he grasp the corner of the chair so totteringly that feel sure there be not strength enough in he to walk away without support . what could he do ? he could not see a man sink close to he for want of help . he rise and give he arm to , and in that way lead he out of the room ; yet this act , which might have be one of gentle duty and pure compassion , be at this moment unspeakably bitter to he . it seem as if he be put he sign - manual to
to that association of himself with , of which he now see the full meaning as it must have present itself to other mind . he now feel the conviction that this man who be lean tremblingly on he arm , have give he the thousand pound as a bribe , and that somehow the treatment of Raffles have be tamper with from a evil motive . the inference be closely link enough ; the town know of the loan , believe it to be a bribe , and believe that he take it as a bribe . poor Lydgate , he mind strugg under the terrible clutch of this revelation , be all the while morally force to take to the , send a man off for he carriage , and wait to accompany he home . meanwhile the business of the meeting be despatch , and fringe off into eager discussion among various group concern this affair of -- and . , who have before hear only imperfect hint of it , and be very uneasy that he have " go a little too far " in countenancing , now get himself fully inform , and feel some benevolent sadness in talk to about the ugly light in which have come to be regard . be go to walk back to . " step into my carriage , " say . " I be go round to see . she be to come back from last night . she will like to see I , you know . " so they drive along , chat with good - natured hope that there have not really be anything black in 's behavior -- a young fellow whom he have see to be quite above the common mark , when he bring a letter from he uncle . say little : he be deeply mournful : with a keen perception of human weakness , he could not be confident that under the pressure of humiliating need have not fall below himself . when the carriage drive up to the gate of the , be out on the gravel , and come to greet they . " well , my dear , " say , " we have just come from a meeting -- a sanitary meeting , you know . " " be there ? " say , who look full of health and animation , and stand with she head bear under the gleaming light . " I want to see he and have a great consultation with he about the hospital . I have engage with to do so . " " oh , my dear , " say , " we have be hear bad news -- bad news , you know . " they walk through the garden towards the churchyard gate , Farebrother want to go on to the parsonage ; and hear the whole sad story . she listen with deep interest , and beg to hear twice over the fact and impression concern . after a short silence , pause at the churchyard gate , and address , she say energetically -- " you do not believe that be guilty of anything base ? I will not believe it . let we find out the truth and clear he ! " . Sunset and . . full soul be double mirror , make still a endless vista of fair thing before , repeat thing behind . 's impetuous generosity , which would have leape at once to the vindication of from the suspicion of have accept money as a bribe , undergo a melancholy check when she come to consider all the circumstance of the case by the light of 's experience . " it be a delicate matter to touch , " he say . " how can we begin to inquire into it ? it must be either publicly by set the magistrate and coroner to work , or privately by questioning . as to the first proceeding there be no solid ground to go upon , else would have adopt it ; and as to open the subject with , I confess I should shrink from it . he would probably take it as a deadly insult . I have more than once experience the difficulty of speak to he on personal matters . and -- one should know the truth about he conduct beforehand , to feel very confident of a good result . " " I feel convinced that he conduct have not be guilty : I believe that people be almost always better than they neighbor think they be , " say . some of she intensest experience in the last two year have set she mind strongly in opposition to any unfavorable construction of other ; and for the first time she feel rather discontented with . she dislike this cautious weighing of consequence , instead of a ardent faith in effort of justice and mercy , which would conquer by they emotional force . two day afterwards , he be dine at the with she uncle and the Chettam , and when the dessert be stand uneaten , the servants be out of the room , and be nodd in a nap , she return to the subject with renew vivacity . " would understand that if he friend hear a calumny about he they first wish must be to justify he . what do we live for , if it be not to make life less difficult to each other ? I can not be indifferent to the trouble of a man who advise I in _my_ trouble , and attend I in my illness . " 's tone and manner be not more energetic than they have be when she be at the head of she uncle 's table nearly three year before , and she experience since have give she more right to
to express a decided opinion . but be no longer the diffident and acquiescent suitor : he be the anxious brother - in - law , with a devout admiration for he sister , but with a constant alarm lest she should fall under some new illusion almost as bad as marry . he smile much less ; when he say " exactly " it be more often a introduction to a dissentient opinion than in those submissive bachelor day ; and find to she surprise that she have to resolve not to be afraid of he -- all the more because he be really she best friend . he disagree with she now . " but , , " he say , remonstrantly , " you can not undertake to manage a man 's life for he in that way . Lydgate must know -- at least he will soon come to know how he stand . if he can clear himself , he will . he must act for himself . " " I think he friend must wait till they find a opportunity , " add . " it be possible -- I have often felt so much weakness in myself that I can conceive even a man of honorable disposition , such as I have always believe to be , succumb to such a temptation as that of accept money which be offer more or less indirectly as a bribe to insure he silence about scandalous fact long go by . I say , I can conceive this , if he be under the pressure of hard circumstance -- if he have be harass as I feel sure have be . I would not believe anything worse of he except under stringent proof . but there be the terrible follow on some error , that it be always possible for those who like it to interpret they into a crime : there be no proof in favor of the man outside he own consciousness and assertion . " " oh , how cruel ! " say , clasp she hand . " and would you not like to be the one person who believe in that man 's innocence , if the rest of the world bely he ? besides , there be a man 's character beforehand to speak for he . " " but , my dear , " say , smile gently at she ardor , " character be not cut in marble -- it be not something solid and unalterable . it be something live and change , and may become diseased as we body do . " " then it may be rescue and heale , " say " I should not be afraid of ask to tell I the truth , that I might help he . why should I be afraid ? now that I be not to have the land , , I might do as Bulstrode propose , and take he place in provide for the ; and I have to consult , to know thoroughly what be the prospect of do good by keep up the present plan . there be the best opportunity in the world for I to ask for he confidence ; and he would be able to tell I thing which might make all the circumstance clear . then we would all stand by he and bring he out of he trouble . people glorify all sort of bravery except the bravery they might show on behalf of they nearest neighbor . " 's eye have a moist brightness in they , and the change tone of she voice rouse she uncle , who begin to listen . " it be true that a woman may venture on some effort of sympathy which would hardly succeed if we man undertake they , " say , almost convert by 's ardor . " surely , a woman be bound to be cautious and listen to those who know the world better than she do . " say , with he little frown . " whatever you do in the end , Dorothea , you should really keep back at present , and not volunteer any meddling with this Bulstrode business . we do not know yet what may turn up . you must agree with I ? " he end , look at . " I do think it would be better to wait , " say the latter . " yes , yes , my dear , " say , not quite know at what point the discussion have arrive , but come up to it with a contribution which be generally appropriate . " it be easy to go too far , you know . you must not let you idea run away with you . and as to be in a hurry to put money into scheme -- it will not do , you know . have draw I in uncommonly with repair , drain , that sort of thing : I be uncommonly out of pocket with one thing or another . I must pull up . as for you , , you be spend a fortune on those oak fence round you demesne . " Dorothea , submit uneasily to this discouragement , go with into the library , which be she usual drawing - room . " now , , do listen to what say , " say , " else you will be get into a scrape . you always do , and you always will , when you set about do as you please . and I think it be a mercy now after all that you have get to think for you . he let s you have you plan , only he hinder you from be take in . and that be the good of have a brother instead of a husband . a
a husband would not let you have you plan . " " as if I want a husband ! " say . " I only want not to have my feeling check at every turn . " be still undisciplin enough to burst into angry tear . " now , really , , " say , with rather a deeper guttural than usual , " you _are_ contradictory : first one thing and then another . you use to submit to quite shamefully : I think you would have give up ever come to see I if he have ask you . " " of course I submit to he , because it be my duty ; it be my feeling for he , " say , look through the prism of she tear . " then why can not you think it you duty to submit a little to what wish ? " say , with a sense of stringency in she argument . " because he only wish what be for you own good . and , of course , men know best about everything , except what woman know better . " laugh and forgot she tear . " well , I mean about baby and those thing , " explain . " I should not give up to when I know he be wrong , as you use to do to . " . Pity the laden one ; this wander woe May visit you and I . when Lydgate have allay 's anxiety by tell she that she husband have be seize with faintness at the meeting , but that he trust soon to see he better and would call again the next day , unless she - send for he earlier , he go directly home , get on he horse , and ride three mile out of the town for the sake of be out of reach . he feel himself become violent and unreasonable as if rage under the pain of sting : he be ready to curse the day on which he have come to . everything that bad happen to he there see a mere preparation for this hateful fatality , which have come as a blight on he honorable ambition , and must make even people who have only vulgar standard regard he reputation as irrevocably damage . in such moment be a man can hardly escape be unloving . Lydgate thought of himself as the sufferer , and of other as the agent who have injur he lot . he have mean everything to turn out differently ; and other have thrust themselves into he life and thwart he purpose . he marriage seem a unmitigated calamity ; and he be afraid of go to before he have vent himself in this solitary rage , lest the mere sight of she should exasperate he and make he behave unwarrantably . there be episodes in most man 's live in which they highest quality can only cast a deterring shadow over the object that fill they inward vision : 's tenderheartedness be present just then only as a dread lest he should offend against it , not as a emotion that sway he to tenderness . for he be very miserable . only those who know the supremacy of the intellectual life -- the life which have a seed of ennobling thought and purpose within it -- can understand the grief of one who fall from that serene activity into the absorbing soul - waste struggle with worldly annoyance . how be he to live on without vindicat himself among people who suspect he of baseness ? how could he go silently away from as if he be retreat before a just condemnation ? and yet how be he to set about vindicating himself ? for that scene at the meeting , which he have just witness , although it have tell he no particular , have be enough to make he own situation thoroughly clear to he . Bulstrode have be in dread of scandalous disclosure on the part of Raffles . Lydgate could now construct all the probabilitie of the case . " he be afraid of some betrayal in my hearing : all he want be to bind I to he by a strong obligation : that be why he pass on a sudden from hardness to liberality . and he may have tamper with the patient -- he may have disobey my order . I fear he do . but whether he do or not , the world believe that he somehow or other poisone the man and that I wink at the crime , if I do not help in it . and yet -- and yet he may not be guilty of the last offence ; and it be just possible that the change towards I may have be a genuine relenting -- the effect of second thought such as he allege . what we call the ' just possible ' be sometimes true and the thing we find it easier to believe be grossly false . in he last dealings with this man Bulstrode may have keep he hand pure , in spite of my suspicion to the contrary . " there be a benumbing cruelty in he position . even if he renounce every other consideration than that of justify himself -- if he meet shrug , cold glance , and avoidance as a accusation , and make a public statement of all the fact as he know they , who would be convince ? it would be play the part of a fool to offer he own testimony on behalf of himself , and say , " I do not take the money as a bribe . " the circumstance would always be stronger than he assertion . and besides , to come forward and tell everything about himself must include
include declaration about which would darke the suspicions of other against he . he must tell that he have not know of 's existence when he first mention he pressing need of money to , and that he take the money innocently as a result of that communication , not know that a new motive for the loan might have arisen on he be call in to this man . and after all , the suspicion of 's motive might be unjust . but then come the question whether he should have act in precisely the same way if he have not take the money ? certainly , if Raffles have continue alive and susceptible of further treatment when he arrive , and he have then imagine any disobedience to he order on the part of , he would have make a strict inquiry , and if he conjecture have be verify he would have throw up the case , in spite of he recent heavy obligation . but if he have not receive any money -- if have never revoke he cold recommendation of bankruptcy -- would he , , have abstain from all inquiry even on find the man dead ?--would the shrinking from a insult to -- would the dubiousness of all medical treatment and the argument that he own treatment would pass for the wrong with most member of he profession -- have have just the same force or significance with he ? that be the uneasy corner of 's consciousness while he be review the fact and resist all reproach . if he have be independent , this matter of a patient 's treatment and the distinct rule that he must do or see do that which he believe best for the life commit to he , would have be the point on which he would have be the sturdiest . as it be , he have rest in the consideration that disobedience to he order , however it might have arisen , could not be consider a crime , that in the dominant opinion obedience to he order be just as likely to be fatal , and that the affair be simply one of etiquette . whereas , again and again , in he time of freedom , he have denounce the perversion of pathological doubt into moral doubt and have say -- " the purest experiment in treatment may still be conscientious : my business be to take care of life , and to do the best I can think of for it . science be properly more scrupulous than dogma . give a charter to mistake , but the very breath of science be a contest with mistake , and must keep the conscience alive . " ! the scientific conscience have get into the debasing company of money obligation and selfish respects . " be there a medical man of they all in who would question himself as I do ? " say poor , with a renew outburst of rebellion against the oppression of he lot . " and yet they will all feel warrant in make a wide space between I and they , as if I be a leper ! my practice and my reputation be utterly damned -- I can see that . even if I could be clear by valid evidence , it would make little difference to the blessed world here . I have be set down as taint and should be cheapen to they all the same . " already there have be abundant sign which have hithertoo puzzl he , that just when he have be pay off he debt and get cheerfully on he foot , the townsman be avoid he or look strangely at he , and in two instance it come to he knowledge that patient of he have call in another practitioner . the reason be too plain now . the general black - balling have begin . no wonder that in 's energetic nature the sense of a hopeless misconstruction easily turn into a dog resistance . the scowl which occasionally show itself on he square brow be not a meaningless accident . already when he be re-enter the town after that ride take in the first hour of stinging pain , he be set he mind on remain in in spite of the worst that could be do against he . he would not retreat before calumny , as if he submit to it . he would face it to the utmost , and no act of he should show that he be afraid . it belong to the generosity as well as defiant force of he nature that he resolve not to shrink from show to the full he sense of obligation to . it be true that the association with this man have be fatal to he -- true that if he have have the thousand pound still in he hand with all he debt unpaid he would have return the money to , and take beggary rather than the rescue which have be sully with the suspicion of a bribe ( for , remember , he be one of the proudest among the son of man )--nevertheless , he would not turn away from this crush fellow - mortal whose aid he have use , and make a pitiful effort to get acquittal for himself by how against another . " I shall do as I think right , and explain to nobody . they will try to starve I out , but -- " he be go on with a obstinate resolve , but he be get near home , and the thought of urge itself again into that chief place from which it have be thrust by the agonized struggle of wounded honor and pride . how would take it all ? here be another weight of chain to drag , and poor
poor Lydgate be in a bad mood for bear she dumb mastery . he have no impulse to tell she the trouble which must soon be common to they both . he prefer waiting for the incidental disclosure which event must soon bring about . . " Mercifully grant that we may grow a together . " -- of : . in Middlemarch a wife could not long remain ignorant that the town hold a bad opinion of she husband . no feminine intimate might carry she friendship so far as to make a plain statement to the wife of the unpleasant fact know or believe about she husband ; but when a woman with she thought much at leisure get they suddenly employ on something grievously disadvantageous to she neighbor , various moral impulse be call into play which tend to stimulate utterance . be one . to be cando , in phraseology , mean , to use a early opportunity of let you friend know that you do not take a cheerful view of they capacity , they conduct , or they position ; and a robust candor never wait to be ask for its opinion . then , again , there be the love of truth -- a wide phrase , but mean in this relation , a lively objection to see a wife look happier than she husband 's character warrant , or manifest too much satisfaction in she lot -- the poor thing should have some hint give she that if she know the truth she would have less complacency in she bonnet , and in light dish for a supper- party . stronger than all , there be the regard for a friend 's moral improvement , sometimes call she soul , which be likely to be benefite by remark tend to , utter with the accompaniment of pensive staring at the furniture and a manner imply that the speaker would not tell what be on she mind , from regard to the feeling of she hearer . on the whole , one might say that a ardent charity be at work set the virtuous mind to make a neighbor unhappy for she good . there be hardly any wife in whose matrimonial misfortunes would in different way be likely to call forth more of this moral activity than and she aunt Bulstrode . be not a object of dislike , and have never consciously injure any human being . have always think she a handsome comfortable woman , and have reckon it among the sign of 's hypocrisy that he have choose a red - blood Vincy , instead of a ghastly and melancholy person suite to he low esteem for earthly pleasure . when the scandal about she husband be disclose they remark of she -- " ah , poor woman ! she be as honest as the day --_she_ never suspect anything wrong in he , you may depend on it . " women , who be intimate with she , talk together much of " poor Harriet , " imagine what she feeling must be when she come to know everything , and conjecture how much she have already come to know . there be no spiteful disposition towards she ; rather , there be a busy benevolence anxious to ascertain what it would be well for she to feel and do under the circumstance , which of course keep the imagination occupy with she character and history from the time when she be till now . with the review of and she position it be inevitable to associate , whose prospect be under the same blight with she aunt 's . be more severely criticise and less pitie , though she too , as one of the good old Vincy family who have always be know in , be regard as a victim to marriage with a interloper . the have they weakness , but then they lay on the surface : there be never anything bad to be " find out " concern they . be vindicate from any resemblance to she husband . 's fault be she own . " she have always been showy , " say , make tea for a small party , " though she have get into the way of put she religion forward , to conform to she husband ; she have try to hold she head up above by make it know that she invite clergyman and heaven - know - who from and those place . " " we can hardly blame she for that , " say ; " because few of the best people in the town care to associate with , and she must have somebody to sit down at she table . " " have always countenance he , " say . " I think he must be sorry now . " " but he be never fond of he in he heart -- that every one know , " say . " never go into extreme . he keep to the truth in what be evangelical . it be only clergyman like , who want to use hymn - book and that low kind of religion , who ever find to they taste . " " I understand , be in great distress about he , " say . " and well he may be : they say the Bulstrode have half keep the Tyke family . " " and of coarse it be a discredit to he doctrine , " say , who be elderly , and old - fashioned in she opinion . " people will not make a boast of be methodistical in for a good while to come . " " I think we must not set down people 's bad action to they religion , " say falcon - face , who have be listen hithertoo . " oh ,
, my dear , we be forget , " say . " we ought not to be talk of this before you . " " I be sure I have no reason to be partial , " say , coloring . " it be true have always be on good term with , and be my friend long before she marry he . but I have always keep my own opinion and tell she where she be wrong , poor thing . still , in point of religion , I must say , might have do what he have , and worse , and yet have be a man of no religion . I do not say that there have not be a little too much of that -- I like moderation myself . but truth be truth . the man try at the assize be not all over -religious , I suppose . " " well , " say , wheel adroitly , " all I can say be , that I think she ought to separate from he . " " I can not say that , " say . " she take he for better or worse , you know . " " but ' worse ' can never mean find out that you husband be fit for , " say . " Fancy live with such a man ! I should expect to be poisone . " " yes , I think myself it be a encouragement to crime if such man be to be take care of and wait on by good wife , " say . " and a good wife poor have be , " say . " she think she husband the first of man . it be true he have never deny she anything . " " well , we shall see what she will do , " say . " I suppose she know nothing yet , poor creature . I do hope and trust I shall not see she , for I should be frightene to death lest I should say anything about she husband . do you think any hint have reach she ? " " I should hardly think so , " say . " we hear that he be ill , and have never stir out of the house since the meeting on ; but she be with she girl at church yesterday , and they have new Tuscan bonnet . she own have a feather in it . I have never see that she religion make any difference in she dress . " " she wear very neat pattern always , " say , a little stung . " and that feather I know she get dye a pale lavender on purpose to be consistent . I must say it of that she wish to do right . " " as to she know what have happen , it can not be keep from she long , " say . " the know , for be at the meeting . it will he a great blow to he . there be he daughter as well as he sister . " " yes , indeed , " say . " nobody suppose that can go on hold up he head in , thing look so black about the thousand pound he take just at that man 's death . it really make one shudder . " " pride must have a fall , " say . " I be not so sorry for that be as I be for she aunt , " say . " she need a lesson . " " I suppose the Bulstrodes will go and live abroad somewhere , " say . " that be what be generally do when there be anything disgraceful in a family . " " and a most deadly blow it will be to , " say . " if ever a woman be crush , she will be . I pity she from my heart . and with all she fault , few woman be better . from a girl she have the neatest way , and be always good - hear , and as open as the day . you might look into she drawer when you would -- always the same . and so she have brotch up and . you may think how hard it will be for she to go among foreigner . " " the doctor say that be what he should recommend the Lydgates to do , " say . " he say Lydgate ought to have keep among the french . " " that would suit _her_ well enough , I dare say , " say ; " there be that kind of lightness about she . but she get that from she mother ; she never get it from she aunt , who always give she good advice , and to my knowledge would rather have have she marry elsewhere . " be in a situation which cause she some complication of feeling . there have be not only she intimacy with , but also a profitable business relation of the great Plymdale dyee house with , which on the one hand would have inclin she to desire that the mildest view of he character should be the true one , but on the other , make she the more afraid of seem to palliate he culpability . again , the late alliance of she family with the Toller have bring she in connection with the best circle , which gratify she in every direction except in the inclination to those serious view which she believe to be the best in another sense . the sharp little woman 's conscience be somewhat troublead in the adjustment of these opposing " best , " and of she grief and satisfaction under late event , which be likely to humble
humble those who need humbling , but also to fall heavily on she old friend whose fault she would have prefer see on a background of prosperity . poor , meanwhile , have be no further shake by the oncoming tread of calamity than in the busier stirring of that secret uneasiness which have always be present in she since the last visit of Raffle to the . that the hateful man have come ill to , and that she husband have choose to remain there and watch over he , she allow to be explain by the fact that Raffles have be employ and aid in earlier - day , and that this make a tie of benevolence towards he in he degrad helplessness ; and she have be since then innocently cheer by she husband 's more hopeful speech about he own health and ability to continue he attention to business . the calm be disturb when Lydgate have bring he home ill from the meeting , and in spite of comforting assurance during the next few day , she cry in private from the conviction that she husband be not suffer from bodily illness merely , but from something that afflict he mind . he would not allow she to read to he , and scarcely to sit with he , allege nervous susceptibility to sound and movement ; yet she suspect that in shutt himself up in he private room he want to be busy with he papers . something , she feel sure , have happen . perhaps it be some great loss of money ; and she be keep in the dark . not da to question she husband , she say to Lydgate , on the fifth day after the meeting , when she have not leave home except to go to church -- " , pray be open with I : I like to know the truth . have anything happen to ? " " some little nervous shock , " say , evasively . he feel that it be not for he to make the painful revelation . " but what bring it on ? " say , look directly at he with she large dark eye . " there be often something poisonous in the air of public room , " say . " strong man can stand it , but it tell on people in proportion to the delicacy of they system . it be often impossible to account for the precise moment of a attack -- or rather , to say why the strength give way at a particular moment . " be not satisfy with this answer . there remain in she the belief that some calamity have befall she husband , of which she be to be keep in ignorance ; and it be in she nature strongly to object to such concealment . she beg leave for she daughter to sit with they father , and drive into the town to pay some visit , conjectur that if anything be know to have go wrong in 's affair , she should see or hear some sign of it . she call on . , who be not at home , and then drive to 's on the other side of the churchyard . see she come from a up - stair window , and remember she former alarm lest she should meet . , feel almost bound in consistency to send word that she be not at home ; but against that , there be a sudden strong desire within she for the excitement of a interview in which she be quite determined not to make the slightest allusion to what be in she mind . be show into the drawing - room , and go to she , with more tightness of lip and rub of she hand than be usually observable in she , these be precaution adopt against freedom of speech . she be resolve not to ask how be . " I have not be anywhere except to church for nearly a week , " say , after a few introductory remark . " but be take so ill at the meeting on that I have not like to leave the house . " rub the back of one hand with the palm of the other held against she chest , and let she eye ramble over the pattern on the rug . " be at the meeting ? " persever . " yes , he be , " say , with the same attitude . " the land be to be buy by subscription , I believe . " " let we hope that there will be no more case of cholera to be bury in it , " say . " it be a awful visitation . but I always think a very healthy spot . I suppose it be be used to it from a child ; but I never see the town I should like to live at better , and especially we end . " " I be sure I should be glad that you always should live at , , " say , with a slight sigh . " , we must learn to resign ourselves , wherever we lot may be cast . though I be sure there will always be people in this town who will wish you well . " longe to say , " if you take my advice you will part from you husband , " but it seem clear to she that the poor woman kknow nothing of the thunder ready to bolt on she head , and she herself could do no more than prepare she a little . feel suddenly rather chill and trembl : there be evidently something unusual behind this speech of 's ; but though she have set out with the desire to be fully
fully informed , she find herself unable now to pursue she brave purpose , and turn the conversation by a inquiry about the young Hackbutt , she soon take she leave say that she be go to see . on she way thither she try to imagine that there might have be some unusually warm sparring at the meeting between and some of he frequent opponent -- perhaps might have be one of they . that would account for everything . but when she be in conversation with . Plymdale that comforting explanation seem no longer tenable . " " receive she with a pathetic affectionateness and a disposition to give edify answer on the commonest topics , which could hardly have reference to a ordinary quarrel of which the most important consequence be a perturbation of 's health . have think that she would sooner question Mr . Plymdale than any one else ; but she find to she surprise that a old friend be not always the person whom it be easiest to make a confident of : there be the barrier of remember communication under other circumstance -- there be the dislike of be pitie and inform by one who have be long will not to allow she the superiority . for certain word of mysterious appropriateness that . Plymdale let fall about she resolution never to turn she back on she friend , convince Mrs . Bulstrode that what have happen must be some kind of misfortune , and instead of be able to say with she native directness , " what be it that you have in you mind ? " she find herself anxious to get away before she have hear anything more explicit . she begin to have a agitating certainty that the misfortune be something more than the mere loss of money , be keenly sensitive to the fact that now , just as have do before , avoid noticing what she say about she husband , as they would have avoid notice a personal blemish . she say good - by with nervous haste , and tell the coachman to drive to 's warehouse . in that short drive she dread gather so much force from the sense of darkness , that when she enter the private counting - house where she brother sit at he desk , she knee tremble and she usually florid face be deathly pale . something of the same effect be produce in he by the sight of she : he rise from he seat to meet she , take she by the hand , and say , with he impulsive rashness -- " God help you , ! you know all . " that moment be perhaps worse than any which come after . it contain that concentrate experience which in great crisis of emotion reveal the bia of a nature , and be prophetic of the ultimate act which will end a intermediate struggle . without that memory of Raffle she might still have think only of monetary ruin , but now along with she brother 's look and word there dart into she mind the idea of some guilt in she husband -- then , under the working of terror come the image of she husband expose to disgrace -- and then , after a instant of scorching shame in which she feel only the eye of the world , with one leap of she heart she be at he side in mournful but unreproaching fellowship with shame and isolation . all this go on within she in a mere flash of time -- while she sank into the chair , and raise she eye to she brother , who stand over she . " I know nothing , . what be it ? " she say , faintly . he tell she everything , very inartificially , in slow fragment , make she aware that the scandal go much beyond proof , especially as to the end of Raffles . " people will talk , " he say . " even if a man have be acquit by a jury , they will talk , and nod and wink -- and as far as the world go , a man might often as well be guilty as not . it be a breakdown blow , and it damage Lydgate as much as . I do not pretend to say what be the truth . I only wish we have never hear the name of either or . you would better have be a Vincy all you life , and so have . " make no reply . " but you must bear up as well as you can , . people do not blame _you _. and I will stand by you whatever you make up you mind to do , " say the brother , with rough but well - mean affectionateness . " give I you arm to the carriage , , " say . " I feel very weak . " and when she get home she be obliged to say to she daughter , " I be not well , my dear ; I must go and lie down . attend to you papa . leave I in quiet . I shall take no dinner . " she lock herself in she room . she need time to get used to she maimed consciousness , she poor lopped life , before she could walk steadily to the place allot she . a new searching light have fall on she husband 's character , and she could not judge he leniently : the twenty year in which she have believe in he and venerate he by virtue of he concealment come back with particular that make they seem a odious deceit . he have marry she with that bad past life hide behind he , and she have no faith
faith leave to protest he innocence of the worst that be impute to he . she honest ostentatious nature make the sharing of a merit dishonor as bitter as it could be to any mortal . but this imperfectly teach woman , whose phrase and habits be a odd patchwork , have a loyal spirit within she . the man whose prosperity she have share through nearly half a life , and who have unvaryingly cherish she -- now that punishment have befall he it be not possible to she in any sense to forsake he . there be a forsaking which still sit at the same board and lie on the same couch with the forsaken soul , wither it the more by unloving proximity . she know , when she lock she door , that she should unlock it ready to go down to she unhappy husband and espouse he sorrow , and say of he guilt , I will mourn and not reproach . but she need time to gather up she strength ; she need to sob out she farewell to all the gladness and pride of she life . when she have resolve to go down , she prepare herself by some little act which might seem mere folly to a hard onlooker ; they be she way of express to all spectator visible or invisible that she have begin a new life in which she embrace humiliation . she take off all she ornament and put on a plain black gown , and instead of wear she much - adorned cap and large bow of hair , she brush she hair down and put on a plain bonnet-cap , which make she look suddenly like a early . , who know that he wife have be out and have come in say that she be not well , have spend the time in a agitation equal to hers . he have look forward to she learn the truth from other , and have acquiesce in that probability , as something easier to he than any confession . but now that he imagine the moment of she knowledge come , he await the result in anguish . he daughter have be oblige to consent to leave he , and though he have allow some food to be bring to he , he have not touch it . he feel himself perish slowly in unpitied misery . perhaps he should never see he wife 's face with affection in it again . and if he turn to there seem to be no answer but the pressure of retribution . it be eight o'clock in the evening before the door open and he wife enter . he da not look up at she . he sit with he eye bend down , and as she go towards he she think he look smaller -- he seem so withered and shrunken . a movement of new compassion and old tenderness go through she like a great wave , and put one hand on he which rest on the arm of the chair , and the other on he shoulder , she say , solemnly but kindly -- " look up , . " he raise he eye with a little start and look at she half amaze for a moment : she pale face , she change , mourn dress , the trembling about she mouth , all say , " I know ; " and she hand and eye rest gently on he . he burst out crying and they cry together , she sit at he side . they could not yet speak to each other of the shame which she be bear with he , or of the act which have bring it down on they . he confession be silent , and she promise of faithfulness be silent . Open-mind as she be , she nevertheless shrank from the word which would have express they mutual consciousness , as she would have shrunk from flake of fire . she could not say , " how much be only slander and false suspicion ? " and he do not say , " I be innocent . " . " sentiment de la faussete des plaisir present , et l'ignorance de la vanite des plaisir absent causent l'inconstance . " -- . have a gleam of return cheerfulness when the house be free from the threatening figure , and when all the disagreeable creditor be pay . but she be not joyous : she married life have fulfil none of she hope , and have be quite spoiled for she imagination . in this brief interval of calm , Lydgate , remember that he have often be stormy in he hour of perturbation , and mindful of the pain have have to bear , be carefully gentle towards she ; but he , too , have lose some of he old spirit , and he still feel it necessary to refer to a economical change in they way of live as a matter of course , try to reconcile she to it gradually , and repress he anger when she answer by wishing that he would go to live in . when she do not make this answer , she listen languidly , and wonder what she have that be worth live for . the hard and contemptuous word which have fall from she husband in he anger have deeply offended that vanity which he have at first call into active enjoyment ; and what she regard as he perverse way of look at thing , keep up a secret repulsion , which make she receive all he tenderness as a poor substitute for the happiness he have fail to give she . they be at a disadvantage with they neighbor , and there be no longer any outlook towards -- there be no outlook anywhere except
except in a occasional letter from . she have felt stung and disappoint by 's resolution to quit , for in spite of what she know and guess about he admiration for , she secretly cherish the belief that he have , or would necessarily come to have , much more admiration for herself ; Rosamond be one of those woman who live much in the idea that each man they meet would have prefer they if the preference have not be hopeless . be all very well ; but 's interest in she date before he know . take he way of talk to herself , which be a mixture of playful fault - finding and hyperbolical gallantry , as the disguise of a deeper feeling ; and in he presence she feel that agreeable titillation of vanity and sense of romantic drama which 's presence have no longer the magic to create . she even fancie -- what will not man and woman fancy in these matters ?-- that will exaggerate he admiration for in order to pique herself . in this way poor 's brain have be busy before 's departure . he would have make , she think , a much more suitable husband for she than she have find in . no notion could have be falser than this , for 's discontent in she marriage be due to the condition of marriage itself , to its demand for self - suppression and tolerance , and not to the nature of she husband ; but the easy conception of a unreal better have a sentimental charm which divert she ennui . she construct a little romance which be to vary the flatness of she life : will be always to be a bachelor and live near she , always to be at she command , and have a understood though never fully expressed passion for she , which would be send out lambent flame every now and then in interesting scene . he departure have be a proportionate disappointment , and have sadly increase she weariness of ; but at first she have the alternative dream of pleasur in store from she intercourse with the family at . since then the trouble of she married life have deepen , and the absence of other relief encourage she regretful rumination over that thin romance which she have once feed on . man and woman make sad mistake about they own symptom , take they vague uneasy longing , sometimes for , sometimes for religion , and oftener still for a mighty love . will have write chatty letter , half to she and half to Lydgate , and she have reply : they separation , she feel , be not likely to be final , and the change she now most longed for be that should go to live in ; everything would be agreeable in ; and she have set to work with quiet determination to win this result , when there come a sudden , delightful promise which inspirit she . it come shortly before the memorable meeting at the town - hall , and be nothing less than a letter from to , which turn indeed chiefly on he new interest in plan of colonization , but mention incidentally , that he might find it necessary to pay a visit to Middlemarch within the next few week -- a very pleasant necessity , he say , almost as good as holiday to a schoolboy . he hope there be he old place on the rug , and a great deal of music in store for he . but he be quite uncertain as to the time . while be read the letter to , she face look like a revive flower -- it grow prettier and more blooming . there be nothing unendurable now : the debt be pay , be come , and would be persuade to leave and settle in , which be " so different from a provincial town . " that be a bright bit of morning . but soon the sky become black over poor . the presence of a new gloom in she husband , about which he be entirely reserve towards she -- for he dread to expose he lacerate feeling to she neutrality and misconception -- soon receive a painfully strange explanation , alien to all she previous notion of what could affect she happiness . in the new gayety of she spirit , think that have merely a worse fit of moodiness than usual , cause he to leave she remark unanswered , and evidently to keep out of she way as much as possible , she choose , a few day after the meeting , and without speak to he on the subject , to send out note of invitation for a small evening party , feel convinced that this be a judicious step , since people seem to have be keep aloon from they , and want restoring to the old habit of intercourse . when the invitation have be accept , she would tell , and give he a wise admonition as to how a medical man should behave to he neighbor ; for have the gravest little air possible about other people 's duty . but all the invitation be decline , and the last answer come into 's hand . " this be 's scratch . what be he write to you about ? " say , wonderingly , as he hand the note to she . she be oblige to let he see it , and , look at she severely , he say -- " why on earth have you be send out invitation without tell I , ? I beg , I insist that you will not invite any one to this house . I suppose you have be invite other , and they have refuse too
too . " she say nothing . " do you hear I ? " thunder . " yes , certainly I hear you , " say , turn she head aside with the movement of a graceful long - necked bird . toss he head without any grace and walk out of the room , feel himself dangerous . 's thought be , that he be get more and more unbearable -- not that there be any new special reason for this peremptoriness . he indisposition to tell she anything in which he be sure beforehand that she would not be interested be grow into a unreflecting habit , and she be in ignorance of everything connect with the thousand pound except that the loan have come from she uncle . 's odious humors and they neighbor 's apparent avoidance of they have a unaccountable date for she in they relief from money difficulty . if the invitation have be accept she would have go to invite she mamma and the rest , whom she have see nothing of for several day ; and she now put on she bonnet to go and inquire what have become of they all , suddenly feel as if there be a conspiracy to leave she in isolation with a husband dispose to offend everybody . it be after the dinner hour , and she find she father and mother seat together alone in the drawing - room . they greet she with sad look , say " well , my dear ! " and no more . she have never see she father look so downcast ; and seate herself near he she say -- " be there anything the matter , papa ? " he do not answer , but . say , " oh , my dear , have you hear nothing ? it will not be long before it reach you . " " be it anything about ? " say , turn pale . the idea of trouble immediately connect itself with what have be unaccountable to she in he . " oh , my dear , yes . to think of you marry into this trouble . be bad enough , but this will be worse . " " stay , stay , , " say . " have you hear nothing about you uncle , ? " " no , papa , " say the poor thing , feel as if trouble be not anything she have before experience , but some invisible power with a iron grasp that make she soul faint within she . she father tell she everything , say at the end , " it be better for you to know , my dear . I think must leave the town . thing have go against he . I dare say he could not help it . I do not accuse he of any harm , " say . he have always before be dispose to find the utmost fault with . the shock to be terrible . it seem to she that no lot could be so cruelly hard as hers to have marry a man who have become the centre of infamous suspicion . in many case it be inevitable that the shame be feel to be the worst part of crime ; and it would have require a great deal of disentangling reflection , such as have never enter into 's life , for she in these moment to feel that she trouble be less than if she husband have be certainly kny to have do something criminal . all the shame seem to be there . and she have innocently marry this man with the belief that he and he family be a glory to she ! she show she usual reticence to she parent , and only say , that if have do as she wish he would have leave long ago . " she bear it beyond anything , " say she mother when she be gone . " ah , thank ! " say , who be much break down . but go home with a sense of justified repugnance towards she husband . what have he really do -- how have he really ac ? she do not know . why have he not tell she everything ? he do not speak to she on the subject , and of course she could not speak to he . it come into she mind once that she would ask she father to let she go home again ; but dwell on that prospect make it seem utter dreariness to she : a married woman go back to live with she parent -- life seem to have no meaning for she in such a position : she could not contemplate herself in it . the next two day observ a change in she , and believe that she have hear the bad news . would she speak to he about it , or would she go on forever in the silence which seem to imply that she believe he guilty ? we must remember that he be in a morbid state of mind , in which almost all contact be pain . certainly Rosamond in this case have equal reason to complain of reserve and want of confidence on he part ; but in the bitterness of he soul he excuse himself ; -- be he not justifi in shrinking from the task of tell she , since now she know the truth she have no impulse to speak to he ? but a deeper - lie consciousness that he be in fault make he restless , and the silence between they become intolerable to he ; it be as if they be both adrift on one piece of wreck and look away from each other . he think , " I be a fool . have not
not I give up expect anything ? I have marry care , not help . " and that evening he say -- " , have you hear anything that distress you ? " " yes , " she answer , lay down she work , which she have be carry on with a languid semi-consciousness , most unlike she usual self . " what have you hear ? " " everything , I suppose . tell I . " " that people think I disgrac ? " " yes , " say , faintly , begin to sow again automatically . there be silence . thought , " if she have any trust in I -- any notion of what I be , she ought to speak now and say that she do not believe I have deserve disgrace . " but on she side go on move she finger languidly . whatever be to be say on the subject she expect to come from . what do she know ? and if he be innocent of any wrong , why do he not do something to clear himself ? this silence of hers bring a new rush of gall to that bitter mood in which have be say to himself that nobody believe in he -- even Farebrother have not come forward . he have begin to question she with the intent that they conversation should disperse the chill fog which have gather between they , but he feel he resolution check by despairing resentment . even this trouble , like the rest , she seem to regard as if it be hers alone . he be always to she a be apart , do what she object to . he start from he chair with a angry impulse , and thrust he hand in he pocket , walk up and down the room . there be a underlying consciousness all the while that he should have to master this anger , and tell she everything , and convince she of the fact . for he have almost learn the lesson that he must bend himself to she nature , and that because she come short in she sympathy , he must give the more . he recur to he intention of opening himself : the occasion must not be lose . if he could bring she to feel with some solemnity that here be a slander which must be meet and not run away from , and that the whole trouble have come out of he desperate want of money , it would be a moment for urging powerfully on she that they should be one in the resolve to do with as little money as possible , so that they might weather the bad time and keep themselves independent . he would mention the definite measure which he desire to take , and win she to a willing spirit . he be bound to try this -- and what else be there for he to do ? he do not know how long he have be walk uneasily backwards and forwards , but feel that it be long , and wish that he would sit down . she too have begin to think this a opportunity for urge on what he ought to do . whatever might be the truth about all this misery , there be one dread which assert itself . Lydgate at last seat himself , not in he usual chair , but in one nearer to , lean aside in it towards she , and look at she gravely before he reopen the sad subject . he have conquer himself so far , and be about to speak with a sense of solemnity , as on a occasion which be not to be repeat . he have even open he lip , when , let she hand fall , look at he and say -- " surly , -- " " well ? " " surely now at last you have give up the idea of staying in . I can not go on living here . let we go to . , and every one else , say you have better go . whatever misery I have to put up with , it will be easier away from here . " feel miserably jarred . instead of that critical outpouring for which he have prepare himself with effort , here be the old round to be go through again . he could not bear it . with a quick change of countenance he rise and go out of the room . perhaps if he have be strong enough to persist in he determination to be the more because she be less , that evening might have have a better issue . if he energy could have borne down that check , he might still have wrotch on 's vision and will . we can not be sure that any nature , however inflexible or peculiar , will resist this effect from a more massive be than they own . they may be take by storm and for the moment convert , become part of the soul which enwrap they in the ardor of its movement . but poor have a throbbing pain within he , and he energy have fall short of its task . the beginning of mutual understanding and resolve seem as far off as ever ; nay , it seem block out by the sense of unsuccessful effort . they live on from day to day with they thought still apart , go about what work he have in a mood of despair , and feeling , with some justification , that he be behave cruelly . it be of no use to say anything to ; but when will come , she be determined to tell he everything . in spite of she general reticence , she need some
some one who would recognize she wrongs . . " to mercy , pity , peace , and love all pray in they distress , and to these virtue of delight , return they thankfulness . . . . . . . for have a human heart , Pity a human face ; and love , the human form divine ; and peace , the human dress . -- : of . some day later , be ride to , in consequence of a summon from . the summon have not be unexpected , since it have follow a letter from , in which he state that he have resume he arrangement for quit , and must remind of he previous communication about the , to the purport of which he still adhere . it have be he duty , before take further step , to reopen the subject with , who now wish , as before , to discuss the question with . " you views may possibly have undergone some change , " write ; " but , in that case also , it be desirable that you should lay they before she . " await he arrival with eager interest . though , in deference to she masculine advisers , she have refrain from what have call " interfere in this business , " the hardship of 's position be continually in she mind , and when apply to she again about the hospital , she feel that the opportunity be come to she which she have be hinder from hastening . in she luxurious home , wandere under the bough of she own great tree , she thought be go out over the lot of other , and she emotion be imprison . the idea of some active good within she reach , " haunt she like a passion , " and another be need have once come to she as a distinct image , preoccupy she desire with the yearning to give relief , and make she own ease tasteless . she be full of confident hope about this interview with , never heede what be say of he personal reserve ; never heed that she be a very young woman . nothing could have seem more irrelevant to than insistence on she youth and sex when she be move to show she human fellowship . as she sit wait in the library , she could do nothing but live through again all the past scene which have bring Lydgate into she memory . they all owed they significance to she marriage and its trouble -- but no ; there be two occasion in which the image of have come painfully in connection with he wife and some one else . the pain have be allay for , but it have leave in she a awakened conjecture as to what 's marriage might be to he , a susceptibility to the slightest hint about . these thought be like a drama to she , and make she eye bright , and give a attitude of suspense to she whole frame , though she be only look out from the brown library on to the turf and the bright green bud which stand in relief against the dark evergreens . when come in , she be almost shocked at the change in he face , which be strikingly perceptible to she who have not see he for two month . it be not the change of emaciation , but that effect which even young face will very soon show from the persistent presence of resentment and despondency . she cordial look , when she put out she hand to he , soften he expression , but only with melancholy . " I have wish very much to see you for a long while , , " say when they be seat opposite each other ; " but I put off ask you to come until apply to I again about the hospital . I know that the advantage of keep the management of it separate from that of the depend on you , or , at least , on the good which you be encourage to hope for from have it under you control . and I be sure you will not refuse to tell I exactly what you think . " " you want to decide whether you should give a generous support to the , " say . " I can not conscientiously advise you to do it in dependence on any activity of mine . I may be oblige to leave the town . " he speak curtly , feel the ache of despair as to he be able to carry out any purpose that have set she mind against . " not because there be no one to believe in you ? " say , pour out she word in clearness from a full heart . " I know the unhappy mistake about you . I know they from the first moment to be mistake . you have never do anything vile . you would not do anything dishonorable . " it be the first assurance of belief in he that have fall on 's ear . he draw a deep breath , and say , " thank you . " he could say no more : it be something very new and strange in he life that these few word of trust from a woman should be so much to he . " I beseech you to tell I how everything be , " say , fearlessly . " I be sure that the truth would clear you . " start up from he chair and go towards the window , forget where he be . he have so often go over in he mind the possibility of explai everything without aggravating appearance that would tell , perhaps unfairly , against ,
, and have so often decide against it -- he have so often say to himself that he assertion would not change people 's impressions -- that 's word sound like a temptation to do something which in he soberness he have pronounce to be unreasonable . " tell I , pray , " say , with simple earnestness ; " then we can consult together . it be wick to let people think evil of any one falsely , when it can be hinder . " turn , remember where he be , and see 's face look up at he with a sweet trustful gravity . the presence of a noble nature , generous in its wish , ardent in its charity , change the light for we : we begin to see thing again in they larger , quieter mass , and to believe that we too can be see and judge in the wholeness of we character . that influence be begin to act on , who have for many day be see all life as one who be drag and struggle amid the throng . he sit down again , and feel that he be recover he old self in the consciousness that he be with one who believe in it . " I do not want , " he say , " to bear hard on , who have lent I money of which I be in need -- though I would rather have go without it now . he be hunt down and miserable , and have only a poor thread of life in he . but I should like to tell you everything . it will be a comfort to I to speak where belief have go beforehand , and where I shall not seem to be offer assertion of my own honesty . you will feel what be fair to another , as you feel what be fair to I . " " do trust I , " say ; " I will not repeat anything without you leave . but at the very least , I could say that you have make all the circumstance clear to I , and that I know you be not in any way guilty . would believe I , and my uncle , and . Nay , there be person in to whom i could go ; although they do not know much of I , they would believe I . they would know that I could have no other motive than truth and justice . I would take any pain to clear you . I have very little to do . there be nothing better that I can do in the world . " 's voice , as she make this childlike picture of what she would do , might have be almost take as a proof that she could do it effectively . the search tenderness of she woman 's tone seem make for a defence against ready accuser . do not stay to think that she be quixotic : he give himself up , for the first time in he life , to the exquisite sense of leaning entirely on a generous sympathy , without any check of proud reserve . and he tell she everything , from the time when , under the pressure of he difficulty , he unwillingly make he first application to ; gradually , in the relief of speak , get into a more thorough utterance of what have go on in he mind --enter fully into the fact that he treatment of the patient be oppos to the dominant practice , into he doubt at the last , he ideal of medical duty , and he uneasy consciousness that the acceptance of the money have make some difference in he private inclination and professional behavior , though not in he fulfilment of any publicly recognize obligation . " it have come to my knowledge since , " he add , " that send some one to examine the housekeeper at , and she say that she give the patient all the opium in the phial I leave , as well as a good deal of brandy . but that would not have be oppose to ordinary prescription , even of first - rate man . the suspicion against I have no hold there : they be grounde on the knowledge that I take money , that have strong motive for wishing the man to die , and that he give I the money as a bribe to concur in some malpractice or other against the patient -- that in any case I accept a bribe to hold my tongue . they be just the suspicions that cling the most obstinately , because they lie in people 's inclination and can never be disprove . how my order come to be disobey be a question to which I do not know the answer . it be still possible that be innocent of any criminal intention -- even possible that he have nothing to do with the disobedience , and merely abstain from mention it . but all that have nothing to do with the public belief . it be one of those case on which a man be condemne on the ground of he character -- it be believe that he have commit a crime in some undefined way , because he have the motive for do it ; and 's character have envelope I , because I take he money . I be simply blight -- like a damage ear of corn -- the business be do and can not be undone . " " oh , it be hard ! " say . " I understand the difficulty there be in you vindicat yourself . and that all this should have come to you who have mean to lead a higher life than the common
common , and to find out better way -- I can not bear to rest in this as unchangeable . I know you mean that . I remember what you say to I when you first speak to I about the hospital . there be no sorrow I have think more about than that -- to love what be great , and try to reach it , and yet to fail . " " yes , " say , feel that here he have find room for the full meaning of he grief . " I have some ambition . I mean everything to be different with I . I think I have more strength and mastery . but the most terrible obstacle be such as nobody can see except oneself . " " suppose , " say , meditatively , --" suppose we keep on the hospital accord to the present plan , and you stay here though only with the friendship and support of a few , the evil feel towards you would gradually die out ; there would come opportunity in which people would be force to acknowledge that they have be unjust to you , because they would see that you purpose be pure . you may still win a great fame like the and I have hear you speak of , and we shall all be proud of you , " she end , with a smile . " that might do if I have my old trust in myself , " say , mournfully . " nothing gall I more than the notion of turn round and run away before this slander , leave it uncheck behind I . still , I can not ask any one to put a great deal of money into a plan which depend on I . " " it would be quite worth my while , " say , simply . " only think . I be very uncomfortable with my money , because they tell I I have too little for any great scheme of the sort I like best , and yet I have too much . I do not know what to do . I have seven hundred a - year of my own fortune , and nineteen hundred a - year that leave I , and between three and four thousand of ready money in the bank . I wish to raise money and pay it off gradually out of my income which I do not want , to buy land with and find a village which should be a school of industry ; but and my uncle have convince I that the risk would be too great . so you see that what I should most rejoice at would be to have something good to do with my money : I should like it to make other people 's life better to they . it make I very uneasy -- come all to I who do not want it . " a smile break through the gloom of 's face . the childlike grave - ey earnestness with which say all this be irresistible -- blent into a adorable whole with she ready understanding of high experience . ( of lower experience such as play a great part in the world , poor have a very blurred shortsighted knowledge , little help by she imagination . ) but she take the smile as encouragement of she plan . " I think you see now that you speak too scrupulously , " she say , in a tone of persuasion . " the hospital would be one good ; and make you life quite whole and well again would be another . " 's smile have die away . " you have the goodness as well as the money to do all that ; if it could be do , " he say . " but -- " he hesitate a little while , look vaguly towards the window ; and she sit in silent expectation . at last he turn towards she and say impetuously -- " why should I not tell you ?-- you know what sort of bond marriage be . you will understand everything . " feel she heart begin to beat faster . have he that sorrow too ? but she fear to say any word , and he go on immediately . " it be impossible for I now to do anything -- to take any step without consider my wife 's happiness . the thing that I might like to do if I be alone , be become impossible to I . I can not see she miserable . she marry I without know what she be go into , and it might have be better for she if she have not marry I . " " I know , I know -- you could not give she pain , if you be not oblige to do it , " say , with keen memory of she own life . " and she have set she mind against staying . she wish to go . the trouble she have have here have weary she , " say , break off again , lest he should say too much . " but when she see the good that might come of staie -- " say , remonstrantly , look at as if he have forget the reason which have just be consider . he do not speak immediately . " she would not see it , " he say at last , curtly , feel at first that this statement must do without explanation . " and , indeed , I have lose all spirit about carry on my life here . " he pause a moment and then , follow the impulse to let see deeper into the difficulty of he life , he say , " the
the fact be , this trouble have come upon she confusedly . we have not be able to speak to each other about it . I be not sure what be in she mind about it : she may fear that I have really do something base . it be my fault ; I ought to be more open . but I have be suffer cruelly . " " may I go and see she ? " say , eagerly . " would she accept my sympathy ? I would tell she that you have not be blamable before any one 's judgment but you own . I would tell she that you shall be clear in every fair mind . I would cheer she heart . will you ask she if I may go to see she ? I do see she once . " " I be sure you may , " say , seize the proposition with some hope . " she would feel honored -- cheer , I think , by the proof that you at least have some respect for I . I will not speak to she about you come -- that she may not connect it with my wish at all . I know very well that I ought not to have leave anything to be tell she by other , but -- " he break off , and there be a moment 's silence . refrain from say what be in she mind -- how well she know that there might be invisible barriers to speech between husband and wife . this be a point on which even sympathy might make a wound . she return to the more outward aspect of 's position , say cheerfully -- " and if know that there be friend who would believe in you and support you , she might then be glad that you should stay in you place and recover you hope -- and do what you mean to do . perhaps then you would see that it be right to agree with what I propose about you continue at the hospital . surely you would , if you still have faith in it as a means of make you knowledge useful ? " do not answer , and she see that he be debat with himself . " you need not decide immediately , " she say , gently . " a few day hence it will be early enough for I to send my answer to . " Lydgate still wait , but at last turn to speak in he most decisive tone . " no ; I prefer that there should be no interval leave for wavering . I be no longer sure enough of myself -- I mean of what it would be possible for I to do under the change circumstance of my life . it would be dishonorable to let other engage themselves to anything serious in dependence on I . I might be oblige to go away after all ; I see little chance of anything else . the whole thing be too problematic ; I can not consent to be the cause of you goodness be waste . no -- let the new be join with the old , and everything go on as it might have do if I have never come . I have keep a valuable register since I have be there ; I shall send it to a man who will make use of it , " he end bitterly . " I can think of nothing for a long while but get a income . " " it hurt I very much to hear you speak so hopelessly , " say . " it would be a happiness to you friend , who believe in you future , in you power to do great thing , if you would let they save you from that . think how much money I have ; it would be like take a burthan from I if you take some of it every year till you get free from this fettering want of income . why should not people do these thing ? it be so difficult to make share at all even . this be one way . " " bless you , ! " say , rise as if with the same impulse that make he word energetic , and rest he arm on the back of the great leather chair he have be sit in . " it be good that you should have such feeling . but I be not the man who ought to allow himself to benefit by they . I have not give guarantee enough . I must not at least sink into the degradation of be pension for work that I never achieve . it be very clear to I that I must not count on anything else than get away from as soon as I can manage it . I should not be able for a long while , at the very best , to get a income here , and -- and it be easier to make necessary change in a new place . I must do as other man do , and think what will please the world and bring in money ; look for a little opening in the crowd , and push myself ; set up in a watering - place , or go to some southern town where there be plenty of idle , and get myself puffe , -- that be the sort of shell I must creep into and try to keep my soul alive in . " " now that be not brave , " say , -- " to give up the fight . " " no , it be not brave , " say , " but if a man be afraid of creeping paralysis ?
? " then , in another tone , " yet you have make a great difference in my courage by believe in I . everything seem more bearable since I have talk to you ; and if you can clear I in a few other mind , especially in 's , I shall be deeply grateful . the point I wish you not to mention be the fact of disobedience to my order . that would soon get distort . after all , there be no evidence for I but people 's opinion of I beforehand . you can only repeat my own report of myself . " " will believe -- other will believe , " say . " I can say of you what will make it stupidity to suppose that you would be bribe to do a wickedness . " " I do not know , " say , with something like a groan in he voice . " I have not take a bribe yet . but there be a pale shade of bribery which be sometimes call prosperity . you will do I another great kindness , then , and come to see my wife ? " " yes , I will . I remember how pretty she be , " say , into whose mind every impression about have cut deep . " I hope she will like I . " as ride away , he think , " this young creature have a heart large enough for the . she evidently think nothing of she own future , and would pledge away half she income at once , as if she want nothing for herself but a chair to sit in from which she can look down with those clear eye at the poor mortal who pray to she . she seem to have what I never see in any woman before -- a fountain of friendship towards man -- a man can make a friend of she . must have raise some heroic hallucination in she . I wonder if she could have any other sort of passion for a man ? Ladislaw ?--there be certainly a unusual feeling between they . and must have have a notion of it . well -- she love might help a man more than she money . " Dorothea on she side have immediately form a plan of relieive from he obligation to , which she feel sure be a part , though small , of the galling pressure he have to bear . she sit down at once under the inspiration of they interview , and write a brief note , in which she plead that she have more claim than have to the satisfaction of provide the money which have be serviceable to Lydgate -- that it would be unkind in not to grant she the position of be he helper in this small matter , the favor be entirely to she who have so little that be plainly mark out for she to do with she superfluous money . he might call she a creditor or by any other name if it do but imply that he grant she request . she enclose a check for a thousand pound , and determined to take the letter with she the next day when she go to see . . " and thus thy fall hath leave a kind of blot , to mark the full - fraught man and best indue with some suspicion . " -- . the next day have to go to , and tell Rosamond that he should be away until the evening . of late she have never go beyond she own house and garden , except to church , and once to see she papa , to whom she say , " if go away , you will help we to move , will you not , papa ? I suppose we shall have very little money . I be sure I hope some one will help we . " and have say , " yes , child , I do not mind a hundred or two . I can see the end of that . " with these exception she have sit at home in languid melancholy and suspense , fix she mind on 's come as the one point of hope and interest , and associate this with some new urgency on to make immediate arrangement for leave and go to , till she feel assure that the come would be a potent cause of the go , without at all see how . this way of establish sequence be too common to be fairly regard as a peculiar folly in . and it be precisely this sort of sequence which cause the greatest shock when it be sunder : for to see how a effect may be produce be often to see possible missing and check ; but to see nothing except the desirable cause , and close upon it the desirable effect , rid we of doubt and make we mind strongly intuitive . that be the process go on in poor , while she arrange all object around she with the same nicety as ever , only with more slowness -- or sit down to the piano , mean to play , and then desiste , yet linger on the music stool with she white finger suspend on the wooden front , and look before she in dreamy ennui . she melancholy have become so mark that feel a strange timidity before it , as a perpetual silent reproach , and the strong man , master by he keen sensibility towards this fair fragile creature whose life he seem somehow to have bruise , shrank from she look , and sometimes start at she approach , fear of she and fear for she rush in only the more forcibly after it have be
be momentarily expel by exasperation . but this morning descend from she room upstairs -- where she sometimes sit the whole day when be out -- equip for a walk in the town . she have a letter to post -- a letter address to and write with charming discretion , but intend to hasten he arrival by a hint of trouble . the servant-maid , they sole house - servant now , notice she come down - stair in she walking dress , and think " there never do anybody look so pretty in a bonnet poor thing . " meanwhile 's mind be fill with she project of go to , and with the many thought , both of the past and the probable future , which gather round the idea of that visit . until yesterday when Lydgate have open to she a glimpse of some trouble in he married life , the image of have always be associate for she with that of . even in she most uneasy moments -- even when she have be agitate by 's painfully graphic report of gossip -- she effort , nay , she strongest impulsive prompting , have be towards the vindication of from any sully surmise ; and when , in she meeting with he afterwards , she have at first interpret he word as a probable allusion to a feeling towards which he be determined to cut himself off from indulging , she have have a quick , sad , excusing vision of the charm there might be in he constant opportunity of companionship with that fair creature , who must likely share he other taste as she evidently do he delight in music . but there have follow he parting word -- the few passionate word in which he have imply that she herself be the object of whom he love hold he in dread , that it be he love for she only which he be resolve not to declare but to carry away into banishment . from the time of that parting , Dorothea , believe in 's love for she , believe with a proud delight in he delicate sense of honor and he determination that no one should impeach he justly , feel she heart quite at rest as to the regard he might have for . she be sure that the regard be blameless . there be nature in which , if they love we , we be conscious of have a sort of baptism and consecration : they bind we over to rectitude and purity by they pure belief about we ; and we sins become that worst kind of sacrilege which tear down the invisible altar of trust . " if you be not good , none be good " -- those little word may give a terrific meaning to responsibility , may hold a vitriolic intensity for remorse . 's nature be of that kind : she own passionate fault lay along the easily count open channel of she ardent character ; and while she be full of pity for the visible mistake of other , she have not yet any material within she experience for subtle construction and suspicion of hidden wrong . but that simplicity of hers , hold up a ideal for other in she believe conception of they , be one of the great power of she womanhood . and it have from the first ac strongly on . he feel , when he part from she , that the brief word by which he have try to convey to she he feel about herself and the division which she fortune make between they , would only profit by they brevity when have to interpret they : he feel that in she mind he have find he highest estimate . and he be right there . in the months since they parting have feel a delicious though sad repose in they relation to each other , as one which be inwardly whole and without blemish . she have a active force of antagonism within she , when the antagonism turn on the defence either of plan or person that she believe in ; and the wrongs which she feel that have receive from she husband , and the external condition which to other be grounds for slighte he , only give the more tenacity to she affection and admir judgment . and now with the disclosure about have come another fact affect 's social position , which rouse afresh 's inward resistance to what be say about he in that part of she world which lay within park paling . " young Ladislaw the grandson of a thieve pawnbroker " be a phrase which have enter emphatically into the dialogue about the business , at , , and , and be a worse kind of placard on poor 's back than the " italian with white mouse . " be convinc that he own satisfaction be righteous when he think with some complacency that here be a add league to that mountainous distance between and , which enable he to dismiss any anxiety in that direction as too absurd . and perhaps there have be some pleasure in point 's attention to this ugly bit of 's genealogy , as a fresh candle for he to see he own folly by . have observ the animus with which 's part in the painful story have be recal more than once ; but she have utter no word , be check now , as she have not be formerly in speaking of , by the consciousness of a deeper relation between they which must always remain in consecrated secrecy . but she silence shroude she resistant emotion into a more thorough glow ; and this misfortune in 's lot which , it seem , other be wish to fl at he back as a opprobrium
opprobrium , only give something more of enthusiasm to she clinging thought . she entertain no vision of they ever come into nearer union , and yet she have take no posture of renunciation . she have accept she whole relation to will very simply as part of she marriage sorrow , and would have think it very sinful in she to keep up a inward wail because she be not completely happy , be rather dispose to dwell on the superfluity of she lot . she could bear that the chief pleasure of she tenderness should lie in memory , and the idea of marriage come to she solely as a repulsive proposition from some suitor of whom she at present knew nothing , but whose merit , as see by she friend , would be a source of torment to she :--" somebody who will manage you property for you , my dear , " be 's attractive suggestion of suitable characteristic . " I should like to manage it myself , if I know what to do with it , " say . no -- she adhere to she declaration that she would never be marry again , and in the long valley of she life which look so flat and empty of waymark , guidance would come as she walk along the road , and see she fellow - passenger by the way . this habitual state of feeling about have be strong in all she wake hour since she have propose to pay a visit to , make a sort of background against which she see 's figure present to she without hindrance to she interest and compassion . there be evidently some mental separation , some barrier to complete confidence which have arisen between this wife and the husband who have yet make she happiness a law to he . that be a trouble which no third person must directly touch . but think with deep pity of the loneliness which must have come upon from the suspicion cast on she husband ; and there would surely be help in the manifestation of respect for and sympathy with she . " I shall talk to she about she husband , " think , as she be be drive towards the town . the clear spring morning , the scent of the moist earth , the fresh leave just show they crease - up wealth of greenery from out they half - open sheath , see part of the cheerfulness she be feel from a long conversation with , who have joyfully accept the justifying explanation of 's conduct . " I shall take good news , and perhaps she will like to talk to I and make a friend of I . " have another errand in : it be about a new fine - toned bell for the school - house , and as she have to get out of she carriage very near to 's , she walk thither across the street , have tell the coachman to wait for some package . the street door be open , and the servant be take the opportunity of look out at the carriage which be pause within sight when it become apparent to she that the lady who " belong to it " be come towards she . " be Lydgate at home ? " say . " I be not sure , my lady ; I will see , if you will please to walk in , " say , a little confused on the score of she kitchen apron , but collect enough to be sure that " mum " be not the right title for this queenly young widow with a carriage and pair . " will you please to walk in , and I will go and see . " " say that I be , " say , as move forward intend to show she into the drawing - room and then to go up - stair to see if have return from she walk . they cross the broader part of the entrance - hall , and turn up the passage which lead to the garden . the drawing - room door be unlatched , and , push it without look into the room , wait for to enter and then turn away , the door have swing open and swing back again without noise . have less of outward vision than usual this morning , be fill with image of thing as they have be and be go to be . she find herself on the other side of the door without see anything remarkable , but immediately she hear a voice speak in low tone which start she as with a sense of dreaming in daylight , and advance unconsciously a step or two beyond the project slab of a bookcase , she see , in the terrible illumination of a certainty which fill up all outline , something which make she pause , motionless , without self - possession enough to speak . seat with he back towards she on a sofa which stand against the wall on a line with the door by which she have enter , she see : close by he and turn towards he with a flushed tearfulness which give a new brilliancy to she face sit , she bonnet hang back , while will lean towards she clasp both she upraise hand in he and speak with low - ton fervor . Rosamond in she agitated absorption have not notice the silently advancing figure ; but when , after the first immeasurable instant of this vision , move confusedly backward and find herself imped by some piece of furniture , be suddenly aware of she presence , and with a spasmodic movement snatch away she hand and rise , look at who be necessarily arrest . will Ladislee ,
, start up , look round also , and meet 's eye with a new lightning in they , see change to marble : but she immediately turn they away from he to and say in a firm voice -- " excuse I , , the servant do not know that you be here . I call to deliver a important letter for , which I wish to put into you own hand . " she lay down the letter on the small table which have check she retreat , and then include and in one distant glance and bow , she go quickly out of the room , meet in the passage the surprised , who say she be sorry the mistress be not at home , and then show the strange lady out with a inward reflection that grand people be probably more impatient than other . walk across the street with she most elastic step and be quickly in she carriage again . " drive on to , " she say to the coachman , and any one look at she might have think that though she be paler than usual she be never animate by a more self - possess energy . and that be really her experience . it be as if she have a great dratch of scorn that stimulate she beyond the susceptibility to other feeling . she have see something so far below she belief , that she emotion rush back from it and make a excited throng without a object . she need something active to turn she excitement out upon . she feel power to walk and work for a day , without meat or drink . and she would carry out the purpose with which she have start in the morning , of go to and to tell and she uncle all that she wish they to know about , whose marry loneliness under he trial now present itself to she with new significance , and make she more ardent in readiness to be he champion . she have never feel anything like this triumphant power of indignation in the struggle of she married life , in which there have always be a quickly subduing pang ; and she take it as a sign of new strength . " , how very bright you eye be ! " say , when be go out of the room . " and you do not see anything you look at , or anything . you be go to do something uncomfortable , I know . be it all about , or have something else happen ? " have be use to watch she sister with expectation . " yes , dear , a great many thing have happen , " say , in she full tone . " I wonder what , " say , fold she arm cozily and lean forward upon they . " oh , all the trouble of all people on the face of the earth , " say , lift she arm to the back of she head . " dear I , , be you go to have a scheme for they ? " say , a little uneasy at this Hamlet - like rave . but come in again , ready to accompany Dorothea to the , and she finish she expedition well , not swerve in she resolution until she descende at she own door . . " would it be yesterday and I I ' the grave , with she sweet faith above for monument " and stand motionless -- they do not know how long -- he look towards the spot where have stood , and she look towards he with doubt . it seem a endless time to , in whose inmost soul there be hardly so much annoyance as gratification from what have just happen . shallow nature dream of a easy sway over the emotion of other , trust implicitly in they own petty magic to turn the deepest stream , and confident , by pretty gesture and remark , of make the thing that be not as though it be . she know that have receive a severe blow , but she have be little used to imagine other people 's state of mind except as a material cut into shape by she own wish ; and she believe in she own power to soothe or subdue . even Tertius , that most perverse of man , be always subdue in the long - run : event have be obstinate , but still would have say now , as she do before she marriage , that she never give up what she have set she mind on . she put out she arm and lay the tip of she finger on 's coat - sleeve . " do not touch I ! " he say , with a utterance like the cut of a lash , dart from she , and change from pink to white and back again , as if he whole frame be tingl with the pain of the sting . he wheel round to the other side of the room and stand opposite to she , with the tip of he finger in he pocket and he head throw back , look fiercely not at but at a point a few inche away from she . she be keenly offended , but the she make of this be such as only be used to interpret . she become suddenly quiet and seate herself , unty she hang bonnet and lay it down with she shawl . she little hand which she fold before she be very cold . it would have be safer for in the first instance to have take up he hat and go away ; but he have feel no impulse to do this ; on the contrary , he have
have a horrible inclination to stay and shatter with he anger . it seem as impossible to bear the fatality she have draw down on he without vent he fury as it would be to a panther to bear the javelin - wound without spring and bite . and yet -- how could he tell a woman that he be ready to curse she ? he be fume under a repressive law which he be force to acknowledge : he be dangerously poise , and 's voice now bring the decisive vibration . in flute - like tone of sarcasm she say -- " you can easily go after and explain you preference . " " go after she ! " he burst out , with a sharp edge in he voice . " do you think she would turn to look at I , or value any word I ever utter to she again at more than a dirty feather a?--Explain ! how can a man explain at the expense of a woman ? " " you can tell she what you please , " say with more tremor . " do you suppose she would like I better for sacrifice you ? she be not a woman to be flatter because I make myself despicable -- to believe that I must be true to she because I be a dastard to you . " he begin to move about with the restlessness of a wild animal that see prey but can not reach it . presently he burst out again -- " I have no hope before -- not much -- of anything better to come . but I have one certainty -- that she believe in I . whatever people have say or do about I , she believe in I .-- that be gone ! she will never again think I anything but a paltry pretence -- too nice to take heaven except upon flattering condition , and yet sell myself for any 's change by the sly . she will think of I as a incarnate insult to she , from the first moment we -- " will stop as if he have find himself grasp something that must not be throw and shatte . he find another vent for he rage by snatch up 's word again , as if they be reptile to be throttle and fling off . " ! tell a man to explain how he drop into hell ! explain my preference ! I never have a _preference for she , any more than I have a preference for breathing . no other woman exist by the side of she . I would rather touch she hand if it be dead , than I would touch any other woman 's living . " , while these poisoned weapon be be hurl at she , be almost lose the sense of she identity , and seem to be wake into some new terrible existence . she have no sense of chill resolute repulsion , of reticent self - justification such as she have know under 's most stormy displeasure : all she sensibility be turn into a bewilder novelty of pain ; she feel a new terrified recoil under a lash never experience before . what another nature feel in opposition to she own be be burnt and bite into she consciousness . when will have cease to speak she have become a image of sickened misery : she lip be pale , and she eye have a tearless dismay in they . if it have be who stand opposite to she , that look of misery would have be a pang to he , and he would have sunk by she side to comfort she , with that strong -armed comfort which , she have often hold very cheap . let it be forgive to Will that he have no such movement of pity . he have feel no bond beforehand to this woman who have spoil the ideal treasure of he life , and he hold himself blameless . he know that he be cruel , but he have no relenting in he yet . after he have do speak , he still move about , half in absence of mind , and sit perfectly still . at length , seem to bethink himself , take up he hat , yet stand some moment irresolute . he have speak to she in a way that make a phrase of common politeness difficult to utter ; and yet , now that he have come to the point of go away from she without further speech , he shrank from it as a brutality ; he feel check and stultify in he anger . he walk towards the mantel - piece and lean he arm on it , and wait in silence for -- he hardly know what . the vindictive fire be still burn in he , and he could utter no word of retractation ; but it be nevertheless in he mind that have come back to this hearth where he have enjoy a caresse friendship he have find calamity seat there -- he have have suddenly reveal to he a trouble that lay outside the home as well as within it . and what seem a foreboding be press upon he as with slow pincer :-- that he life might come to be enslave by this helpless woman who have throw herself upon he in the dreary sadness of she heart . but he be in gloomy rebellion against the fact that he quick apprehensiveness foreshadow to he , and when he eye fell on 's blighted face it seem to he that he be the more pitiable of the two ; for pain must enter into its glorified life of memory before it can turn into compassion . and so they remain for many minute , opposite each
each other , far apart , in silence ; 's face still possess by a mute rage , and be by a mute misery . the poor thing have no force to fl out any passion in return ; the terrible collapse of the illusion towards which all she hope have be strain be a stroke which have too thoroughly shake she : she little world be in ruin , and she feel herself totter in the midst as a lonely bewildered consciousness . will wish that she would speak and bring some mitigate shadow across he own cruel speech , which seem to stand sta at they both in mockery of any attempt at revive fellowship . but she say nothing , and at last with a desperate effort over himself , he ask , " shall I come in and see Lydgate this evening ? " " if you like , " answer , just audibly . and then will go out of the house , never know that he have be in . after he be gone , try to get up from she seat , but fall back fainting . when she come to herself again , she feel too ill to make the exertion of rise to ring the bell , and she remain helpless until the girl , surprise at she long absence , think for the first time of look for she in all the down - stair room . say that she have feel suddenly sick and faint , and want to be help up - stair . when there she throw herself on the bed with she clothes on , and lay in apparent torpor , as she have do once before on a memorable day of grief . come home earlier than he have expect , about half - past five , and find she there . the perception that she be ill throw every other thought into the background . when he feel she pulse , she eye rest on he with more persistence than they have do for a long while , as if she feel some content that he be there . he perceive the difference in a moment , and seate himself by she put he arm gently under she , and bend over she say , " my poor Rosamond ! have something agitate you ? " Clinge to he she fall into hysterical sobbing and cry , and for the next hour he do nothing but soothey and tend she . he imagine that have be to see she , and that all this effect on she nervous system , which evidently involve some new turn towards himself , be due to the excitement of the new impressions which that visit have raise . . " now , I see in my dream , that just as they have end they talk , they draw nigh to a very miry slough , that be in the midst of the plain ; and they , be heedless , do both fall suddenly into the bog . the name of the slough be . " --bunyan . when be quiet , and have leave she , hope that she might soon sleep under the effect of a anodyne , he go into the drawing - room to fetch a book which he have leave there , mean to spend the evening in he work - room , and he see on the table Dorothea 's letter address to he . he have not venture to ask if have call , but the reading of this letter assure he of the fact , for mention that it be to be carry by herself . when will come in a little later Lydgate meet he with a surprise which make it clear that he have not be tell of the earlier visit , and will could not say , " do not tell you that I come this morning ? " " be ill , " add immediately on he greeting . " not seriously , I hope , " say . " no -- only a slight nervous shock -- the effect of some agitation . she have be overwrotch lately . the truth be , Ladislaw , I be a unlucky devil . we have go through several round of purgatory since you leave , and I have lately get on to a worse ledge of it than ever . I suppose you be only just come down -- you look rather batter -- you have not be long enough in the town to hear anything ? " " I travel all night and get to the at eight o'clock this morning . I have be shutt myself up and rest , " say , feel himself a sneak , but see no alternative to this evasion . and then he hear 's account of the trouble which have already depict to he in she way . she have not mention the fact of 's name be connect with the public story -- this detail not immediately affect she -- and he now hear it for the first time . " I think it better to tell you that you name be mix up with the disclosure , " say , who could understand better than most man how Ladislaw might be sting by the revelation . " you will be sure to hear it as soon as you turn out into the town . I suppose it be true that speak to you . " " yes , " say , sardonically . " I shall be fortunate if gossip do not make I the most disreputable person in the whole affair . I should think the latest version must be , that I plot with Raffles to murder , and run away from for the purpose . " he be think " here be a
a new ring in the sound of my name to recommend it in she hearing ; however -- what do it signify now ? " but he say nothing of 's offer to he . will be very open and careless about he personal affair , but it be among the more exquisite touch in nature 's modelling of he that he have a delicate generosity which warn he into reticence here . he shrank from say that he have reject 's money , in the moment when he be learn that it be 's misfortune to have accept it . Lydgate too be reticent in the midst of he confidence . he make no allusion to 's feel under they trouble , and of Dorothea he only say , " . have be the one person to come forward and say that she have no belief in any of the suspicion against I . " Observe a change in 's face , he avoid any further mention of she , feel himself too ignorant of they relation to each other not to fear that he word might have some hidden painful bearing on it . and it occur to he that be the real cause of the present visit to . the two man be pity each other , but it be only will who guess the extent of he companion 's trouble . when speak with desperate resignation of go to settle in , and say with a faint smile , " we shall have you again , old fellow . " will feel inexpressibly mournful , and say nothing . have that morning entreate he to urge this step on ; and it seem to he as if he be behold in a magic panorama a future where he himself be slide into that pleasureless yielding to the small solicitation of circumstance , which be a commoner history of perdition than any single momentous bargain . we be on a perilous margin when we begin to look passively at we future self , and see we own figure lead with dull consent into insipid misdoing and shabby achievement . poor Lydgate be inwardly groane on that margin , and be arrive at it . it seem to he this evening as if the cruelty of he outburst to have make a obligation for he , and he dread the obligation : he dread 's unsuspecting good - will : he dread he own distaste for he spoiled life , which would leave he in motiveless levity . . " Stern lawgiver ! yet thou dost wear the 's most benignant grace ; know we anything so fair as be the smile upon thy face ; Flowers laugh before thee on they bed , and fragrance in thy foot tread ; thou dost preserve the Star from wrong ; and the most ancient Heavens , through thee , be fresh and strong . -- Wordsworth : Ode to . when have see in the morning , she have promise to go and dine at the parsonage on she return from . there be a frequent interchange of visit between she and the Farebrother family , which enable she to say that she be not at all lonely at the Manor , and to resist for the present the severe prescription of a lady companion . when she reach home and remember she engagement , she be glad of it ; and find that she have still a hour before she could dress for dinner , she walk straight to the schoolhouse and enter into a conversation with the master and mistress about the new bell , give eager attention to they small detail and repetition , and get up a dramatic sense that she life be very busy . she pause on she way back to talk to old master who be put in some garden - seed , and discourse wisely with that rural sage about the crop that would make the most return on a perch of ground , and the result of sixty year 's experience as to soil -- namely , that if you soil be pretty mellow it would do , but if there come wet , wet , wet to make it all of a mummy , why then -- find that the social spirit have beguil she into be rather late , she dress hastily and go over to the parsonage rather earlier than be necessary . that house be never dull , , like another of , have continually something new to tell of he inarticulate guest and protege , whom he be teach the boy not to torment ; and he have just set up a pair of beautiful goat to be pet of the village in general , and to walk at large as sacr animal . the evening go by cheerfully till after tea , talk more than usual and dilat with on the possible histories of creature that converse compendiously with they antenna , and for atch we know may hold reform parliament ; when suddenly some inarticulate little sound be hear which call everybody 's attention . " , " say , see she small sister move about the furniture - leg distressfully , " what be the matter ? " " I have lose my tortoise - shell lozenge - box . I fear the kitten have roll it away , " say the tiny old lady , involuntarily continue she beaver - like note . " be it a great treasure , aunt ? " say , put up he glass and look at the carpet . " give it I , " say . " a german box -- very pretty , but if it fall it always spin away as far as it can . " " oh , if it be 's present , " say , in a deep tone
tone of comprehension , get up and hunt . the box be find at last under a chiffonier , and grasp it with delight , say , " it be under a fender the last time . " " that be a affair of the heart with my aunt , " say , smile at , as he reseate himself . " if form a attachment to any one , , " say he mother , emphatically , -- " she be like a dog -- she would take they shoe for a pillow and sleep the better . " " 's shoe , I would , " say . make a attempt at smiling in return . she be surprised and annoyed to find that she heart be palpitat violently , and that it be quite useless to try after a recovery of she former animation . Alarm at herself -- fear some further betrayal of a change so mark in its occasion , she rise and say in a low voice with undisguised anxiety , " I must go ; I have overtire myself . " , quick in perception , rise and say , " it be true ; you must have half - exhaust yourself in talk about . that sort of work tell upon one after the excitement be over . " he give she he arm back to the Manor , but do not attempt to speak , even when he say good - night . the limit of resistance be reach , and she have sink back helpless within the clutch of inescapable anguish . dismiss with a few faint word , she lock she door , and turn away from it towards the vacant room she press she hand hard on the top of she head , and moan out -- " oh , I do love he ! " then come the hour in which the wave of suffering shake she too thoroughly to leave any power of thought . she could only cry in loud whisper , between she sob , after she lose belief which she have plan and keep alive from a very little seed since the day in -- after she lose joy of clinging with silent love and faith to one who , misprize by other , be worthy in she thought -- after she lost woman 's pride of reign in he memory -- after she sweet dim perspective of hope , that along some pathway they should meet with unchanged recognition and take up the backward year as a yesterday . in that hour she repeat what the merciful eye of solitude have look on for age in the spiritual struggle of man -- she besotch hardness and coldness and ach weariness to bring she relief from the mysterious incorporeal might of she anguish : she lay on the bare floor and let the night grow cold around she ; while she grand woman 's frame be shake by sob as if she have be a despairing child . there be two image -- two living form that tore she heart in two , as if it have be the heart of a mother who seem to see she child divide by the sword , and press one bleed half to she breast while she gaze go forth in agony towards the half which be carry away by the lying woman that have never know the mother 's pang . here , with the nearness of a answer smile , here within the vibrating bond of mutual speech , be the bright creature whom she have trust -- who have come to she like the spirit of morning visit the dim vault where she sit as the bride of a worn - out life ; and now , with a full consciousness which have never awaken before , she stretch out she arm towards he and cry with bitter cry that they nearness be a parting vision : she discover she passion to herself in the unshrinking utterance of despair . and there , aloof , yet persistently with she , move wherever she move , be the ' who be a change belief exhaust of hope , a detect illusion -- no , a liive man towards whom there could not yet struggle any wail of regretful pity , from the midst of scorn and indignation and jealous offended pride . the fire of 's anger be not easily spend , and it flam out in fitful return of spurning reproach . why have he come obtrud he life into hers , hers that might have be whole enough without he ? why have he bring he cheap regard and he lip - bear word to she who have nothing paltry to give in exchange ? he know that he be delude she -- wish , in the very moment of farewell , to make she believe that he give she the whole price of she heart , and know that he have spend it half before . why have he not stay among the crowd of whom she ask nothing -- but only pray that they might be less contemptible ? but she lose energy at last even for she loud - whispered cry and moan : she subsid into helpless sob , and on the cold floor she sob herself to sleep . in the chill hour of the morning twilight , when all be dim around she , she awoke -- not with any amazed wonder where she be or what have happen , but with the clearest consciousness that she be look into the eyes of sorrow . she rise , and wrap warm thing around she , and seate herself in a great chair where she have often watch before . she be vigorous enough to have borne that hard night without feel ill in body , beyond some
some aching and fatigue ; but she have wake to a new condition : she feel as if she soul have be liberate from its terrible conflict ; she be no longer wrestl with she grief , but could sit down with it as a last companion and make it a sharer in she thought . for now the thought come thickly . it be not in 's nature , for longer than the duration of a paroxysm , to sit in the narrow cell of she calamity , in the besotted misery of a consciousness that only see another 's lot as a accident of its own . she begin now to live through that yesterday morn deliberately again , force herself to dwell on every detail and it be possible meaning . be she alone in that scene ? be it she event only ? she force herself to think of it as bound up with another woman 's life -- a woman towards whom she have set out with a longing to carry some clearness and comfort into she beclouded youth . in she first outleap of jealous indignation and disgust , when quit the hateful room , she have fling away all the mercy with which she have undertake that visit . she have envelo both and in she burn scorn , and it seem to she as if be burn out of she sight forever . but that base prompt which make a woman more cruel to a rival than to a faithless lover , could have no strength of recurrence in when the dominant spirit of justice within she have once overcome the tumult and have once show she the truer measure of thing . all the active thought with which she have before be represent to herself the trial of 's lot , and this young marriage union which , like she own , seem to have its hidden as well as evident trouble -- all this vivid sympathetic experience return to she now as a power : it assert itself as acquire knowledge assert itself and will not let we see as we see in the day of we ignorance . she say to she own irremediable grief , that it should make she more helpful , instead of drive she back from effort . and what sort of crisis might not this be in three life whose contact with hers lay a obligation on she as if they have be suppliant bear the sacred branch ? the object of she rescue be not to be seek out by she fancy : they be choose for she . she year towards the perfect Right , that it might make a throne within she , and rule she errant will . " what should I do -- how should I act now , this very day , if I could clutch my own pain , and compel it to silence , and think of those three ? " it have take long for she to come to that question , and there be light pierce into the room . she open she curtain , and look out towards the bit of road that lay in view , with field beyond outside the entrance - gate . on the road there be a man with a bundle on he back and a woman carry she baby ; in the field she could see figure move -- perhaps the shepherd with he dog . far off in the bending sky be the pearly light ; and she feel the largeness of the world and the manifold waking of man to labor and endurance . she be a part of that involuntary , palpitat life , and could neither look out on it from she luxurious shelter as a mere spectator , nor hide she eye in selfish complaining . what she would resolve to do that day do not yet seem quite clear , but something that she could achieve stir she as with a approaching murmur which would soon gather distinctness . she take off the clothes which seem to have some of the weariness of a hard watch in they , and begin to make she toilet . presently she ring for , who come in she dressing - gown . " why , madam , you have never be in bed this bless night , " burst out , look first at the bed and then at 's face , which in spite of bathing have the pale cheek and pink eyelid of a mater dolorosa . " you will kill yourself , you _will . anybody might think now you have a right to give yourself a little comfort . " " do not be alarm , , " say , smile . " I have sleep ; I be not ill . I shall be glad of a cup of coffee as soon as possible . and I want you to bring I my new dress ; and most likely I shall want my new bonnet to - day . " " they have lain there a month and more ready for you , madam , and most thankful I shall be to see you with a couple of ' pound ' worth less of crape , " say , stoop to light the fire . " there be a reason in mourning , as I have always say ; and three fold at the bottom of you skirt and a plain quil in you bonnet -- and if ever anybody look like a angel , it be you in a net quilling -- be what be consistent for a second year . at least , that be _my_ think , " end , look anxiously at the fire ; " and if anybody be to marry I flatter himself I should wear those hijeous weeper two year for he ,
, he would be deceive by he own vanity , that be all . " " the fire will do , my good , " say , speak as she use to do in the old Lausanne day , only with a very low voice ; " get I the coffee . " she fold herself in the large chair , and lean she head against it in fatigued quiescence , while go away wonder at this strange contrariness in she young mistress -- that just the morning when she have more of a widow 's face than ever , she should have ask for she lighter mourn which she have waive before . Tantripp would never have find the clew to this mystery . wish to acknowledge that she have not the less a active life before she because she have bury a private joy ; and the tradition that fresh garment belong to all initiation , haunt she mind , make she grasp after even that slight outward help towards calm resolve . for the resolve be not easy . nevertheless at eleven o'clock she be walk towards , have make up she mind that she would make as quietly and unnoticeably as possible she second attempt to see and save . . " warst auch diese , athmest neu erquickt zu meinen Fussen , Beginnest schon mit Lust mich zu umgeben , regst und ruhrst ein kraftige immerfort zu streben . -- Faust : 2r . when be again at 's door speak to , he be in the room close by with the door ajar , prepare to go out . he hear she voice , and immediately come to she . " do you think that can receive I this morning ? " she say , have reflecte that it would be better to leave out all allusion to she previous visit . " I have no doubt she will , " say , suppresse he thought about 's look , which be as much change as 's , " if you will be kind enough to come in and let I tell she that you be here . she have not be very well since you be here yesterday , but she be better this morning , and I think it be very likely that she will be cheer by see you again . " it be plain that Lydgate , as have expect , know nothing about the circumstance of she yesterday 's visit ; nay , he appear to imagine that she have carry it out accord to she intention . she have prepare a little note ask to see she , which she would have give to the servant if he have not be in the way , but now she be in much anxiety as to the result of he announcement . after lead she into the drawing - room , he pause to take a letter from he pocket and put it into she hand , say , " I write this last night , and be go to carry it to Lowick in my ride . when one be grateful for something too good for common thanks , writing be less unsatisfactory than speech -- one do not at least _hear_ how inadequate the word be . " 's face brighten . " it be I who have most to thank for , since you have let I take that place . you _have consent ? " she say , suddenly doubt . " yes , the check be go to Bulstrode to - day . " he say no more , but go up - stair to , who have but lately finish dress herself , and sit languidly wonder what she should do next , she habitual industry in small thing , even in the day of she sadness , prompt she to begin some kind of occupation , which she drag through slowly or pause in from lack of interest . she look ill , but have recover she usual quietude of manner , and have fear to disturb she by any question . he have tell she of 's letter contain the check , and afterwards he have say , " be come , ; he sit with I last night ; I dare say he will be here again to - day . I think he look rather batter and depresse . " and have make no reply . now , when he come up , he say to she very gently , " , dear , be come to see you again ; you would like to see she , would you not ? " that she colore and give rather a start movement do not surprise he after the agitation produce by the interview yesterday -- a beneficent agitation , he think , since it seem to have make she turn to he again . da not say no . she da not with a tone of she voice touch the fact of yesterday . why have come again ? the answer be a blank which could only fill up with dread , for 's lacerating word have make every thought of a fresh smart to she . nevertheless , in she new humiliating uncertainty she da do nothing but comply . she do not say yes , but she rise and let put a light shawl over she shoulders , while he say , " I be go out immediately . " then something cross she mind which prompt she to say , " pray tell not to bring any one else into the drawing - room . " and assent , think that he fully understand this wish . he lead she down to the drawing - room door , and then turn away , observe to himself that he be rather a blundering husband to be dependent for he
he wife 's trust in he on the influence of another woman . , wrap she soft shawl around she as she walk towards , be inwardly wrap she soul in cold reserve . have come to say anything to she about ? if so , it be a liberty that resent ; and she prepare herself to meet every word with polite impassibility . will have bruise she pride too sorely for she to feel any compunction towards he and : she own injury seem much the greater . be not only the " prefer " woman , but have also a formidable advantage in be 's benefactor ; and to poor 's pained confused vision it seem that this Mrs. Casaubon --this woman who predominate in all thing concern she -- must have come now with the sense of have the advantage , and with animosity prompt she to use it . indeed , not Rosamond only , but any one else , know the outer fact of the case , and not the simple inspiration on which act , might well have wonder why she come . look like the lovely ghost of herself , she graceful slimness wrap in she soft white shawl , the rounded infantine mouth and cheek inevitably suggest mildness and innocence , pause at three yard ' distance from she visitor and bow . but , who have take off she glove , from a impulse which she could never resist when she want a sense of freedom , come forward , and with she face full of a sad yet sweet openness , put out she hand . could not avoid meet she glance , could not avoid put she small hand into 's , which clasp it with gentle motherliness ; and immediately a doubt of she own prepossession begin to stir within she . 's eye be quick for face ; she see that 's face look pale and change since yesterday , yet gentle , and like the firm softness of she hand . but have count a little too much on she own strength : the clearness and intensity of she mental action this morning be the continuance of a nervous exaltation which make she frame as dangerously responsive as a bit of finest Venetian crystal ; and in look at , she suddenly find she heart swell , and be unable to speak -- all she effort be require to keep back tear . she succeed in that , and the emotion only pass over she face like the spirit of a sob ; but it add to 's impression that 's state of mind must be something quite different from what she have imagine . so they sit down without a word of preface on the two chair that happen to be nearest , and happen also to be close together ; though 's notion when she first bow be that she should stay a long way off from . but she cease think how anything would turn out -- merely wonder what would come . and begin to speak quite simply , gather firmness as she go on . " I have a errand yesterday which I do not finish ; that be why I be here again so soon . you will not think I too troublesome when I tell you that I come to talk to you about the injustice that have be show towards . it will cheer you -- will it not ? -- to know a great deal about he , that he may not like to speak about himself just because it be in he own vindication and to he own honor . you will like to know that you husband have warm friend , who have not leave off believe in he high character ? you will let I speak of this without think that I take a liberty ? " the cordial , plead tone which seem to flow with generous heedlessness above all the fact which have fill 's mind as grounds of obstruction and hatre between she and this woman , come as soothingly as a warm stream over she shrinking fear . of course have the fact in she mind , but she be not go to speak of anything connect with they . that relief be too great for to feel much else at the moment . she answer prettily , in the new ease of she soul -- " I know you have be very good . I shall like to hear anything you will say to I about . " " the day before yesterday , " say , " when I have ask he to come to Lowick to give I he opinion on the affair of the hospital , he tell I everything about he conduct and feeling in this sad event which have make ignorant people cast suspicion on he . the reason he tell I be because I be very bold and ask he . I believe that he have never ac dishonorably , and I beg he to tell I the history . he confess to I that he have never tell it before , not even to you , because he have a great dislike to say , be not wrong , ' as if that be proof , when there be guilty people who will say so . the truth be , he know nothing of this man Raffle , or that there be any bad secret about he ; and he think that offer he the money because he repent , out of kindness , of have refuse it before . all he anxiety about he patient be to treat he rightly , and he be a little uncomfortable that the case do not end as he have expect ; but he think then and still think that there may have be no
no wrong in it on any one 's part . and I have tell , and , and : they all believe in you husband . that will cheer you , will it not ? that will give you courage ? " 's face have become animated , and as it beam on very close to she , she feel something like bashful timidity before a superior , in the presence of this self - forgetful ardor . she say , with blush embarrassment , " thank you : you be very kind . " " and he feel that he have be so wrong not to pour out everything about this to you . but you will forgive he . it be because he feel so much more about you happiness than anything else -- he feel he life bound into one with yours , and it hurt he more than anything , that he misfortune must hurt you . he could speak to I because I be a indifferent person . and then I ask he if I might come to see you ; because I feel so much for he trouble and yours . that be why I come yesterday , and why I be come to - day . trouble be so hard to bear , be it not ?-- how can we live and think that any one have trouble -- piercing trouble -- and we could help they , and never try ? " Dorothea , completely sway by the feeling that she be utter , forgot everything but that she be speak from out the heart of she own trial to 's . the emotion have wrotch itself more and more into she utterance , till the tone might have go to one be very marrow , like a low cry from some suffer creature in the darkness . and she have unconsciously laid she hand again on the little hand that she have press before . , with a overmastering pang , as if a wound withing she have be pro , burst into hysterical crying as she have do the day before when she cling to she husband . poor Dorothea be feel a great wave of she own sorrow return over she -- she think be draw to the possible share that will Ladislaw might have in 's mental tumult . she be begin to fear that she should not be able to suppress herself enough to the end of this meeting , and while she hand be still rest on 's lap , though the hand underneath it be withdraw , she be struggle against she own rise sob . she try to master herself with the thought that this might be a turning - point in three life -- not in she own ; no , there the irrevocable have happen , but -- in those three life which be touch hers with the solemn neighborhood of danger and distress . the fragile creature who be cry close to she -- there might still be time to rescue she from the misery of false incompatible bond ; and this moment be unlike any other : she and could never be together again with the same thrill consciousness of yesterday within they both . she feel the relation between they to be peculiar enough to give she a peculiar influence , though she have no conception that the way in which she own feeling be involved be fully known to . it be a newer crisis in 's experience than even could imagine : she be under the first great shock that have shatte she dream - world in which she have be easily confident of herself and critical of other ; and this strange unexpected manifestation of feeling in a woman whom she have approach with a shrinking aversion and dread , as one who must necessarily have a jealous hatred towards she , make she soul totter all the more with a sense that she have be walk in a unknown world which have just break in upon she . when 's convulse throat be subsid into , and she withdraw the handkerchief with which she have be hide she face , she eye meet 's as helplessly as if they have be blue flower . what be the use of think about behavior after this cry ? and look almost as childish , with the neglected trace of a silent tear . pride be break down between these two . " we be talk about you husband , " Dorothea say , with some timidity . " I think he look be sadly change with suffer the other day . I have not see he for many week before . he say he have be feel very lonely in he trial ; but I think he would have borne it all better if he have be able to be quite open with you . " " Tertius be so angry and impatient if I say anything , " say , imagine that he have be complain of she to . " he ought not to wonder that I object to speak to he on painful subject . " " it be himself he blame for not speak , " say . " what he say of you be , that he could not be happy in do anything which make you unhappy -- that he marriage be of course a bond which must affect he choice about everything ; and for that reason he refuse my proposal that he should keep he position at the hospital , because that would bind he to stay in , and he would not undertake to do anything which would be painful to you . he could say that to I , because he know that I have much trial in my marriage , from my husband 's illness , which
which hinder he plan and sadden he ; and he know that I have feel how hard it be to walk always in fear of hur another who be tie to we . " wait a little ; she have discern a faint pleasure steal over 's face . but there be no answer , and she go on , with a gather tremor , " marriage be so unlike everything else . there be something even awful in the nearness it bring . even if we love some one else better than -- than those we be marry to , it would be no use " -- poor Dorothea , in she palpitat anxiety , could only seize she language brokenly -- " I mean , marriage drink up all we power of give or get any blessedness in that sort of love . I know it may be very dear -- but it murder we marriage -- and then the marriage stay with we like a murder -- and everything else be gone . and then we husband -- if he love and trust we , and we have not help he , but make a curse in he life -- " she voice have sink very low : there be a dread upon she of presum too far , and of speak as if she herself be perfection address error . she be too much preoccupy with she own anxiety , to be aware that be trembl too ; and fill with the need to express pity fellowship rather than rebuke , she put she hand on 's , and say with more agitated rapidity ,-- " I know , I know that the feeling may be very dear -- it have take hold of we unaware -- it be so hard , it may seem like death to part with it -- and we be weak -- I be weak -- " the wafe of she own sorrow , from out of which she be struggle to save another , rush over with conquering force . she stop in speechless agitation , not cry , but feel as if she be be inwardly grapple . she face have become of a deathlier paleness , she lip tremble , and she press she hand helplessly on the hand that lay under they . , take hold of by a emotion stronger than she own -- hurrie along in a new movement which give all thing some new , awful , undefined aspect -- could find no word , but involuntarily she put she lip to 's forehead which be very near she , and then for a minute the two woman clasp each other as if they have be in a shipwreck . " you be think what be not true , " say , in a eager half - whisper , while she be still feel 's arm round she -- urge by a mysterious necessity to free herself from something that oppress she as if it be blood guiltiness . they move apart , look at each other . " when you come in yesterday -- it be not as you think , " say in the same tone . there be a movement of surprised attention in . she expect a vindication of herself . " he be tell I how he love another woman , that I might know he could never love I , " say , get more and more hurried as she go on . " and now I think he hate I because -- because you mistake he yesterday . he say it be through I that you will think ill of he -- think that he be a false person . but it shall not be through I . he have never have any love for I -- I know he have not -- he have always think slightly of I . he say yesterday that no other woman exist for he beside you . the blame of what happen be entirely mine . he say he could never explain to you -- because of I . he say you could never think well of he again . but now I have tell you , and he can not reproach I any more . " have deliver she soul under impulse which she have not know before . she have begin she confession under the subdue influence of 's emotion ; and as she go on she have gather the sense that she be repell will have reproach , which be still like a knife - wound within she . the revulsion of feeling in be too strong to be call joy . it be a tumult in which the terrible strain of the night and morning make a resistant pain :-- she could only perceive that this would be joy when she have recover she power of feel it . she immediate consciousness be one of immense sympathy without cheek ; she care for without struggle now , and respond earnestly to she last word -- " no , he can not reproach you any more . " with she usual tendency to over-estimate the good in other , she feel a great outgoing of she heart towards , for the generous effort which have redeem she from suffering , not count that the effort be a reflex of she own energy . after they have be silent a little , she say -- " you be not sorry that I come this morning ? " " no , you have be very good to I , " say . " I do not think that you would be so good . I be very unhappy . I be not happy now . everything be so sad . " " but better day will come . you husband will be rightly value . and he depend on you
you for comfort . he love you best . the worst loss would be to lose that -- and you have not lose it , " say . she try to thrust away the too overpowering thought of she own relief , lest she should fail to win some sign that 's affection be year back towards she husband . " do not find fault with I , then ? " say , understand now that might have say anything to , and that she certainly be different from other woman . perhaps there be a faint taste of jealousy in the question . a smile begin to play over 's face as she say -- " no , indeed ! how could you imagine it ? " but here the door open , and enter . " I be come back in my quality of doctor , " he say . " after I go away , I be haunt by two pale face : look as much in need of care as you , . and I think that I have not do my duty in leave you together ; so when I have be to 's I come home again . I notice that you be walk , , and the sky have change -- I think we may have rain . may I send some one to order you carriage to come for you ? " " oh , no ! I be strong : I need the walk , " say , rise with animation in she face . " and I have chat a great deal , and it be time for I to go . I have always be accuse of be immoderate and say too much . " she put out she hand to , and they say a earnest , quiet good - by without kiss or other show of effusion : there have be between they too much serious emotion for they to use the sign of it superficially . as take she to the door she say nothing of , but tell he of and the other friend who have listen with belief to he story . when he come back to , she have already throw herself on the sofa , in resign fatigue . " well , , " he say , stand over she , and touch she hair , " what do you think of now you have see so much of she ? " " I think she must be better than any one , " say , " and she be very beautiful . if you go to talk to she so often , you will be more discontented with I than ever ! " laugh at the " so often . " " but have she make you any less discontented with I ? " " I think she have , " say , look up in he face . " how heavy you eye be , -- and do push you hair back . " he lift up he large white hand to obey she , and feel thankful for this little mark of interest in he . 's vagrant fancy have come back terribly scour -- meek enough to nestle under the old despise shelter . and the shelter be still there : have accept he narrow lot with sad resignation . he have choose this fragile creature , and have take the of she life upon he arm . he must walk as he could , carry that burthen pitifully . . " my grief lie onward and my joy behind . " -- : . Exiles notoriously feed much on hope , and be unlikely to stay in banishment unless they be oblige . when will exil himself from he have place no stronger obstacle to he return than he own resolve , which be by no means a iron barrier , but simply a state of mind liable to melt into a minuet with other state of mind , and to find itself bow , smile , and give place with polite facility . as the months go on , it have see more and more difficult to he to say why he should not run down to -- merely for the sake of hear something about ; and if on such a fly visit he should chance by some strange coincidence to meet with she , there be no reason for he to be asham of have take a innocent journey which he have beforehand suppose that he should not take . since he be hopelessly divide from she , he might surely venture into she neighborhood ; and as to the suspicious friend who keep a dragon watch over she -- they opinion see less and less important with time and change of air . and there have come a reason quite irrespective of , which seem to make a journey to Middlemarch a sort of philanthropic duty . will have give a disinterested attention to a intend settlement on a new plan in the , and the need for fund in order to carry out a good design have set he on debating with himself whether it would not be a laudable use to make of he claim on , to urge the application of that money which have be offer to himself as a means of carry out a scheme likely to be largely beneficial . the question seem a very dubious one to , and he repugnance to again enter into any relation with the banker might have make he dismiss it quickly , if there have not arisen in he imagination the probability that he judgment might be more safely determine by a visit to . that be the object which will state to himself as a reason for come down . he have mean to confide in , and discuss the
the money question with he , and he have mean to amuse himself for the few evening of he stay by have a great deal of music and badinage with fair , without neglect he friend at :-- if the Parsonage be close to the , that be no fault of he . he have neglect the Farebrother before he departure , from a proud resistance to the possible accusation of indirectly seek interview with ; but hunger tame we , and will have become very hungry for the vision of a certain form and the sound of a certain voice . nothing , have do instead -- not the opera , or the converse of zealous politician , or the flatter reception ( in dim corner ) of he new hand in lead article . thus he have come down , foresee with confidence how almost everything would be in he familiar little world ; fear , indeed , that there would be no surprise in he visit . but he have find that humdrum world in a terribly dynamic condition , in which even badinage and lyrism have turn explosive ; and the first day of this visit have become the most fatal epoch of he life . the next morning he feel so harassed with the nightmare of consequence -- he dread so much the immediate issue before he -- that see while he breakfast the arrival of the coach , he go out hurriedly and take he place on it , that he might be relieved , at least for a day , from the necessity of do or say anything in . will be in one of those tangle crisis which be commoner in experience than one might imagine , from the shallow absoluteness of man 's judgment . he have find , for whom he have the sincerest respect , under circumstance which claim he thorough and frankly declare sympathy ; and the reason why , in spite of that claim , it would have be better for to have avoid all further intimacy , or even contact , with , be precisely of the kind to make such a course appear impossible . to a creature of 's susceptible temperament -- without any neutral region of indifference in he nature , ready to turn everything that befell he into the collision of a passionate drama -- the revelation that have make she happiness in any way dependent on he be a difficulty which he outburst of rage towards she have immeasurably increase for he . he hate he own cruelty , and yet he dread to show the fulness of he relenting : he must go to she again ; the friendship could not be put to a sudden end ; and she unhappiness be a power which he dread . and all the while there be no more foretaste of enjoyment in the life before he than if he limb have be lop off and he be make he fresh start on crutch . in the night he have debat whether he should not get on the coach , not for , but for , leave a note to Lydgate which would give a makeshift reason for he retreat . but there be strong cord pull he back from that abrupt departure : the blight on he happiness in thinking of , the crushing of that chief hope which have remain in spite of the acknowledged necessity for renunciation , be too fresh a misery for he to resign himself to it and go straightway into a distance which be also despair . thus he do nothing more decided than take the coach . he come back again by it while it be still daylight , have make up he mind that he must go to 's that evening . the , we know , be a very insignificant stream to look at ; its significance lay entirely in certain invisible condition . will feel as if he be force to cross he small boundary ditch , and what he see beyond it be not empire , but discontent subjection . but it be give to we sometimes even in we every - day life to witness the save influence of a noble nature , the divine efficacy of rescue that may lie in a self - subdue act of fellowship . if , after she night 's anguish , have not take that walk to -- why , she perhaps would have be a woman who gain a higher character for discretion , but it would certainly not have be as well for those three who be on one hearth in 's house at half - past seven that evening . have be prepare for 's visit , and she receive he with a languid coldness which account for by she nervous exhaustion , of which he could not suppose that it have any relation to . and when she sit in silence bend over a bit of work , he innocently apologize for she in a indirect way by begge she to lean backward and rest . will be miserable in the necessity for play the part of a friend who be make he first appearance and greet to , while he thought be busy about she feeling since that scene of yesterday , which seem still inexorably to enclose they both , like the painful vision of a double madness . it happen that nothing call out of the room ; but when pour out the tea , and come near to fetch it , she place a tiny bit of fold paper in he saucer . he see it and secure it quickly , but as he go back to he inn he have no eagerness to unfold the paper . what have write to he would probably deepen the painful impressions of the evening . still , he
he open and read it by he bed - candle . there be only these few word in she neatly flow hand :-- " I have tell . she be not under any mistake about you . I tell she because she come to see I and be very kind . you will have nothing to reproach I with now . I shall not have make any difference to you . " the effect of these word be not quite all gladness . as will dwelt on they with excited imagination , he feel he cheek and ears burn at the thought of what have occur between and -- at the uncertainty how far might still feel she dignity wounded in have a explanation of he conduct offer to she . there might still remain in she mind a change association with he which make a irremediable difference -- a lasting flaw . with active fancy he wrotch himself into a state of doubt little more easy than that of the man who have escape from wreck by night and stand on unknown ground in the darkness . until that wretch yesterday --except the moment of vexation long ago in the very same room and in the very same presence -- all they vision , all they thought of each other , have be as in a world apart , where the sunshine fall on tall white lily , where no evil lurk , and no other soul enter . but now -- would meet he in that world again ? . " and now good - morrow to we wake soul which watch not one another out of fear ; for love all love of other sight control , and make one little room , a everywhere . " -- . . on the second morning after 's visit to , she have have two night of sound sleep , and have not only lose all trace of fatigue , but feel as if she have a great deal of superfluous strength -- that be to say , more strength than she could manage to concentrate on any occupation . the day before , she have take long walk outside the grounds , and have pay two visit to the Parsonage ; but she never in she life tell any one the reason why she spend she time in that fruitless manner , and this morning she be rather angry with herself for she childish restlessness . to -day be to be spend quite differently . what be there to be do in the village ? oh dear ! nothing . everybody be well and have flannel ; nobody 's pig have die ; and it be morning , when there be a general scrubbing of door and door - stone , and when it be useless to go into the school . but there be various subject that be try to get clear upon , and she resolve to throw herself energetically into the gravest of all . she sit down in the library before she particular little heap of book on political economy and kindred matter , out of which she be try to get light as to the best way of spend money so as not to injure one 's neighbor , or -- what come to the same thing -- so as to do they the most good . here be a weighty subject which , if she could but lay hold of it , would certainly keep she mind steady . Unhappily she mind slip off it for a whole hour ; and at the end she find herself read sentence twice over with a intense consciousness of many thing , but not of any one thing contain in the text . this be hopeless . should she order the carriage and drive to ? no ; for some reason or other she prefer stay at . but she vagrant mind must be reduce to order : there be a art in self - discipline ; and she walk round and round the brown library consider by what sort of manoeuvre she could arrest she wander thought . perhaps a mere task be the best means -- something to which she must go doggedly . be there not the geography of , in which she slackness have often be rebuk by ? she go to the cabinet of map and unrolled one : this morning she might make herself finally sure that be not on the coast , and fix she total darkness about the firmly on the shore of the . a map be a fine thing to study when you be dispose to think of something else , be make up of name that would turn into a chime if you go back upon they . set earnestly to work , bend close to she map , and utter the name in a audible , subdue tone , which often get into a chime . she look amusingly girlish after all she deep experience -- nodd she head and mark the name off on she finger , with a little pursing of she lip , and now and then break off to put she hand on each side of she face and say , " oh dear ! oh dear ! " there be no reason why this should end any more than a merry - go - round ; but it be at last interrupt by the opening of the door and the announcement of . the little old lady , whose bonnet hardly reach 's shoulder , be warmly welcome , but while she hand be be press she make many of she beaver - like noise , as if she have something difficult to say . " do sit down , " say , rol a chair forward . " be I want for anything ? I shall be so
so glad if I can do anything . " " I will not stay , " say , put she hand into she small basket , and hold some article inside it nervously ; " I have leave a friend in the churchyard . " she lapse into she inarticulate sound , and unconsciously draw forth the article which she be finger . it be the tortoise - shell lozenge - box , and feel the color mount to she cheek . " , " continue the timid little woman . " he fear he have offend you , and have beg I to ask if you will see he for a few minute . " do not answer on the instant : it be cross she mind that she could not receive he in this library , where she husband 's prohibition seem to dwell . she look towards the window . could she go out and meet he in the grounds ? the sky be heavy , and the tree have begin to shiver as at a come storm . besides , she shrank from go out to he . " do see he , , " say , pathetically ; " else I must go back and say no , and that will hurt he . " " yes , I will see he , " say . " pray tell he to come . " what else be there to be do ? there be nothing that she longe for at that moment except to see : the possibility of see he have thrust itself insistently between she and every other object ; and yet she have a throbbing excitement like a alarm upon she -- a sense that she be do something daringly defiant for he sake . when the little lady have trot away on she mission , stood in the middle of the library with she hand fall clasp before she , make no attempt to compose herself in a attitude of dignified unconsciousness . what she be least conscious of just then be she own body : she be think of what be likely to be in 's mind , and of the hard feeling that other have have about he . how could any duty bind she to hardness ? resistance to unjust dispraise have mingle with she feeling for he from the very first , and now in the rebound of she heart after she anguish the resistance be stronger than ever . " if I love he too much it be because he have be use so ill :" -- there be a voice within she say this to some imagined audience in the library , when the door be open , and she see before she . she do not move , and he come towards she with more doubt and timidity in he face than she have ever see before . he be in a state of uncertainty which make he afraid lest some look or word of he should condemn he to a new distance from she ; and be afraid of she _own_ emotion . she look as if there be a spell upon she , keep she motionless and hinder she from unclaspe she hand , while some intense , grave yearning be imprison within she eye . see that she do not put out she hand as usual , will pause a yard from she and say with embarrassment , " I be so grateful to you for see I . " " I want to see you , " say , have no other word at command . it do not occur to she to sit down , and do not give a cheerful interpretation to this queenly way of receive he ; but he go on to say what he have make up he mind to say . " I fear you think I foolish and perhaps wrong for come back so soon . I have be punish for my impatience . you know -- every one know now -- a painful story about my parentage . I know of it before I go away , and I always mean to tell you of it if -- if we ever meet again . " there be a slight movement in , and she unclasp she hand , but immediately fold they over each other . " but the affair be matter of gossip now , " will continue . " I wish you to know that something connect with it -- something which happen before I go away , help to bring I down here again . at least I think it excuse my coming . it be the idea of get to apply some money to a public purpose -- some money which he have think of give I . perhaps it be rather to 's credit that he privately offer I compensation for a old injury : he offer to give I a good income to make amend ; but I suppose you know the disagreeable story ? " will look doubtfully at , but he manner be gather some of the defiant courage with which he always think of this fact in he destiny . he add , " you know that it must be altogether painful to I . " " yes -- yes -- I know , " say , hastily . " I do not choose to accept a income from such a source . I be sure that you would not think well of I if I do so , " say . why should he mind say anything of that sort to she now ? she know that he have avow he love for she . " I feel that " -- he break off , nevertheless . " you act as I should have expect you to act , " say , she
she face brighten and she head become a little more erect on its beautiful stem . " I do not believe that you would let any circumstance of my birth create a prejudice in you against I , though it be sure to do so in other , " say , shak he head backward in he old way , and look with a grave appeal into she eye . " if it be a new hardship it would be a new reason for I to cling to you , " say , fervidly . " nothing could have change I but -- " she heart be swell , and it be difficult to go on ; she make a great effort over herself to say in a low tremulous voice , " but think that you be different -- not so good as I have believe you to be . " " you be sure to believe I better than I be in everything but one , " say , give way to he own feeling in the evidence of hers . " I mean , in my truth to you . when I think you doubt of that , I do not care about anything that be leave . I think it be all over with I , and there be nothing to try for -- only thing to endure . " " I do not doubt you any longer , " say , put out she hand ; a vague fear for he impell she unutterable affection . he take she hand and raise it to he lip with something like a sob . but he stand with he hat and glove in the other hand , and might have do for the portrait of a Royalist . still it be difficult to loose the hand , and , withdraw it in a confusion that distress she , look and move away . " see how dark the cloud have become , and how the tree be toss , " she say , walk towards the window , yet speak and move with only a dim sense of what she be do . will follow she at a little distance , and lean against the tall back of a leather chair , on which he venture now to lay he hat and glove , and free himself from the intolerable durance of formality to which he have be for the first time condemn in 's presence . it must be confess that he feel very happy at that moment lean on the chair . he be not much afraid of anything that she might feel now . they stand silent , not look at each other , but look at the evergreens which be be toss , and be show the pale underside of they leave against the blackening sky . will never enjoy the prospect of a storm so much : it deliver he from the necessity of go away . leave and little branch be hurl about , and the thunder be get nearer . the light be more and more sombre , but there come a flash of lightning which make they start and look at each other , and then smile . begin to say what she have be think of . " that be a wrong thing for you to say , that you would have have nothing to try for . if we have lose we own chief good , other people 's good would remain , and that be worth try for . some can be happy . I seem to see that more clearly than ever , when I be the most wretched . I can hardly think how I could have borne the trouble , if that feel have not come to I to make strength . " " you have never feel the sort of misery I feel , " say ; " the misery of know that you must despise I . " " but I have feel worse -- it be worse to think ill -- " have begin impetuously , but break off . will colore . he have the sense that whatever she say be utter in the vision of a fatality that keep they apart . he be silent a moment , and then say passionately -- " we may at least have the comfort of speak to each other without disguise . I must go away -- since we must always be divide -- you may think of I as one on the brink of the grave . " while he be speak there come a vivid flash of lightning which light each of they up for the other -- and the light seem to be the terror of a hopeless love . dart instantaneously from the window ; will follow she , seize she hand with a spasmodic movement ; and so they stand , with they hand clasp , like two child , look out on the storm , while the thunder give a tremendous crack and roll above they , and the rain begin to pour down . then they turn they face towards each other , with the memory of he last word in they , and they do not loose each other 's hand . " there be no hope for I , " say . " even if you love I as well as I love you -- even if I be everything to you -- I shall most likely always be very poor : on a sober calculation , one can count on nothing but a creeping lot . it be impossible for we ever to belong to each other . it be perhaps base of I to have ask for a word from you . I mean to go away into silence , but I have not be able to do what I mean
mean . " " do not be sorry , " say , in she clear tender tone . " I would rather share all the trouble of we parting . " she lip tremble , and so do he . it be never know which lip be the first to move towards the other lip ; but they kiss tremblingly , and then they move apart . the rain be dash against the window - pane as if a angry spirit be within it , and behind it be the great swoop of the wind ; it be one of those moment in which both the busy and the idle pause with a certain awe . sit down on the seat nearest to she , a long low ottoman in the middle of the room , and with she hand fold over each other on she lap , look at the drear outer world . will stand still a instant look at she , then seate himself beside she , and lay he hand on hers , which turn itself upward to be clasp . they sit in that way without look at each other , until the rain abate and begin to fall in stillness . each have be full of thought which neither of they could begin to utter . but when the rain be quiet , turn to look at . with passionate exclamation , as if some torture screw be threaten he , he start up and say , " it be impossible ! " he go and lean on the back of the chair again , and seem to be battle with he own anger , while she look towards he sadly . " it be as fatal as a murder or any other horror that divide people , " he burst out again ; " it be more intolerable -- to have we life maim by petty accident . " " no -- do not say that -- you life need not be maim , " say , gently . " yes , it must , " say , angrily . " it be cruel of you to speak in that way -- as if there be any comfort . you may see beyond the misery of it , but I do not . it be unkind -- it be throw back my love for you as if it be a trifle , to speak in that way in the face of the fact . we can never be marry . " " some time -- we might , " say , in a trembling voice . " when ? " say , bitterly . " what be the use of count on any success of mine ? it be a mere toss up whether I shall ever do more than keep myself decently , unless I choose to sell myself as a mere pen and a mouthpiece . I can see that clearly enough . I could not offer myself to any woman , even if she have no luxuries to renounce . " there be silence . 's heart be full of something that she want to say , and yet the word be too difficult . she be wholly possess by they : at that moment debate be mute within she . and it be very hard that she could not say what she want to say . will be look out of the window angrily . if he would have look at she and not go away from she side , she think everything would have be easier . at last he turn , still rest against the chair , and stretch he hand automatically towards he hat , say with a sort of exasperation , " good - by . " " oh , I can not bear it -- my heart will break , " say , start from she seat , the flood of she young passion bear down all the obstruction which have keep she silent -- the great tear rise and fall in a instant : " I do not mind about poverty -- I hate my wealth . " in a instant will be close to she and have he arm round she , but she draw she head back and hold he away gently that she might go on speaking , she large tear - fill eye look at he very simply , while she say in a sobb childlike way , " we could live quite well on my own fortune -- it be too much -- seven hundred a - year -- I want so little -- no new clothes -- and I will learn what everything cost . " . " though it be songe of old and yonge , that I sholde be to blame , Theyrs be the charge , that speak so large in hurtynge of my name . " -- the - . it be just after the Lords have throw out the : that explain how come to be walk on the slope of the lawn near the great conservatory at , hold the " " in he hand behind he , while he talk with a trout - fisher 's dispassionateness about the prospect of the country to . , the , and be sometimes seat on garden - chair , sometimes walk to meet little , who be be draw in he chariot , and , as become the infantine , be shelter by he sacred umbrella with handsome silken fringe . the lady also talk politics , though more fitfully . be strong on the intend creation of peer : she have it for certain from she cousin that have go over to the other side entirely at the instigation of he wife , who have scent peerage in the air from the very first introduction of the question , and would sign
sign she soul away to take precedence of she younger sister , who have marry a baronet . think that such conduct be very reprehensible , and remember that 's mother be a of . confess it be nicer to be " " than " , " and that never mind about precedence if she could have she own way . hold that it be a poor satisfaction to take precedence when everybody about you know that you have not a drop of good blood in you vein ; and again , stop to look at , say , " it would be very nice , though , if he be a Viscount -- and he lordship 's little tooth come through ! he might have be , if have be a . " " my dear , " say the Dowager , " 's title be worth far more than any new earldom . I never wish he father to be anything else than . " " oh , I only mean about 's little tooth , " say , comfortably . " but see , here be my uncle come . " she trip off to meet she uncle , while and come forward to make one group with the ladie . have slip she arm through she uncle 's , and he pat she hand with a rather melancholy " well , my dear ! " as they approach , it be evident that be look dejected , but this be fully accounted for by the state of politics ; and as he be shak hand all round without more greeting than a " well , you be all here , you know , " the rector say , laughingly -- " do not take the throw out of the so much to heart , Brooke ; you have get all the riff - raff of the country on you side . " " the , eh ? ah ! " say , with a mild distractedness of manner . " throw out , you know , eh ? the Lords be go too far , though . they will have to pull up . sad news , you know . I mean , here at home -- sad news . but you must not blame I , . " " what be the matter ? " say . " not another gamekeeper shot , I hope ? it be what I should expect , when a fellow like Trapp be let off so easily . " " ? no . let we go in ; I can tell you all in the house , you know , " say , nodd at the Cadwallader , to show that he include they in he confidence . " as to poacher like , you know , , " he continue , as they be enter , " when you be a magistrate , you will not find it so easy to commit . Severity be all very well , but it be a great deal easier when you have get somebody to do it for you . you have a soft place in you heart yourself , you know -- you be not a , a , that sort of thing . " be evidently in a state of nervous perturbation . when he have something painful to tell , it be usually he way to introduce it among a number of disjointed particular , as if it be a medicine that would get a milder flavor by mixing . he continue he chat with about the poacher until they be all seate , and Cadwallader , impatient of this drivelling , say -- " I be die to know the sad news . the gamekeeper be not shoot : that be settled . what be it , then ? " " well , it be a very trying thing , you know , " say . " I be glad you and the rector be here ; it be a family matter -- but you will help we all to bear it , . I have get to break it to you , my dear . " here look at -- " you 've no notion what it be , you know . and , , it will annoy you uncommonly -- but , you see , you have not be able to hinder it , any more than I have . there be something singular in thing : they come round , you know . " " it must be about , " say , who have be use to think of she sister as the dangerous part of the family machinery . she have seat herself on a low stool against she husband 's knee. fx " for 's sake let we hear what it be ! " say . " well , you know , , I could not help 's will : it be a sort of will to make thing worse . " " exactly , " say , hastily . " but _what_ be worse ? " " Dorothea be go to be marry again , you know , " say , nodd towards , who immediately look up at she husband with a frightened glance , and put she hand on he knee . be almost white with anger , but he do not speak . " Merciful heaven ! " say . " not to _yoing ? " nod , say , " yes ; to , " and then fall into a prudential silence . " you see , ! " say , wave she arm towards she husband . " another time you will admit that I have some foresight ; or rather you will contradict I and be just as blind as ever . You_ suppose that the young gentleman be go out of the country .
. " " so he might be , and yet come back , " say the rector , quietly " when do you learn this ? " say , not like to hear any one else speak , though find it difficult to speak himself . " yesterday , " say , meekly . " I go to . send for I , you know . it have come about quite suddenly -- neither of they have any idea two day ago -- not any idea , you know . there be something singular in thing . but be quite determined -- it be no use oppose . I put it strongly to she . I do my duty , . but she can act as she like , you know . " " it would have be better if I have call he out and shoot he a year ago , " say , not from bloody - mindedness , but because he need something strong to say . " really , , that would have be very disagreeable , " say . " be reasonable , . look at the affair more quietly , " say , sorry to see he good - natured friend so overmaster by anger . " that be not so very easy for a man of any dignity -- with any sense of right -- when the affair happen to be in he own family , " say , still in he white indignation . " it be perfectly scandalous . if have have a spark of honor he would have go out of the country at once , and never show he face in it again . however , I be not surprise . the day after 's funeral I say what ought to be do . but I be not listen to . " " you want what be impossible , you know , , " say . " you want he ship off . I tell you be not to be do as we like with : he have he idea . he be a remarkable fellow -- I always say he be a remarkable fellow . " " yes , " say , unable to repress a retort , " it be rather a pity you form that high opinion of he . we be indebt to that for he be lod in this neighborhood . we be indebt to that for see a woman like degrad herself by marry he . " make little stoppage between he clause , the word not come easily . " a man so mark out by she husband 's will , that delicacy ought to have forbide she from see he again -- who take she out of she proper rank -- into poverty -- have the meanness to accept such a sacrifice -- have always have a objectionable position -- a bad origin -- and , I _believe , be a man of little principle and light character . that be my opinion . " end emphatically , turn aside and cross he leg . " I point everything out to she , " say , apologetically -- " I mean the poverty , and abandon she position . I say , ' my dear , you do not know what it be to live on seven hundred a - year , and have no carriage , and that kind of thing , and go amongst people who do not know who you be . ' I put it strongly to she . but I advise you to talk to herself . the fact be , she have a dislike to 's property . you will hear what she say , you know . " " no -- excuse I -- I shall not , " say , with more coolness . " I can not bear to see she again ; it be too painful . it hurt I too much that a woman like should have do what be wrong . " " be just , , " say the easy , large - lip rector , who object to all this unnecessary discomfort . " . may be act imprudently : she be give up a fortune for the sake of a man , and we man have so poor a opinion of each other that we can hardly call a woman wise who do that . but I think you should not condemn it as a wrong action , in the strict sense of the word . " " yes , I do , " answer . " I think that commit a wrong action in marrying . " " my dear fellow , we be rather apt to consider a act wrong because it be unpleasant to we , " say the rector , quietly . like many man who take life easily , he have the knack of say a home truth occasionally to those who feel themselves virtuously out of temper . take out he handkerchief and begin to bite the corner . " it be very dreadful of , though , " say , wish to justify she husband . " she say she _never would marry again -- not anybody at all . " " I hear she say the same thing myself , " say , majestically , as if this be royal evidence . " oh , there be usually a silent exception in such case , " say . " the only wonder to I be , that any of you be surprise . you do nothing to hinder it . if you would have have down here to woo she with he philanthropy , he might have carry she off before the year be over . there be no safety in anything else . have prepare all this as beautifully as possible . he make himself disagreeable -- or
or it please to make he so -- and then he da she to contradict he . it be the way to make any trumpery tempting , to ticket it at a high price in that way . " " I do not know what you mean by wrong , Cadwallader , " say , still feel a little stung , and turn round in he chair towards the rector . " he be not a man we can take into the family . at least , I must speak for myself , " he continue , carefully keep he eye off . " I suppose other will find he society too pleasant to care about the propriety of the thing . " " well , you know , , " say , good - humoredly , nurse he leg , " I can not turn my back on . I must be a father to she up to a certain point . I say , ' my dear , I will not refuse to give you away . ' I have speak strongly before . but I can cut off the entail , you know . it will cost money and be troublesome ; but I can do it , you know . " nod at , and feel that he be both show he own force of resolution and propitiat what be just in the 's vexation . he have hit on a more ingenious mode of parrying than he be aware of . he have touch a motive of which be asham . the mass of he feeling about 's marriage to be due partly to excusable prejudice , or even justifiable opinion , partly to a jealous repugnance hardly less in 's case than in 's . he be convince that the marriage be a fatal one for . but amid that mass run a vein of which he be too good and honorable a man to like the avowal even to himself : it be undeniable that the union of the two estate -- and -- lie charmingly within a ring - fence , be a prospect that flatter he for he son and heir . hence when noddingly appeal to that motive , feel a sudden embarrassment ; there be a stoppage in he throat ; he even blush . he have find more word than usual in the first jet of he anger , but 's propitiation be more clogging to he tongue than 's caustic hint . but be glad to have room for speech after she uncle 's suggestion of the marriage ceremony , and she say , though with as little eagerness of manner as if the question have turn on a invitation to dinner , " do you mean that be go to be marry directly , uncle ? " " in three week , you know , " say , helplessly . " I can do nothing to hinder it , , " he add , turn for a little countenance toward the rector , who say -- " -- I -- should not make any fuss about it . if she like to be poor , that be she affair . nobody would have say anything if she have marry the young fellow because he be rich . plenty of beneficed clergy be poorer than they will be . here be , " continue the provoke husband ; " she vex she friend by I : I have hardly a thousand a - year -- I be a lout -- nobody could see anything in I -- my shoe be not the right cut -- all the man wonder how a woman could like I . upon my word , I must take 's part until I hear more harm of he . " " Humphrey , that be all sophistry , and you know it , " say he wife . " everything be all one -- that be the beginning and end with you . as if you have not be a Cadwallader ! do any one suppose that I would have take such a monster as you by any other name ? " " and a clergyman too , " observ with approbation . " can not be say to have descende below she rank . it be difficult to say what be , eh , ? " give a small grunt , which be less respectful than he usual mode of answer he mother . look up at he like a thoughtful kitten . " it must be admit that he blood be a frightful mixture ! " say Cadwallader . " the cuttle - fish fluid to begin with , and then a rebellious polish fiddler or dancing - master , be it ?-- and then a old clo -- " " , , " say the rector , rise . " it be time for we to go . " " after all , he be a pretty sprig , " say , rise too , and wish to make amend . " he be like the fine old portrait before the idiot come in . " " I will go with you , " say , start up with alacrity . " you must all come and dine with I to - morrow , you know -- eh , , my dear ? " " you will , -- will not you ? " say , take she husband 's hand . " oh , of course , if you like , " say , pull down he waistcoat , but unable yet to adjust he face good - humoredly . " that be to say , if it be not to meet anybody else . ' : " no , no , no , " say , understand the condition . " Dorothea would not come , you know ,
, unless you have be to see she . " when and be alone , she say , " do you mind about my have the carriage to go to , , ? " " what , now , directly ? " he answer , with some surprise . " yes , it be very important , " say . " remember , , I can not see she , " say . " not if she give up marrying ? " " what be the use of say that ?-- however , I be go to the stable . I will tell to bring the carriage round . " think it be of great use , if not to say that , at least to take a journey to Lowick in order to influence 's mind . all through they girlhood she have feel that she could act on she sister by a word judiciously place -- by open a little window for the daylight of she own understanding to enter among the strange color lamps by which habitually see . and the naturally feel more able to advise she childless sister . how could any one understand so well as do or love she so tenderly ? , busy in she boudoir , feel a glow of pleasure at the sight of she sister so soon after the revelation of she intend marriage . she have prefigure to herself , even with exaggeration , the disgust of she friend , and she have even fear that might be keep aloon from she . " of , I be delighted to see you ! " say , put she hand on 's shoulders , and beam on she . " I almost think you would not come to I . " " I have not bring Arthur , because I be in a hurry , " say , and they sit down on two small chair opposite each other , with they knee touching . " you know , , it be very bad , " say , in she placid guttural , look as prettily free from humor as possible . " you have disappoint we all so . and I can not think that it ever _will be -- you never can go and live in that way . and then there be all you plan ! you never can have thought of that . would have take any trouble for you , and you might have go on all you life do what you like . " " on the contrary , dear , " say , " I never could do anything that I like . I have never carry out any plan yet . " " because you always want thing that would not do . but other plan would have come . and how can you marry , that we none of we ever think you _could marry ? it shock so dreadfully . and then it be all so different from what you have always been . you would have because he have such a great soul , and be so and dismal and learn ; and now , to think of marry , who have get no estate or anything . I suppose it be because you must be make yourself uncomfortable in some way or other . " laugh . " well , it be very serious , , " say , become more impressive . " how will you live ? and you will go away among queer people . and I shall never see you -- and you will not mind about little -- and I think you always would -- " 's rare tear have get into she eye , and the corner of she mouth be agitate . " dear , " say , with tender gravity , " if you do not ever see I , it will not be my fault . " " yes , it will , " say , with the same touch distortion of she small featur . " how can I come to you or have you with I when can not bear it ?-- that be because he think it be not right -- he think you be so wrong , . but you always be wrong : only I can not help love you . and nobody can think where you will live : where can you go ? " " I be go to , " say . " how can you always live in a street ? and you will be so poor . I could give you half my thing , only how can I , when I never see you ? " " , , " say , with gentle warmth . " take comfort : perhaps will forgive I some time . " " but it would be much better if you would not be marry , " say , dry she eye , and return to she argument ; " then there would be nothing uncomfortable . and you would not do what nobody think you could do . always say you ought to be a queen ; but this be not at all be like a queen . you know what mistake you have always be make , , and this be another . nobody think a proper husband for you . and you _say you would never be marry again . " " it be quite true that I might be a wiser person , , " say , " and that I might have do something better , if I have be better . but this be what I be go to do . I have promise to marry ; and I be go to marry he . " the tone in which say this be a note that have long learn to recognize . she be silent a
a few moment , and then say , as if she have dismiss all contest , " be he very fond of you , ? " " I hope so . I be very fond of he . " " that be nice , " say , comfortably . " only I rather you have such a sort of husband as be , with a place very near , that I could drive to . " smile , and look rather meditative . presently she say , " I can not think how it all come about . " think it would be pleasant to hear the story . " I dare say not , " say - Dorothea , pinch she sister 's ching . " if you know how it come about , it would not seem wonderful to you . " " can not you tell I ? " say , settle she arm cozily . " no , dear , you would have to feel with I , else you would never know . " . " then go the jury out whose name be , -good , , - , - loose , , High - mind , , , , - light , , who every one give in he private verdict against he among themselves , and afterwards unanimously conclude to bring he in guilty before the judge . and first among themselves , , the foreman , say , I see clearly that this man be a heretic . then say -good , away with such a fellow from the earth ! ay , say , for I hate the very look of he . then say love - lust , I could never endure he . nor I , say - loose ; for he would be always condemn my way . hang he , hang he , say . a sorry scrub , say High - mind . my heart riseth against he , say . he be a rogue , say . hanging be too good for he , say . let we despatch he out of the way say - light . then say , might I have all the world give I , I could not be reconcile to he ; therefore let we forthwith bring he in guilty of death . " -- 's . when immortal make he picture of the persecuting passion bring in they verdict of guilty , who pity faithful ? that be a rare and bless lot which some greatest man have not attaine , to know ourselves guiltless before a condemning crowd -- to be sure that what we be denounce for be solely the good in we . the pitiable lot be that of the man who could not call himself a martyr even though he be to persuade himself that the man who ston he be but ugly passion incarnate -- who know that he be ston , not for professe the , but for not be the man he profess to be . this be the consciousness that be wither under while he make he preparations for depart from , and go to end he stricken life in that sad refuge , the indifference of new face . the duteous merciful constancy of he wife have deliver he from one dread , but it could not hinder she presence from be still a tribunal before which he shrank from confession and desire advocacy . he equivocation with himself about the death of Raffles have sustain the conception of a Omniscience whom he pray to , yet he have a terror upon he which would not let he expose they to judgment by a full confession to he wife : the act which he have wash and dilute with inward argument and motive , and for which it see comparatively easy to win invisible pardon -- what name would she call they by ? that she should ever silently call he act be what he could not bear . he feel shroude by she doubt : he get strength to face she from the sense that she could not yet feel warrant in pronouncing that worst condemnation on he . some time , perhaps -- when he be die -- he would tell she all : in the deep shadow of that time , when she hold he hand in the gather darkness , she might listen without recoiling from he touch . perhaps : but concealment have be the habit of he life , and the impulse to confession have no power against the dread of a deeper humiliation . he be full of timid care for he wife , not only because he deprecate any harshness of judgment from she , but because he feel a deep distress at the sight of she suffering . she have send she daughter away to board at a school on the coast , that this crisis might be hide from they as far as possible . set free by they absence from the intolerable necessity of accounting for she grief or of behold they frightened wonder , she could live unconstrainedly with the sorrow that be every day streak she hair with whiteness and make she eyelid languid . " tell I anything that you would like to have I do , , " have say to she ; " I mean with regard to arrangement of property . it be my intention not to sell the land I possess in this neighborhood , but to leave it to you as a safe provision . if you have any wish on such subject , do not conceal it from I . " a few day afterwards , when she have return from a visit to she brother 's , she begin to speak to she husband on a subject which have for some time be in she mind . "
" I _should like to do something for my brother 's family , ; and I think we be bound to make some amend to and she husband . say must leave the town , and he practice be almost good for nothing , and they have very little left to settle anywhere with . I would rather do without something for ourselves , to make some amend to my poor brother 's family . " do not wish to go nearer to the fact than in the phrase " make some amend ; " know that she husband must understand she . he have a particular reason , which she be not aware of , for wincing under she suggestion . he hesitat before he say -- " it be not possible to carry out you wish in the way you propose , my dear . have virtually reject any further service from I . he have return the thousand pound which I lent he . advance he the sum for that purpose . here be he letter . " the letter seem to cut severely . the mention of 's loan seem a reflection of that public feeling which hold it a matter of course that every one would avoid a connection with she husband . she be silent for some time ; and the tear fall one after the other , she ching trembl as she wip they away . , sit opposite to she , ach at the sight of that grief - worn face , which two month before have be bright and blooming . it have a to keep sad company with he own withered featur . urge into some effort at comfort she , he say -- " there be another means , , by which I might do a service to you brother 's family , if you like to act in it . and it would , I think , be beneficial to you : it would be a advantageous way of manage the land which I mean to be yours . " she look attentive . " once think of undertake the management of in order to place you nephew F there . the stock be to remain as it be , and they be to pay a certain share of the profit instead of a ordinary rent . that would be a desirable beginning for the young man , in conjunction with he employment under . would it be a satisfaction to you ? " " yes , it would , " say , with some return of energy . " poor Walter be so cast down ; I would try anything in my power to do he some good before I go away . we have always be brother and sister . " " you must make the proposal to yourself , , " say , not like what he have to say , but desire the end he have in view , for other reason besides the consolation of he wife . " you must state to he that the land be virtually yours , and that he need have no transaction with I . Communications can be make through . I mention this , because give up be my agent . I can put into you hand a paper which he himself draw up , state condition ; and you can propose he renew acceptance of they . I think it be not unlikely that he will accept when you propose the thing for the sake of you nephew . " . " coeur se sature d'amour comme would 'un sel divin qui le conserve ; de la l'incorruptible adherence de ceux qui se so not aimes de l'aube de la vie , et la fraicheur des vielle amour prolonge . existe un embaumement d'amour . et que so not fait et . Cette vieillesse la , ressemblance do soir avec l'aurore . " -- : L'homme qui rit . , hear enter the passage about tea - time , open the parlor - door and say , " there you be , . have you have you dinner ? " ( 's meal be much subordinate to " business . " ) " oh yes , a good dinner -- cold mutton and I do not know what . where be ? " " in the garden with , I think . " " be not come yet ? " " no . be you go out again without take tea , ? " say , see that she absent - minded husband be put on again the hat which he have just take off . " no , no ; I be only go to Mary a minute . " be in a grassy corner of the garden , where there be a swing loftily hang between two pear-tree . she have a pink kerchief tie over she head , make a little poke to shade she eye from the level sunbeam , while she be give a glorious swing to , who laugh and scream wildly . see she father , leave the swing and go to meet he , push back the pink kerchief and smile afar off at he with the involuntary smile of loving pleasure . " I come to look for you , , " say . " let we walk about a bit . " know quite well that she father have something particular to say : he eyebrow make they pathetic angle , and there be a tender gravity in he voice : these thing have be sign to she when she be 's age . she put she arm within he , and they turn by the row of nut - tree . " it will be a sad while before you can be marry , , " say she father , not look at she ,
, but at the end of the stick which he hold in he other hand . " not a sad while , father -- I mean to be merry , " say , laughingly . " I have be single and merry for four - and - twenty year and more : I suppose it will not be quite as long again as that . " then , after a little pause , she say , more gravely , bend she face before she father 's , " if you be contente with ? " screw up he mouth and turn he head aside wisely . " now , father , you do praise he last . you say he have a uncommon notion of stock , and a good eye for thing . " " do I ? " say , rather slyly . " yes , I put it all down , and the date , anno , and everything , " say . " you like thing to be neatly book . and then he behavior to you , father , be really good ; he have a deep respect for you ; and it be impossible to have a better temper than have . " " ay , ay ; you want to coax I into think he a fine match . " " no , indeed , father . I do not love he because he be a fine match . " " what for , then ? " " oh , dear , because I have always love he . I should never like scold any one else so well ; and that be a point to be think of in a husband . " " you mind be quite settled , then , ? " say , return to he first tone . " there be no other wish come into it since thing have be go on as they have be of late ? " ( mean a great deal in that vague phrase ;) " because , better late than never . a woman must not force she heart -- she will do a man no good by that . " " my feeling have not change , father , " say , calmly . " I shall be constant to as long as he be constant to I . I do not think either of we could spare the other , or like any one else better , however much we might admire they . it would make too great a difference to we -- like see all the old place alte , and change the name for everything . we must wait for each other a long while ; but know that . " instead of speak immediately , stand still and screw he stick on the grassy walk . then he say , with emotion in he voice , " well , I have get a bit of news . what do you think of go to live at , and manage the land there ? " " how can that ever be , father ? " say , wonderingly . " he would manage it for he aunt Bulstrode . the poor woman have be to I begge and pray . she want to do the lad good , and it might be a fine thing for he . with save , he might gradually buy the stock , and he have a turn for farming . " " oh , would be so happy ! it be too good to believe . " " ah , but mind you , " say , turn he head warningly , " I must take it on _my_ shoulders , and be responsible , and see after everything ; and that will grieve you mother a bit , though she may not say so . have need be careful . " " perhaps it be too much , father , " say , check in she joy . " there would be no happiness in bring you any fresh trouble . " " Nay , nay ; work be my delight , child , when it do not vex you mother . and then , if you and get marry , " here 's voice shook just perceptibly , " he will be steady and save ; and you have get you mother 's cleverness , and mine too , in a woman 's sort of way ; and you will keep he in order . he will be come by - and - by , so I want to tell you first , because I think you would like to tell _him by yourselves . after that , I could talk it well over with he , and we could go into business and the nature of thing . " " oh , you dear good father ! " cry , put she hand round she father 's neck , while he bend he head placidly , willing to be caress . " I wonder if any other girl think she father the best man in the world ! " " Nonsense , child ; you will think you husband better . " " impossible , " say , relapse into she usual tone ; " husband be a inferior class of man , who require keep in order . " when they be enter the house with , who have run to join they , see at the orchard - gate , and go to meet he . " what fine clothes you wear , you extravagant youth ! " say , as stand still and raise he hat to she with playful formality . " you be not learn economy . " " now that be too bad , , " say . " just look at the edge of these coat- cuff ! it be only
only by dint of good brushing that I look respectable . I be save up three suit -- one for a wedding - suit . " " how very droll you will look !-- like a gentleman in a old fashion - book . " " oh no , they will keep two year . " " two year ! be reasonable , , " say , turn to walk . " do not encourage flatter expectation . " " why not ? one live on they better than on unflattering one . if we can not be marry in two year , the truth will be quite bad enough when it come . " " I have hear a story of a young gentleman who once encourage flatter expectation , and they do he harm . " " , if you have get something discouraging to tell I , I shall bolt ; I shall go into the house to . I be out of spirit . my father be so cut up -- home be not like itself . I can not bear any more bad news . " " should you call it bad news to be tell that you be to live at , and manage the farm , and be remarkably prudent , and save money every year till all the stock and furniture be you own , and you be a distinguished agricultural character , as say -- rather stout , I fear , and with the and sadly weather - worn ? " " you do not mean anything except nonsense , ? " say , color slightly nevertheless . " that be what my father have just tell I of as what may happen , and he never talk nonsense , " say , look up at now , while he grasp she hand as they walk , till it rather hurt she ; but she would not complain . " oh , I could be a tremendously good fellow then , , and we could be marry directly . " " not so fast , sir ; how do you know that I would not rather defer we marriage for some year ? that would leave you time to misbehave , and then if I like some one else better , I should have a excuse for jilt you . " " pray do not joke , , " say , with strong feeling . " tell I seriously that all this be true , and that you be happy because of it -- because you love I best . " " it be all true , , and I be happy because of it -- because I love you best , " say , in a tone of obedient recitation . they linger on the door - step under the steep - roof porch , and almost in a whisper say -- " when we be first engage , with the umbrella-ring , , you use to -- " the spirit of joy begin to laugh more decidedly in 's eye , but the fatal come run to the door with yappe behind he , and , bounce against they , say -- " and ! be you ever come in ? -- or may I eat you cake ? " Finale . every limit be a begin as well as a ending . who can quit young life after be long in company with they , and not desire to know what befell they in they after - year ? for the fragment of a life , however typical , be not the sample of a even web : promise may not be keep , and a ardent outset may be follow by declension ; latent power may find they long - wait opportunity ; a past error may urge a grand retrieval . marriage , which have be the bourne of so many narrative , be still a great begin , as it be to and , who keep they honeymoon in , but have they first little one among the thorn and thistle of the wilderness . it be still the beginning of the home epic -- the gradual conquest or irremediable loss of that complete union which make the advancing year a climax , and age the harvest of sweet memory in common . some set out , like Crusader of old , with a glorious equipment of hope and enthusiasm and get break by the way , want patience with each other and the world . all who have care for and will like to know that these two make no such failure , but achieve a solid mutual happiness . surprise he neighbor in various way . he become rather distinguished in he side of the county as a theoretic and practical farmer , and produce a work on the " Cultivation of and the Economy of - " which win he high congratulation at agricultural meeting . in Middlemarch admiration be more reserved : most person there be inclined to believe that the merit of 's authorship be due to he wife , since they have never expect to write on turnip and mangel - wurzel . but when write a little book for she boy , call " story of great , take from , " and have it print and publish by & , , every one in the town be willing to give the credit of this work to , observe that he have be to the , " where the ancient be study , " and might have be a clergyman if he have choose . in this way it be make clear that have never be deceive , and that there be no need to praise anybody for write a book , since it be always do by somebody else . moreover , remain unswervingly steady . some year
year after he marriage he tell that he happiness be half owe to , who give he a strong pull - up at the right moment . I can not say that he be never again misl by he hopefulness : the yield of crop or the profit of a cattle sale usually fall below he estimate ; and he be always prone to believe that he could make money by the purchase of a horse which turn out badly -- through this , observe , be of course the fault of the horse , not of 's judgment . he keep he love of horsemanship , but he rarely allow himself a day 's hunting ; and when he do so , it be remarkable that he submit to be laugh at for cowardliness at the fence , seem to see and the boy sit on the five - barred gate , or show they curly head between hedge and ditch . there be three boy : be not discontent that she bring forth men-children only ; and when wish to have a girl like she , she say , laughingly , " that would be too great a trial to you mother . " in she declining year , and in the diminished lustre of she housekeeping , be much comfort by she perception that two at least of 's boy be real Vincys , and do not " feature the Garth . " but secretly rejoice that the youngest of the three be very much what she father must have be when he wear a round jacket , and show a marvellous nicety of aim in play at marble , or in throw stone to bring down the mellow pear . and , who be uncle and aunt before they be well in they teens , dispute much as to whether nephew or niece be more desirable ; contend that it be clear girl be good for less than boy , else they would not be always in petticoat , which show how little they be mean for ; whereupon , who argue much from book , get angry in reply that make coat of skins for both and alike -- also it occur to she that in the the man too wore petticoat . but this latter argument , obscur the majesty of the former , be one too many , for answer contemptuously , " the more spooney they ! " and immediately appeal to he mother whether boy be not better than girl . pronounce that both be alike naughty , but that boy be undoubtedly stronger , could run faster , and throw with more precision to a greater distance . with this oracular sentence be well satisfied , not mind the naughtiness ; but take it ill , she feeling of superiority be stronger than she muscle . never become rich -- he hopefulness have not lead he to expect that ; but he gradually save enough to become owner of the stock and furniture at , and the work which put into he hand carry he in plenty through those " bad time " which be always present with farmer . , in she matronly day , become as solid in figure as she mother ; but , unlike she , give the boy little formal teaching , so that be alarm lest they should never be well grounde in grammar and geography . nevertheless , they be find quite forward enough when they go to school ; perhaps , because they have like nothing so well as be with they mother . when be ride home on winter evening he have a pleasant vision beforehand of the bright hearth in the wainscoted parlor , and be sorry for other man who could not have for they wife ; especially for . " he be ten time worthier of you than I be , " could now say to she , magnanimously . " to be sure he be , " answer ; " and for that reason he could do better without I . but you -- I shudder to think what you would have be -- a curate in debt for horse - hire and cambric pocket -handkerchief ! " on inquiry it might possibly be find that and still inhabit -- that the creeping plant still cast the foam of they blossom over the fine stone - wall into the field where the walnut - tree stand in stately row -- and that on sunny day the two lover who be first engage with the umbrella - ring may be see in white - haire placidity at the open window from which , in the day of old , have often be order to look out for . 's hair never become white . he die when he be only fifty , leave he wife and child provide for by a heavy insurance on he life . he have gain a excellent practice , alternate , accord to the season , between and a bathing - place ; have write a treatise on , a disease which have a good deal of wealth on its side . he skill be rely on by many pay patient , but he always regard himself as a failure : he have not do what he once mean to do . he acquaintance think he enviable to have so charme a wife , and nothing happen to shake they opinion . never commit a second compromising indiscretion . she simply continue to be mild in she temper , inflexible in she judgment , dispose to admonish she husband , and able to frustrate he by stratagem . as the year go on he oppose she less and less , whence conclude that he have learn the value of she opinion ; on the other hand , she have a more thorough conviction of
of he talents now that he gain a good income , and instead of the threaten cage in provide one all flower and gilding , fit for the bird of paradise that she resemble . in brief , be what be call a successful man . but he die prematurely of diphtheria , and afterwards marry a elderly and wealthy physician , who take kindly to she four child . she make a very pretty show with she daughter , drive out in she carriage , and often speak of she happiness as " a reward " -- she do not say for what , but probably she mean that it be a reward for she patience with , whose temper never become faultless , and to the last occasionally let slip a bitter speech which be more memorable than the sign he make of he repentance . he once call she he basil plant ; and when she ask for a explanation , say that be a plant which have flourish wonderfully on a murdered man 's brain . have a placid but strong answer to such speeches . why then have he choose she ? it be a pity he have not have , whom he be always praise and place above she . and thus the conversation end with the advantage on 's side . but it would be unjust not to tell , that she never utter a word in depreciation of , keep in religious remembrance the generosity which have come to she aid in the sharpest crisis of she life . herself have no dream of be praise above other woman , feel that there be always something better which she might have do , if she have only be better and know better . still , she never repent that she have give up position and fortune to marry , and he would have hold it the greatest shame as well as sorrow to he if she have repent . they be bound to each other by a love stronger than any impulse which could have mar it . no life would have be possible to which be not fill with emotion , and she have now a life fill also with a beneficent activity which she have not the doubtful pain of discovering and mark out for herself . will become a ardent public man , work well in those time when reform be begin with a young hopefulness of immediate good which have be much check in we day , and get at last return to parliament by a constituency who pay he expense . Dorothea could have like nothing better , since wrongs exist , than that she husband should be in the thick of a struggle against they , and that she should give he wifely help . many who know she , think it a pity that so substantive and rare a creature should have be absorb into the life of another , and be only know in a certain circle as a wife and mother . but no one state exactly what else that be in she power she ought rather to have do -- not even , who go no further than the negative prescription that she ought not to have marry . but this opinion of he do not cause a lasting alienation ; and the way in which the family be make whole again be characteristic of all concerned . could not resist the pleasure of corresponding with and ; and one morning when he pen have be remarkably fluent on the prospect of , it run off into a invitation to the , which , once write , could not be do away with at less cost than the sacrifice ( hardly to be conceive ) of the whole valuable letter . during the months of this correspondence have continually , in he talk with , be presuppose or hint that the intention of cut off the entail be still maintain ; and the day on which he pen give the daring invitation , he go to expressly to intimate that he have a stronger sense than ever of the reason for take that energetic step as a precaution against any mixture of low blood in the heir of the Brookes . but that mor something exciting have happen at the Hall . a letter have come to which make she cry silently as she read it ; and when , unused to see she in tear , ask anxiously what be the matter , she burst out in a wail such as he have never hear from she before . " Dorothea have a little boy . and you will not let I go and see she . and I be sure she want to see I . and she will not know what to do with the baby -- she will do wrong thing with it . and they think she would die . it be very dreadful ! suppose it have be I and little , and have be hinder from come to see I ! I wish you would be less unkind , ! " " good heaven , ! " say , much wrotch upon , " what do you wish ? I will do anything you like . I will take you to tow to - morrow if you wish it . " and do wish it . it be after this that come , and meet the Baronet in the grounds , begin to chat with he in ignorance of the news , which for some reason do not care to tell he immediately . but when the entail be touch on in the usual way , he say , " my dear sir , it be not for I to dictate to you , but for my part I would let that alone . I would
