. I . contents . introduction . Preface . book I . chapter I . of write live in general , and particularly of , with a word by the bye of and others_ chapter ii . , he birth , parentage , education , and great endowment , with a word or two concerning ancestors_ . the curate , the chambermaid , and others_ . what happen after they journey to London_ . the death of , with the affectionate and mournful behaviour of he widow , and the great purity of Andrews_ . writ a letter to he sister pamela_ . _Saying of wise man . a dialogue between the lady and she maid ; and a panegyric , or rather satire , on the passion of love , in the sublime style_ . _In which , after some very fine writing , the history go on , and relate the interview between the lady and ; where the latter hath set a example which we despair of see follow by he sex in this vicious age_ . what pass between the lady and ; in which we prophesy there be some stroke which every one will not truly comprehend at the first reading_ . write another letter ; he transaction with , & c. , with he departure from Booby_ . of several new matter not expected_ . _Contain many surprizing adventur which meet with on the road , scarce credible to those who have never travel in a stage - coach_ chapter XIII . what happen to during he sickness at the inn , with the curiious discourse between he and , the parson of the parish_ . _Be very full of adventure which succeed each other at the inn_ . show how tow - wouse be a little mollified ; and how officious and the surgeon be to prosecute the thief : with a dissertation accounting for they zeal , and that of many other person not mention in this history_ . the escape of the thief . 's disappointment . the arrival of two very extraordinary personage , and the introduction of parson Adam to parson barnabas_ . _a pleasant discourse between the two parson and the bookseller , which be break off by a unlucky accident happen in the inn , which produce a dialogue between - wouse and she maid of no gentle kind ._ . the history of Betty the chambermaid , and a account of what occasion the violent scene in the preceding chapter_ . chapter I . _on division in authors_ chapter ii . _a surprizing instance of 's short memory , with the unfortunate consequence which it brotch on joseph_ chapter iii . the opinion of two lawyer concern the same gentleman , with 's inquiry into the religion of he host_ chapter iv . the history of , or the unfortunate jilt_ dreadful quarrel which happen at the inn where the company dine , with its bloody consequence to Adams_ . _Conclusion of the unfortunate jilt_ . _a very short chapter , in which parson go a great way_ . _a notable dissertation by ; wherein that gentleman appear in a political light_ . in which the gentleman discant on bravery and heroic virtue , till a unlucky accident put a end to the discourse_ . _Give a account of the strange catastrophe of the preceding adventure , which draw poor Adam into fresh calamity ; and who the woman be who owe the preservation of she chastity to he victorious arm_ . what happen to they while before the justice . a chapter very full of learning_ . _a very delightful adventure , as well to the person concerned as to the good - natured reader_ chapter XIII . _a dissertation concern high people and low people , with 's departure in no very good temper of mind , and the evil plight in which she leave and he company list of iLLUSTRATIONs . Portrait of , from in the , " Joseph , I be sorry to hear such complaint against you " the present he a thank on . there be few amusement more dangerous for a author than the indulgence in ironic description of he own work . if the irony be depreciatory , posterity be but too likely to say , " many a true word be speak in jest ; " if it be encomiastic , the same ruthless and ungrateful critic be but too likely to take it as a involuntary confession of folly and vanity . but when Field , in one of he serio-comic introduction to , describe it as " this prodigious work , " he all unintentionally ( for he be the least pretentious of man ) anticipat the verdict which posterity almost at once , and with ever - increase suffrage of the best judge as time go on , be about to pass not merely upon this particular book , but upon he whole genius and he whole production as a novelist . he work in other kind be of a very different order of excellence . it be sufficientely interesting at time in itself ; and always more than sufficientely interesting as he ; for which reason , as well as for the further one that it be comparatively little know , a considerable selection from it be offer to the reader in the last two volume of this edition . until the present occasion ( which make it necessary that I should acquaint myself with it ) I own that my own knowledge of these miscellaneous writing be by no means thorough . it be now pretty complete ; but the idea which I previously have of they at first and second hand , though a little improved , have not very materially alte . though in all this hack - work Fielding display , partially and at interval , the same quality
quality which he display eminently and constantly in the four great book here give , he be not , as the french idiom express it , _dand son assiette , in he own natural and impregnable disposition and situation of character and ability , when he be occupy on it . the novel be for he that _assiette ; and all he novel be here . although live in quite modern time , although by family and connection he be of a higher rank than most man of letter , and although he genius be at once recognise by he contemporary so soon as it display itself in its proper sphere , he biography until very recently be by no means full ; and the most recent research , include those of -- a crintic unsurpassed for combination of literary faculty and knowledge of the eighteenth century -- have not altogether suffice to fill up the gaps . he family , say to have descende from a member of the great house of who come to in the reign of , distinguished itself in the of the Ros , and in the seventeenth century be advanced to the peerage of in and ( later ) of in . the novelist be the grandson of , of , the fifth son of the first of of this creation . the 's third son , , enter the army , serve under , and marry or , daughter of a judge of the 's . they eldest son be , who be bear on 22 , 1707 , and have a uncertain number of brother and sister of the whole blood . after he first wife 's death , ( for he attain that rank ) marry again . the most remarkable offspring of the first marriage , next to , be he sister , also a novelist , who write ; of the second , , afterwards , who , though blind , succeed he half - brother as a magistrate , and in that office combine a equally honourable record with a longer tenure . Fielding be bear at in , the seat of he maternal grandfather ; but most of he early youth be spend at in , to which he father remove after the judge 's death . he be say to have receive he first education under a parson of the neighbourhood name , in whom a very uncomplimentary tradition see the original of . he be then certainly send to , where he do not waste he time as regards learn , and make several valuable friend . but the date of he entering and leave school be alike unknown ; and he subsequent sojourn at for two year -- though there be no reason to doubt it -- depend even less upon any positive documentary evidence . this famous still have a great repute as a training school in law , for which profession he be intend ; but the reason why he do not receive the even then far more usual completion of a public school education by a sojourn at or may be suspect to be different . it may even have have something to do with a curiious escapade of he about which not very much be know -- a attempt to carry off a pretty heiress of , name . even at , however , seem to have be unable or unwilling to pay he son 's expense , which must have be far less there than at a ; and 's return to in 1728 - 29 be say to have be due to sheer impecuniosity . when he return to , he father be good enough to make he a allowance of L200 nominal , which appear to have be equivalent to L0 actual . and as practically nothing be know of he for the next six or seven year , except the fact of he have work industriously enough at a large number of not very good play of the lighter kind , with a few poem and miscellany , it be reasonably enough suppose that he live by he pen . the only product of this period which have keep ( or indeed which ever receive ) competent applause be , or the of , a follow of course of the , but full of humour and spirit . the most successful of he other dramatic work be the doctor_ and the _Miser , adaptations of 's famous piece . he undoubt connection with the stage , and the fact of the contemporary existence of a certain , help suggestion of less dignified occupations as actor , booth - keeper , and so forth ; but these have long be discredite and indeed disprove . in or about 1735 , when be twenty - eight , we find he in a new , a more brilliant and agreeable , but even a more transient phase . he have marry ( we do not know when or where ) , one of three sister who live at ( it be to be observe that Fielding 's entire connection , both in life and letter , be with the western county and ) , who be certainly of competent means , and for whose allege illegitimacy there be no evidence but a unsupported fling of that old maid of , . the description both of and of be say to have be take from this lady ; she good look and she amiability be as well establish as anything of the kind can be in the absence of photograph and affidavit ; and it be certain that she husband be passionately attach to she , during they too short married life . he method , however , of show he affection smack in some way too much of the foible which he have attribute to , and of those which
which we must suspect would also have exhibit , if he have not be adopt as 's heir , and have not have 's fortune to share and look forward to . it be true that grave breach have be make by recent criticism in the very picturesque and circumstantial story tell on the subject by , the first of 's biographer . this legend be that Field , have succeed by the death of he mother to a small estate at , worth about L200 a year , and have receive L1500 in ready money as he wife 's fortune , get through the whole in three year by keep open house , with a large retinue in " costly yellow livery , " and so forth . in detail , this story have be simply riddle . he mother have die long before ; he be certainly not away from three year , or anything like it ; and so forth . at the same time , the best and soberest judge agree that there be a intrinsic probability , a consensus ( if a vague one ) of tradition , and a chain of almost unmistakably personal reference in the novel , which plead for a certain amount of truth , at the bottom of a much embellished legend . at any rate , if Fielding establish himself in the country , it be not long before he return to town ; for early in 1736 we find he back again , and not merely a playwright , but lessee of the " " in the Haymarket . the play which he produce here -- satirico - political piece , such as _pasquin_ and the _Historical register _-- be popular enough , but offend the government ; and in 1737 a new bill regulate theatrical performance , and institut the 's control , be pass . this measure put a end directly to the " great 's , " as Fielding have call he troop , and indirectly to its manager 's career as a playwright . he do indeed write a few piece in future year , but they be of the smallest importance . after this check he turn at last to a serious profession , enter himself of the in of the same year , and be call three year later ; but during these year , and indeed for some time afterwards , we information about he be still of the vaguest character . nobody doubt that he have a large share in the , a essay - periodical on the usual eighteenth - century model , which begin to appear in 1739 , and which be still occasionally consult for the work that be certainly or probably he . he go the western Circuit , and attend the , after he be call , give up he contribution to periodical soon after that event . but he soon return to literature proper , or rather make he _debut_ in it , with the immortal book now republish . the _History of the Adventure of , and he , appear in 1742 , and its author receive from , the publisher , the sum of L183 , 11s . even greater work have fetch much smaller sum ; but it will be admit that andrews_ be not dear . the advantage , however , of present a survey of a author 's life uninterrupt by criticism be so clear , that what have to be say about may be conveniently postpone for the moment . immediately after its publication the author fall back upon miscellaneous writing , and in the next year ( 1743 ) collect and issue three volume of _Miscellanies . in the two first volume the only thing of much interest be the unfinished and unequal , but in part powerful , from this world to the next , a attempt of a kind which and other , follow , have make very popular with the time . but the third volume of the deserve a less modest and gregarious appearance , for it contain , and be wholly occupy by , the wonderful and terrible satire of , the greatest piece of pure irony in out of . after the publication of the book , a great calamity come on Fielding . he wife have be very ill when he write the preface ; soon afterwards she be dead . they have take the chance , have make the choice , that the more prudent and less wise student - hero and heroine of 's and Art_ have shunn ; they have no doubt " sigh deep , laugh free , Starve , feast , despair , " and we need not question , that they have also " be happy . " except this sad event and its rather incongruous sequel , 's marriage to he wife 's maid -- a marriage , however , which do not take place till full four year later , and which by all account supply he with a faithful and excellent companion and nurse , and he child with a kind stepmother -- little or nothing be again know of this elusive man of genius between the publication of the in 1743 , and that of in 1749 . the second marriage itself in 1747 ; a interview which have with he rather more than a year earlier ( one of the very few direct interview we have ) ; the publication of two anti-Jacobite newspaper ( Fielding be always a strong and ) , call the true patriot_ and the _Jacobite 's journal_ in 1745 and the follow year ; some indistinct tradition about residence at and elsewhere , and some , more precise but not much more authenticated , respect patronage by the of , , , and other , pretty well sum up the whole . be publish in
in ( a favourite month with Fielding or he publisher Millar ) 1749 ; and as it bring he the , for those day , very considerable sum of L600 to which add another hundred later , the novelist must have be , for a time at any rate , relieve from he chronic penury . but he have already , by 's interest , secure he first and last piece of preferment , be make of the peace for , a office on which he enter with characteristic vigour . he be qualified for it not merely by a solid knowledge of the law , and by great natural abilitie , but by he thorough kindness of heart ; and , perhaps , it may also be add , by he long year of queer experience on ( as would have say ) the " burn marl " of the . very shortly afterwards he be choose chairman of quarter sessions , and establish himself in . the magistrate of that time occupy a most singular position , and be more like a french Prefect of Police or even a of than a mere justice . yet he be ill pay . Fielding say that the emolument , which before he accession have but be L500 a year of " dirty " money , be by he own action but L300 of clean ; and the work , if properly perform , be very severe . that he perform it properly all competent evidence show , a foolish , inconclusive , and I fear it must be say emphatically snobbish story of 's notwithstanding . in particular , he break up a gang of cut - throat thief , which have be the terror of . but he tenure of the post be short enough , and scarcely extend to five year . he health have long be break , and he be now constantly attack by gout , so that he have frequently to retreat on from , or he suburban cottage of , . but he do not relax he literary work . he pen be active with pamphlet concern he office ; _amelia_ , he last novel , appear towards the close of 1751 ; and next year see the beginning of a new paper , the , which appear twice a week , run for the greater part of the year , and die in . it be great author do not see that month twice again . in the spring of 1753 he grow worse ; and after a year 's struggle with ill health , hard work , and hard weather , lesser measure be pronounce useless , be persuade to try the " , " of which he have leave so charme a record in the to . he leave on 26 , 1754 , reach in , and , die there on the 8th of , be bury in the cemetery of the . of not many writer perhaps do a clearer notion , as far as they personality go , exist in the general mind that interest itself at all in literature than of Fielding . yet more than once a warning have be sound , especially by he best and most recent biographer , to the effect that this idea be found upon very little warranty of scripture . the truth be , that as the forego record -- which , brief as it be , be a sufficiently faithful summary -- will have show , we know very little about Fielding . we have hardly any letter of he , and so lack the best by far and the most revealing of all character - portrait ; we have but one important autobiographic fragment , and though that be of the highest interest and value , it be write far in the valley of the shadow of death , it be not in the least retrospective , and it afford but dim and inferential light on he younger , healthier , and happier day and way . he come , moreover , just short of one set of man of letter , of whom we have a great deal of personal knowledge , and just beyond another . he be neither of those about , nor of those about . no intimate friend of he have leave we anything elaborate about he . on the other hand , we have a far from inconsiderable body of documentary evidence , of a kind often by no means trustworthy . the best part of it be contain in the letter of he cousin , , and the reminiscence or family tradition of she grand - daughter , . but , vivacious and agreeable as she be , have with all she talent a very considerable knack of writing for effect , of draw strong contrast and the like ; and it be not quite certain that she see very much of Field in the last and most interesting third of he life . another witness , , to less knowledge and equally dubious accuracy , add decide ill - will , which may have be due partly to the shrinking of a dilettante and a fop from a burly Bohemian ; but I fear be also consequent upon the fact that could not afford to despise 's birth , and know he to be vastly he own superior in genius . we hear something of he again from ; and hate he with the hatred of dissimilar genius , of inferior social position , and , lastly , of the cat for the dog who touzle and worry she . partly inherit or share 's aversion , partly be blinded to 's genius by he aggressive Whiggery . I fear , too , that he be incapable of appreciate it for reason other than political . it be certain that ,
, sane and robust as he be , be never quite at ease before genius of the gigantic kind , either in dead or liive . whether he do not like to have to look up too much , or be actually unable to do so , it be certain that , , , and Fielding , those four Atlante of English verse and prose , all affect he with lukewarm admiration , or with positive dislike , for which it be vain to attempt to assign any uniform secondary cause , political or other . it may be permit to hint another reason . all 's most sharp - sighted critic have notice , though most have discreetly refrain from insist on , he " thorn - in - the - flesh , " the combination in he of very strong physical passion with the deepest sense of the moral and religious duty of abstinence . it be perhaps impossible to imagine anything more distasteful to a man so buffet , than the extreme indulgence with which Fielding regards , and the easy freedom , not to say gusto , with which he depict , those who succumb to similar temptation . only by suppose the workings of some subtle influence of this kind be it possible to explain , even in so capricious a humour as 's , the famous and absurd application of the term " bar rascal " to a writer who , die almost young , after have for many year liv a life of pleasure , and then for four or five one of laborious official duty , have left work anything but small in actual bulk , and fertile with the most luxuriant growth of intellectual originality . partly on the _obiter dicta_ of person like these , partly on the still more tempting and still more treacherous ground of indication draw from he work , a Fielding of fantasy have be construct , which in 's admirable sketch attain real life and immortality as a creature of art , but which possess rather dubious claim as a historical character . it be astonish how this Fielding of fantasy sink and shrivel when we begin to apply the horrid test of criticism to he component part . the _eidolon , with ink ruffle and a towel round he head , sit in the Temple and dash off article for the ; then come criticism , hellish maid , and remind we that when the journal_ appear , 's wild oat , if ever sow at all , have be sown long ago ; that he be a busy magistrate and householder in ; and that , if he have towel round he head , it be probably less because he have exceed in liquor than because he of have give he a headache by want elaborate plan and scheme prepare at a hour 's notice . , apparently with some envy , tell we that he could " feel rapture with he cook -maid . " " which many have , " as remark , from Xanthias Phoceus downward ; but when we remember the historic fact that he marry this maid ( not a " cook - maid " at all ) , and that though he always speak of she with warm affection and hearty respect , such " rapture " as we have of he clearly refer to a very different woman , who be both a lady and a beautiful one , we begin a little to shake we head . Walpole at second - hand draw we a Fielding , pig with low companion in a house keep like a hedge tavern ; Field himself , within a year or two , show we more than half - undesignedly in the _Voyage to lisbon_ that he be very careful about the appointment and decency of he table , that he stand rather upon ceremony in regard to he own treatment of he family , and the treatment of they and himself by other , and that he be altogether a person orderly , correct , and even a little finikin . be there the slightest reasonable reason to regard this as a piece of hypocrisy , a vice as alien from the Fielding of fancy as from the Fielding of fact , and one the particular manifestation of which , in this particular place , would have be equally unlikely and unintelligible . it may be ask whether I propose to substitute for the traditional Fielding a quite different person , of regular habit and methodical economy . certainly not . the traditional estimate of great man be rarely wrong altogether , but it constantly have a habit of exaggerating and dramatise they characteristic . for some thing in 's career we have positive evidence of document , and evidence hardly less certain of probability . although I believe the best judge be now of opinion that he impecuniosity have be overcharge , he certainly have experience which do not often fall to the lot of even a cadet of good family in the eighteenth century . there can be no reasonable doubt that he be a man who have a leaning towards pretty girl and bottle of good wine ; and I should suppose that if the girl be kind and fairly winsome , he would not have insist that she should possess 's beauty , that if the bottle of good wine be not forthcome , he would have be very tolerant of a mug of good ale . he may very possibly have drink more than he should , and lose more than he could conveniently pay . it may be put down as morally ascertain that towards all these weakness of humanity , and other like unto they , he hold a attitude which be less that of the unassailable philosopher than that of the
the sympathiser , indulgent and excusing . in regard more especially to what be commonly call moral delinquency , this attitude be so decided as to shock some people even in those day , and many in these . just when the first sheet of this edition be pass through the press , a violent attack be make in a newspaper correspondence on the morality of by certain notorious advocate of Purity , as some say , of Pruriency and Prudery combine , accord to less complimentary estimate . even midway between the two period we find the admirable , a sister of 's own craft , who sometimes have touch of nature and satire not far inferior to he own , express by the mouth of one of she character with whom she seem partly to agree , the sentiment that he work be " vanish like noxious exhalation . " towards any misdoing by person of the one sex towards person of the other , when it involve brutality or treachery , Fielding be pitiless ; but when treachery and brutality be not concerned , he be , to say the least , facile . so , too , he probably know by experience -- he certainly know by native shrewdness and acquire observation -- that to look too much on the wine when it be red , or on the card when they be parti-coloured , be ruinous to health and fortune ; but he think not over badly of any man who do these thing . still it be possible to admit this in he , and to stop short of that idea of a careless and reckless _viveur_ which have so often be put forward . in particular , 's view of he childlike enjoyment of the moment have be , I think , much exaggerate by posterity , and be probably not a little mistaken by the lady herself . there be two mood in which the motto be diem , one a mood of simply childish hurry , the other one where behind the enjoyment of the moment lurk , and in which the enjoyment of the moment be not a little heighten by , that vast ironic consciousness of the before and after , which I at least see everywhere in the background of 's work . the man , however , of whom we know so little , concern we much less than the author of the work , of which it only rest with ourselves to know everything . I have above class Fielding as one of the four Atlante of English verse and prose , and I doubt not that both the phrase and the application of it to he will meet with question and demur . I have only to interject , as the crintic so often have to interject , a request to the court to take what I say in the sense in which i say it . I do not mean that , , , and be in all or even in most respects on a level . I do not mean that the three last be in all respects of the greatest name in English literature . I only mean that , in a certain quality , which for want of a better word I have choose to call , they stand alone . each of they , for the metaphor be applicable either way , carry a whole world on he shoulders , or look down on a whole world from he natural altitude . the worlds be different , but they be worlds ; and though the attitude of the giant be different also , it agree in all of they on the point of competence and strength . take whomsoever else we may among we man of letter , and we shall find this characteristic to be in comparison want . these four carry they world , and be not carry by it ; and if it , in the language so dear to Field himself , be to crash and shatter , the inquiry , " vous reste -t - il ?_ " could be answer by each , " _Moi!_ " the appearance which make be no doubt the most modest of the four . he have not 's absolute universality , and in fact not merely the poet 's tongue , but the poet 's thought seem to have be deny he . he sphere be not the ideal like 's . he irony , splendo as it be , fall a little short of that diabolical magnificence which exalt to the point whence , in he own way , he survey all the kingdom of the world , and the glory or vainglory of they . all Fielding 's critic have not the manner , in a certain sense modest , in another ostentatious , in which he seem to confine himself to the presentation of thing . they might have add to the presentation of thing English -- as they appear in , and on the western Circuit , and on the . but this apparent parochialism have never deceive good judge . it do not deceive , who have see the man and manners of very many clime ; it do not deceive , who be not especially prone to overvalue thing , and who could look down from twenty century on thing ephemeral . it deceive , indeed , I be tell , some excellent person at the present day , who think 's microcosm a " toylike world , " and imagine that russian Nihilist and french Naturalist have go beyond it . it will deceive no one who have liv for some competent space of time a life during which he have try to regard he fellow - creature and himself , as nearly as a mortal may , _sub specie aeternitatis .
. as this be in the main a introduction to a complete reprint of 's four great novel , the justification in detail of the estimate just make or hint of the novelist 's genius will be best and most fitly make by a brief successive discussion of the four as they be here present , with some subsequent remark on the here select . and , indeed , it be not fanciful to perceive in each book a somewhat different presentment of the author 's genius ; though in no one of the four be any one of he masterly quality absent . there be tenderness even in ; there be touch in of that irony of the , the last echo of which be hear amid the kindly resignation of the to , in the sentence , " whereas envy of all thing must expose we to danger from other , so contempt of all thing best secure we from they . " but on the whole it be safe to say that best present Fielding 's mischievous and playful wit ; he half - Lucianic half - Swiftian irony ; he unerring knowledge of human nature , and he constructive faculty ; _Amelia_ he tenderness , he _mitis sapientia_ , he observation of the detail of life . and first of the first . the history of the Adventure of and he friend be , as have be say above , publish in 1742 . a facsimile of the agreement between author and publisher will be give in the second volume of this series ; and it be not uninteresting to observe that the witness , young , be none other than the assert original of the immortal himself . he might , on 's plea in a tolerably well - know anecdote , have demand half of the L183 , 11s . of the other origin of the book we have a pretty full account , partly documentary . that it be " writ in the manner of , " and be intend as a kind of comic epic , be the author 's own statement -- no doubt as near the actual truth as be consistent with comic-epic theory . that there be resemblances to , to , and to other practitioner of the novel be certain ; and it be inevitable that there should be . of directer and more immediate models or start - point one be undoubted ; the other , though less generally admit , not much less indubitable to my mind . the parody of 's _pamela_ , which be little more than a year earlier ( 1740 ) , be avowed , open , flagrant ; nor do I think that the author be so soon carry away by the greater and larger tide of he own invention as some critic seem to hold . he be always more or less return to the ironic charge ; and the multiplicity of the assailant of 's virtue only disguise the resemblance to the long - draw dangers of from a single ravisher . but be also well acquaint with 's , and the resemblances between that book and be much stronger than 's admirer have always be willing to admit . this recalcitrance have , I think , be mainly due to the erroneous conception of as , if not a mere fribble , yet a Dresden - Shepherdess kind of writer , good at " preciousness " and patch - and - powder manners , but nothing more . there be , in fact , a very strong satiric and ironic touch in the author of , and I do not think that I be too rash when some year ago I venture to speak of he as " play Fielding to he own " in the _. origins , however , and indebtedness and the like , be , when great work be concerned , question for the study and the lecture - room , for the literary historian and the professional critic , rather than for the reader , however intelligent and alert , who wish to enjoy a masterpiece , and be content simply to enjoy it . it do not really matter how close to anything else something which possess independent goodness be ; the very utmost technical originality , the most spotless purity from the faintest taint of suggestion , will not suffice to confer merit on what do not otherwise possess it . whether , as I rather think , Field pursue the plan he have form _ab incepto_ , or whether he cavalierly neglect it , or whether the current of he own genius carry he off he leg and lande he , half against he will , on the shore of originality , be question for the , and , as I venture to think , not for the higher form in they . we have as it be ; and we may be abundantly thankful for it . the contents of it , as of all 's work in this kind , include certain thing for which the modern be scantly grateful . of late year , and not of late year only , there have grow up a singular and perhaps a ignorant impatience of digression , of episodes , of tale within a tale . the example of this which have be most maltreate be the " man of the " episode in ; but the story of the " " and of in we present subject , do not appear to I to be much less obnoxious to the censure ; and _Amelia_ contain more than one or two thing of the same kind . I they do not greatly disturb ; and I see many defences for they besides the obvious , and at a pinch sufficient one , that divagation of this kind exist in all
all 's spanish and french model , that the public of the day expect they , and so forth . this defence be enough , but it be easy to amplify and reintrench it . it be not by any mean the fact that the novel of adventure be the only or the chief form of fiction which prescribe or admit these episodic excursion . all the classical epic have they ; many eastern and other story present they ; they be common , if not invariable , in the abundant mediaeval literature of prose and verse romance ; they be not unknown by any means in the modern novel ; and you will very rarely hear a story tell orally at the dinner - table or in the smoking - room without something of the kind . there must , therefore , be something in they correspond to a inseparable accident of that most unchanging of all thing , human nature . and I do not think the special form with which we be here concerned by any mean the worst that they have take . it have the grand and prominent virtue of be at once and easily skippable . there be about and , about and , none of the treachery of the modern novelist , who induce the conscientious reader to drag through page , chapter , and sometimes volume which have nothing to do with the action , for fear he should miss something that have to do with it . these great man have a fearless frankness , and almost tell you in so many word when and what you may skip . therefore , if the " curious Impertinent , " and the " Baneful marriage , " and the " man of the , " and the " Lady of quality , " get in the way , when you desire to " read for the story , " you have nothing to do but turn the page till _finis come . the defence have already be make by a illustrious hand for 's inter-chapter and exordium . it appear to I to be almost more applicable to he insertion . and so we need not trouble ourselves any more either about the insertion or about the exordium . they both please I ; the second class have pleased person much better worth pleasing than I can pretend to be ; but the make or marr of the book lie elsewhere . I do not think that it lie in the construction , though 's follow of the ancient , both sincere and satiric , have impos a false air of regularity upon that . the of , of , and of they ghostly mentor and bodily guard be , in truth , a little haphazard , and might have be longer or shorter without any discreet man approve it the more or the less therefor . the real merits lie partly in the abounding humour and satire of the artist 's criticism , but even more in the marvellous vivacity and fertility of he creation . for the very first time in English prose fiction every character be alive , every incident be capable of have happen . there be lively touch in the romance ; but they be bury in verbiage , swath in stage costume , chok and fetter by they author 's want of art . the quality of 's knowledge of man be not much inferior to 's , or at least to 's ; but the range and the result of it be cramp by he single theological purpose , and he unvaried allegoric or typical form . why do not discover the of , I at least have never be able to put into any brief critical formula that satisfy I , and I have never see it put by any one else . he have not only see it afar off , he have make landing and descent on it ; he have carry off and exhibit in triumph native such as , as , as Moll Flander , as the ; but he have conquer , subdue , and settle no province therein . I like Pamela_ ; I like it better than some person who admire on the whole more than I do , seem to like it . but , as in all its author 's work , the handling seem to I academic -- the work out on paper of a ingeniously conceived problem rather than the observation or evolution of actual or possible life . I should not greatly fear to push the comparison even into foreign country ; but it be well to observe limit . let we be content with hold that in at least , without prejudice to anything further , Fielding be the first to display the qualitie of the perfect novelist as distinguished from the romancer . what be those quality , as show in andrews_ ? the faculty of arrange a probable and interesting course of action be one , of course , and show it here . but I do not think that it be at any time the greatest one ; and nobody deny that he make great advance in this direction later . the faculty of lively dialogue be another ; and that he have not often be refuse ; but much the same may be say of it . the interspersing of appropriate description be another ; but here also we shall not find he exactly a paragon . it be in character -- the chief _differentia_ of the novel as distinguished not merely from its elder sister the romance , and its cousin the drama , but still more from every other kind of literature -- that Field stand even here pre-eminent . no one that I can think of , except he greatest successor in the present century
century , have the same unfailing gift of breathing life into every character he create or borrows ; and even Thackeray draw , if I may use the phrase , he character more in the flat and less in the round than Fielding . whether in he once fail , we must discuss hereafter ; he have fail nowhere in _. some of he sketch may require the caution that they be eighteenth - century man and woman ; some the warning that they be obviously caricature , or set in design profile , or merely sketch . but they be all alive . the finical estimate of ( it be a horrid joy to think how perfectly capable Fielding be of have join in that practical joke of the young gentleman of , which make change he college ) , while dismiss these light thing with patronage , have to admit that " parson Adam be perfectly well , so be . " " they _were , , " say some one once , " they be more perfectly well , and in a higher kind , than anything you ever do ; though you be a pretty workman too . " yes , parson Adam be perfectly well , and so be . but so be they all . even the hero and heroine , tie and bound as they be by the necessity under which they maker lay of preserve 's - hood , and of make Fanny the example of a franker and less interested virtue than she sister - in - law that might have be , be surprisingly human where most writer would have make they stick . and the rest require no allowance . , few as be the stroke give to she , be not much less alive than . , monster and not at all delicate monster as he be , be also a man , and when he lay it down that no one even in he own house shall drink when he " caal vurst , " one can but pay he maker the tribute of that silent shudder of admiration which hail the addition of one more everlasting entity to the world of thought and fancy . and - wouse be real , and - wouse be more real still , and be real ; and the coachman , and grave -air , and all the wonderful crew from first to last . the dress they wear , the manners they exhibit , the law they live under , the very food and drink they live upon , be " past like the shadows on glass " -- to the comfort and rejoicing of some , to the greater or less sorrow of other . but _they be there -- alive , full of blood , full of breath as we be , and , in truth , I fear a little more so . for some purpose a century be a gap harder to cross and more estrange than a couple of millennium . but in they case the gap be nothing ; and it be not too much to say that as they have stand the harder test , they will stand the easier . there be very striking difference between and ; there be difference not less strike between and . but they likeness be a stranger and more wonderful thing than any of they unlikeness . it be that they be all woman , that they be all live citizeness of the Land of , the fashion wherehave passeth not away , and the franchise whereof , once acquire , assure immortality . note to . the text of this issue in the main follow that of the standard or first collect edition of 1762 . the variant which the author introduce in successive edition during he lifetime be not inconsiderable ; but for the purpose of the present issue it do not seem necessary or indeed desirable to take account of they . in the case of prose fiction , more than in any other department of literature , it be desirable that work should be read in the form which represent the completest intention and execution of the author . have any note be attempt ; for again such thing , in the case of prose fiction , be of very doubtful use , and supply pretty certain stumbling - block to enjoyment ; while in the particular case of , the annotation , unless extremely capricious , would have to be disgustingly full . far be it at any rate from the present editor to bury these delightful creation under a ugly crust of parallel passage and miscellaneous erudition . the sheet , however , have be carefully read in order to prevent the casual error which be will not to creep into frequently reprint text ; and the editor hope that if any such have escape he , the escape will not be attribute to wilful negligence . a few obvious error , in spelling of proper name , & c. , which occur in the 1762 version have be correct : but wherever the reading of that version be possible they have be prefer . the embellishment of the edition be partly fanciful and partly " documentary ; " so that it be hope both class of taste may have something to feed upon ._ author be . as it be possible the mere English reader may have a different idea of romance from the author of these little [ a ] volume , and may consequently expect a kind of entertainment not to be find , nor which be even intend , in the follow page , it may not be improper to premise a few word concern this kind of writing , which I do not remember to have see hithertoo attempt in we language . [ ]
] be originally publish in 2 vol . duodecimo . the Epic , as well as the , be divide into tragedy and comedy . Homer , who be the father of this species of poetry , give we a pattern of both these , though that of the latter kind be entirely lose ; which tell we , bear the same relation to comedy which he Iliad bear to tragedy . and perhaps , that we have no more instance of it among the writer of antiquity , be owing to the loss of this great pattern , which , have it survive , would have find its imitator equally with the other poem of this great original . and farther , as this poetry may be tragic or comic , I will not scruple to say it may be likewise either in verse or prose : for though it want one particular , which the crintic enumerate in the constituent part of a epic poem , namely metre ; yet , when any kind of writing contain all its other part , such as fable , action , character , sentiment , and diction , and be deficient in metre only , it seem , I think , reasonable to refer it to the epic ; at least , as no crintic hath thought proper to range it under any other head , or to assign it a particular name to itself . thus the Telemachus of the archbishop of appear to I of the epic kind , as well as the of ; indeed , it be much fairer and more reasonable to give it a name common with that species from which it differ only in a single instance , than to confound it with those which it resemble in no other . such be those voluminous work , commonly call Romances , namely , , , , , the , and innumerable other , which contain , as I apprehend , very little instruction or entertainment . now , a comic romance be a comic epic poem in prose ; differ from comedy , as the serious epic from tragedy : it be action be more extended and comprehensive ; contain a much larger circle of incidents , and introduce a greater variety of character . it differ from the serious romance in it be fable and action , in this ; that as in the one these be grave and solemn , so in the other they be light and ridiculous : it differ in its character by introduce person of inferior rank , and consequently , of inferior manners , whereas the grave romance set the highest before we : lastly , in its sentiment and diction ; by preserve the ludicrous instead of the sublime . in the diction , I think , burlesque itself may be sometimes admit ; of which many instance will occur in this work , as in the description of the battle , and some other place , not necessary to be point out to the classical reader , for whose entertainment those parody or burlesque imitation be chiefly calculate . but though we have sometimes admit this in we diction , we have carefully exclude it from we sentiment and character ; for there it be never properly introduce , unless in writing of the burlesque kind , which this be not intend to be . indeed , no two species of writing can differ more widely than the comic and the burlesque ; for as the latter be ever the exhibition of what be monstrous and unnatural , and where we delight , if we examine it , arise from the surprizing absurdity , as in appropriate the manners of the highest to the lowest , or _e converso_ ; so in the former we should ever confine ourselves strictly to nature , from the just imitation of which will flow all the pleasure we can this way convey to a sensible reader . and perhaps there be one reason why a comic writer should of all other be the least excuse for deviating from nature , since it may not be always so easy for a serious poet to meet with the great and the admirable ; but life everywhere furnish a accurate observer with the ridiculous . I have hint this little concerning burlesque , because I have often hear that name give to performance which have be truly of the comic kind , from the author 's have sometimes admit it in he diction only ; which , as it be the dress of poetry , doth , like the dress of man , establish character ( the one of the whole poem , and the other of the whole man ) , in vulgar opinion , beyond any of they greater excellence : but surely , a certain drollery in stile , where characters and sentiment be perfectly natural , no more constitute the burlesque , than a empty pomp and dignity of word , where everything else be mean and low , can entitle any performance to the appellation of the true sublime . and I apprehend my 's opinion of mere burlesque agree with mine , when he assert , there be no such thing to be find in the writings of the ancient . but perhaps I have less abhorrence than he profess for it ; and that , not because I have have some little success on the stage this way , but rather as it contribute more to exquisite mirth and laughter than any other ; and these be probably more wholesome physic for the mind , and conduce better to purge away spleen , melancholy , and ill affections , than be generally imagined . Nay , I will appeal to common observation , whether the same company be not find more full of good -
- humour and benevolence , after they have be sweeten for two or three hour with entertainment of this kind , than when sour by a tragedy or a grave lecture . but to illustrate all this by another science , in which , perhaps , we shall see the distinction more clearly and plainly , let we examine the work of a comic history painter , with those performance which the call , where we shall find the true excellence of the former to consist in the exactest copying of nature ; insomuch that a judicious eye instantly reject anything _outre , any liberty which the painter hath take with the feature of that _alma mater ; whereas in the we allow all licence -- its aim be to exhibit monster , not man ; and all distortion and exaggeration whatever be within its proper province . now , what be in painting , be in writing ; and in the same manner the comic writer and painter correlate to each other . and here I shall observe , that , as in the former the painter seem to have the advantage ; so it be in the latter infinitely on the side of the writer ; for the be much easier to paint than describe , and the to describe than paint . and though perhaps this latter species doth not in either science so strongly affect and agitate the muscle as the other ; yet it will be own , I believe , that a more rational and useful pleasure arise to we from it . he who should call the ingenious Hogarth a burlesque painter , would , in my opinion , do he very little honour ; for sure it be much easier , much less the subject of admiration , to paint a man with a nose , or any other feature , of a preposterous size , or to expose he in some absurd or monstrous attitude , than to express the affections of man on canva . it hath be think a vast commendation of a painter to say he figure seem to breathe ; but surely it be a much greater and nobler applause , that they appear to think . but to return . the only , as I have before say , fall within my province in the present work . nor will some explanation of this word be think impertinent by the reader , if he consider how wonderfully it hath be mistaken , even by writer who have profess it : for to what but such a mistake can we attribute the many attempt to ridicule the blackest villany , and , what be yet worse , the most dreadful calamity ? what could exceed the absurdity of a author , who should write the comedy of , with the merry incident of ripping up he mother 's belly ? or what would give a greater shock to humanity than a attempt to expose the misery of poverty and distress to ridicule ? and yet the reader will not want much learning to suggest such instance to himself . besides , it may seem remarkable , that , who be so fond and free of definition , hath not think proper to define the . indeed , where he tell we it be proper to comedy , he hath remark that villany be not its object : but he hath not , as I remember , positively assert what be . doth the , who hath write a treatise on this subject , though he show we many species of it , once trace it to its fountain . the only source of the true ( as it appear to I ) be affectation . but though it arise from one spring only , when we consider the infinite stream into which this one branch , we shall presently cease to admire at the copious field it afford to a observer . now , affectation proceed from one of these two cause , vanity or hypocrisy : for as vanity put we on affect false character , in order to purchase applause ; so hypocrisy set we on a endeavour to avoid censure , by conceal we vice under a appearance of they opposite virtue . and though these two cause be often confound ( for there be some difficulty in distinguishe they ) , yet , as they proceed from very different motive , so they be as clearly distinct in they operation : for indeed , the affectation which arise from vanity be nearer to truth than the other , as it hath not that violent repugnancy of nature to struggle with , which that of the hypocrite hath . it may be likewise note , that affectation doth not imply a absolute negation of those quality which be affect ; and , therefore , though , when it proceed from hypocrisy , it be nearly ally to deceit ; yet when it come from vanity only , it partake of the nature of ostentation : for instance , the affectation of liberality in a vain man differ visibly from the same affectation in the avaricious ; for though the vain man be not what he would appear , or hath not the virtue he affect , to the degree he would be think to have it ; yet it sit less awkwardly on he than on the avaricious man , who be the very reverse of what he would seem to be . from the discovery of this affectation arise the , which always strike the reader with surprize and pleasure ; and that in a higher and stronger degree when the affectation arise from hypocrisy , than when from vanity ; for to discover any one to be the exact reverse of what he affect , be more surprizing , and consequently more ridiculous
ridiculous , than to find he a little deficient in the quality he desire the reputation of . I might observe that we , who of all man understand the the best , hath chiefly use the hypocritical affectation . now , from affectation only , the misfortune and calamity of life , or the imperfection of nature , may become the object of ridicule . surely he hath a very ill - fram mind who can look on ugliness , infirmity , or poverty , as ridiculous in themselves : nor do I believe any man live , who meet a dirty fellow ride through the street in a cart , be strike with a idea of the from it ; but if he should see the same figure descend from he coach and six , or bolt from he chair with he hat under he arm , he would then begin to laugh , and with justice . in the same manner , be we to enter a poor house and behold a wretched family shiver with cold and languish with hunger , it would not incline we to laughter ( at least we must have very diabolical nature if it would ) ; but should we discover there a grate , instead of coal , adorn with flower , empty plate or china dish on the sideboard , or any other affectation of riche and finery , either on they person or in they furniture , we might then indeed be excused for ridicule so fantastical a appearance . much less be natural imperfectiond the object of derision ; but when ugliness aim at the applause of beauty , or lameness endeavour to display agility , it be then that these unfortunate circumstance , which at first move we compassion , tend only to raise we mirth . the poet carry this very far :-- none be for be what they be in fault , but for not be what they would be think . where if the metre would suffer the word ridiculous to close the first line , the thought would be rather more proper . great vice be the proper object of we detestation , smaller fault , of we pity ; but affectation appear to I the only true source of the . but perhaps it may be object to I , that I have against my own rule introduce vex , and of a very black kind , into this work . to which I shall answer : first , that it be very difficult to pursue a series of human action , and keep clear from they . secondly , that the vice to be find here be rather the accidental consequence of some human frailty or foible , than cause habitually exist in the mind . thirdly , that they be never set forth as the object of ridicule , but detestation . Fourthly , that they be never the principal figure at that time on the scene : and , lastly , they never produce the intend evil . have thus distinguished Andrews from the productions of romance writer on the one hand and burlesque writer on the other , and give some few very short hint ( for I intend no more ) of this species of writing , which I have affir to be hithertoo unattempted in we language ; I shall leave to my good - natured reader to apply my piece to my observation , and will detain he no longer than with a word concern the character in this work . and here I solemnly protest I have no intention to vilify or asperse any one ; for though everything be copy from the book of nature , and scarce a character or action produce which I have not take from my I own observation and experience ; yet I have use the utmost care to obscure the person by such different circumstance , degree , and colour , that it will be impossible to guess at they with any degree of certainty ; and if it ever happen otherwise , it be only where the failure characterize be so minute , that it be a foible only which the party himself may laugh at as well as any other . as to the character of , as it be the most glaring in the whole , so I conceive it be not to be find in any book now extant . it be desig a character of perfect simplicity ; and as the goodness of he heart will recommend he to the good - natured , so I hope it will excuse I to the gentleman of he cloth ; for whom , while they be worthy of they sacred order , no man can possibly have a greater respect . they will therefore excuse I , notwithstand the low adventure in which he be engage , that I have make he a clergyman ; since no other office could have give he so many opportunity of display he worthy inclination . the history of the Adventure of and I . chapter I . of write live in general , and particularly of ; with a word by the bye of and other ._ it be a trite but true observation , that example work more forcibly on the mind than precept : and if this be just in what be odious and blameable , it be more strongly so in what be amiable and praiseworthy . here emulation most effectually operate upon we , and inspire we imitation in a irresistible manner . a good man therefore be a standing lesson to all he acquaintance , and of far greater use in that narrow circle than a good book . but as it often happen that the best man be but little know , and consequently can not extend the usefulness of they
they example a great way ; the writer may be call in aid to spread they history farther , and to present the amiable picture to those who have not the happiness of know the original ; and so , by communicate such valuable pattern to the world , he may perhaps do a more extensive service to mankind than the person whose life originally afforde the pattern . in this light I have always regard those biographer who have record the action of great and worthy person of both sex . not to mention those antient writer which of late day be little read , be write in obsolete , and as they be generally think , unintelligible language , such as , , and other which I hear of in my youth ; we own language affords many of excellent use and instruction , finely calculate to sow the seed of virtue in youth , and very easy to be comprehend by person of moderate capacity . such as the history of the , who , by he brave and heroic action against man of large and athletic body , obtain the glorious appellation of the - killer ; that of a of , whose name be guy ; the life of and ; and above all , the history of those seven worthy personage , the Champion of . in all these delight be mix with instruction , and the reader be almost as much improve as entertained . but I pass by these and many other to mention two book lately publish , which represent a admirable pattern of the amiable in either sex . the former of these , which deal in male virtue , be write by the great person himself , who liv the life he hath record , and be by many think to have liv such a life only in order to write it . the other be communicate to we by a historian who borrow he light , as the common method be , from authentic papers and record . the reader , I believe , already conjecture , I mean the life of and of . how artfully doth the former , by insinuat that he escape be promote to the highest stations in and , teach we a contempt of worldly grandeur ! how strongly doth he inculcate a absolute submission to we superior ! Lastly , how completely doth he arm we against so uneasy , so wretch a passion as the fear of shame ! how clearly doth he expose the emptiness and vanity of that phantom , reputation ! what the female reader be teach by the memoir of be so well set forth in the excellent essay or letter prefix to the second and subsequent edition of that work , that it would be here a needless repetition . the authentic history with which I now present the public be a instance of the great good that book be likely to do , and of the prevalence of example which I have just observe : since it will appear that it be by keep the excellent pattern of he sister 's virtue before he eye , that be chiefly enable to preserve he purity in the midst of such great temptation . I shall only add that this character of male chastity , though doubtless as desirable and become in one part of the human species as in the other , be almost the only virtue which the great apologist hath not give himself for the sake of give the example to he reader . chapter ii . , he birth , parentage , education , and great endowment ; with a word or two concerning ancestor ._ , the hero of we ensuing history , be esteem to be the only son of and , and brother to the illustrious , whose virtue be at present so famous . as to he ancestor , we have search with great diligence , but little success ; be unable to trace they farther than he great - grandfather , who , as a elderly person in the parish remember to have hear he father say , be a excellent cudgel - player . whether he have any ancestor before this , we must leave to the opinion of we curiious reader , finde nothing of sufficient certainty to rely on . however , we can not omit insert a epitaph which a ingenious friend of ours hath communicate :-- stay , traveller , for underneath this pew lie fast asleep that merry man : when the last day 's great sun shall gild the sky , then he shall from he tomb get up and rise . be merry while thou canst : for surely thou Shalt shortly be as sad as he be now . the word be almost out of the stone with antiquity . but it be needless to observe that here be writ without a _s_ , and be , besides , a Christian name . my friend , moreover , conjecture this to have be the founder of that sect of laugh philosopher since call -andrew . to waive , therefore , a circumstance which , though mention in conformity to the exact rule of biography , be not greatly material , I proceed to thing of more consequence . indeed , it be sufficientely certain that he have as many ancestor as the best man living , and , perhaps , if we look five or six hundred year backwards , might be related to some persons of very great figure at present , whose ancestor within half the last century be bury in as great obscurity . but suppose , for argument 's sake , we should admit that he have no ancestor at all , but have spring up , accord to the modern phrase , out of
of a dunghill , as the pretend they themselves do from the earth , would not this autokopro [ a ] have be justly entitled to all the praise arise from he own virtue ? would it not be hard that a man who hath no ancestor should therefore be render incapable of acquire honou ; when we see so many who have no virtue enjoy the honour of they forefather ? at ten year old ( by which time he education be advance to write and read ) he be bound a apprentice , accord to the statute , to , a uncle of 's by the father 's side . Thomas have then a estate in he own hand , the young Andrews be at first employ in what in the country they call keep bird . he office be to perform the part the ancient assign to the , which deity the modern call by the name of o's ; but he voice be so extremely musical , that it rather allure the bird than terrify they , he be soon transplant from the field into the dog - kennel , where he be place under the huntsman , and make what the sportsman term whipper - in . for this place likewise the sweetness of he voice disqualify he ; the dog prefer the melody of he chiding to all the allur note of the huntsman , who soon become so incense at it , that he desire to provide otherwise for he , and constantly laid every fault the dog be at to the account of the poor boy , who be now transplant to the stable . here he soon give proof of strength and agility beyond he year , and constantly ride the most spirited and vicious horse to water , with a intrepidity which surprize every one . while he be in this station , he ride several race for , and this with such expertness and success , that the neighbour gentleman frequently solicite the knight to permit little ( for so he be call ) to ride they match . the best gamester , before they lay they money , always inquire which horse little be to ride ; and the bet be rather proportion by the rider than by the horse himself ; especially after he have scornfully refuse a considerable bribe to play booty on such a occasion . this extremely raise he character , and so please the , that she desire to have he ( be now seventeen year of age ) for she own footboy . [ ] in , spring from a dunghill . be now prefer from the stable to attend on he lady , to go on she errand , stand behind she chair , wait at she tea - table , and carry she prayer - book to church ; at which place he voice give he a opportunity of distinguishe himself by singe psalm : he behave likewise in every other respect so well at service , that it recommend he to the notice of , the curate , who take a opportunity one day , as he be drink a cup of ale in 's kitchen , to ask the young man several question concern religion ; with he answer to which he be wonderfully pleased . chapter III . the curate , the chambermaid , and other ._ be a excellent scholar . he be a perfect master of the and latin language ; to which he add a great share of knowledge in the Oriental tongue ; and could read and translate french , italian , and spanish . he have apply many year to the most severe study , and have treasure up a fund of learn rarely to be meet with in a university . he be , besides , a man of good sense , good part , and good nature ; but be at the same time as entirely ignorant of the way of this world as a infant just enter into it could possibly be . as he have never any intention to deceive , so he never suspect such a design in other . he be generous , friendly , and brave to a excess ; but simplicity be he characteristick : he do , no more than , apprehend any such passion as malice and envy to exist in mankind ; which be indeed less remarkable in a country parson than in a gentleman who hath pass he life behind the scene ,-- a place which hath be seldom think the school of innocence , and where a very little observation would have convince the great apologist that those passion have a real existence in the human mind . he virtue , and he other qualification , as they render he equal to he office , so they make he a agreeable and valuable companion , and have so much endeared and well recommend he to a bishop , that at the age of fifty he be provide with a handsome income of twenty - three pound a year ; which , however , he could not make any great figure with , because he live in a dear country , and be a little encumber with a wife and six child . it be this gentleman , who have , as I have say , observe the singular devotion of young Andrews , have find means to question he concern several particular ; as , how many book there be in the New testament ? which be they ? how many chapters they contain ? and such like : to all which , privately say , he answer much better than , or two other neighbour justex of the peace could probably have do . be wonderfully solicitous to know at what time , and by what opportunity , the
the youth become acquainted with these matters : tell he that he have very early learnt to read and write by the goodness of he father , who , though he have not interest enough to get he into a charity school , because a cousin of he father 's landlord do not vote on the right side for a churchwarden in a borough town , yet have be himself at the expense of sixpence a week for he learning . he tell he likewise , that ever since he be in 's family he have employ all he hour of leisure in reading good book ; that he have read the , the of , and a ; and that as often as he could , without be perceive , he have study a great good book which lay open in the hall window , where he have read , " as how the carry away half a church in sermon - time , without hurt one of the congregation ; and as how a field of corn run away down a hill with all the tree upon it , and cover another man 's meadow . " this sufficientely assure that the good book mean could be no other than 's . the curate , surprize to find such instance of industry and application in a young man who have never meet with the least encouragement , ask he , if he do not extremely regret the want of a liberal education , and the not have be bear of parent who might have indulge he talents and desire of knowledge ? to which he answer , " he hope he have profit somewhat better from the book he have read than to lament he condition in this world . that , for he part , he be perfectly content with the state to which he be call ; that he should endeaavor to improve he talent , which be all require of he ; but not repine at he own lot , nor envy those of he betters . " " well say , my lad , " reply the curate ; " and I wish some who have read many more good book , nay , and some who have write good book themselves , have profit so much by they . " Adam have no nearer access to or my lady than through the waiting -gentlewoman ; for be too apt to estimate man merely by they dress or fortune ; and my lady be a woman of gaiety , who have be blest with a town education , and never speak of any of she country neighbour by any other appellation than that of the brute . they both regard the curate as a kind of domestic only , belong to the parson of the parish , who be at this time at variance with the knight ; for the parson have for many year live in a constant state of civil war , or , which be perhaps as bad , of civil law , with himself and the tenant of he manor . the foundation of this quarrel be a modus , by set which aside a advantage of several shilling _per annum would have accrue to the rector ; but he have not yet be able to accomplish he purpose , and have reap hitherto nothing better from the suit than the pleasure ( which he use indeed frequently to say be no small one ) of reflec that he have utterly undone many of the poor tenant , though he have at the same time greatly impoverish himself . , the waiting - gentlewoman , be herself the daughter of a curate , preserve some respect for Adams : she profess great regard for he learning , and would frequently dispute with he on point of theology ; but always insist on a deference to be pay to she understanding , as she have be frequently at , and know more of the world than a country parson could pretend to . she have in these dispute a particular advantage over Adams : for she be a mighty affecter of hard word , which she use in such a manner that the parson , who durst not offend she by call she word in question , be frequently at some loss to guess she meaning , and would have be much less puzzl by a Arabian manuscript . Adams therefore take a opportunity one day , after a pretty long discourse with she on the essence ( or , as she pleas to term it , the incence ) of matter , to mention the case of young Andrews ; desire she to recommend he to she lady as a youth very susceptible of learning , and one whose instruction in he would himself undertake ; by which mean he might be qualified for a higher station than that of a footman ; and add , she know it be in he master 's power easily to provide for he in a better manner . he therefore desire that the boy might be leave behind under he care . " ! , " say , " do you think my lady will suffer any preamble about any such matter ? she be go to very concisely , and I be confidous would not leave behind she on any account ; for he be one of the genteelest young fellow you may see in a summer 's day ; and I be confidous she would as soon think of part with a pair of she grey mare , for she value herself as much on one as the other . " Adam would have interrupt , but she proceed : " and why be latin more necessitous for a footman than a gentleman ? it be very proper that you clergyman must
must learn it , because you can not preach without it : but I have hear gentleman say in , that it be fit for nobody else . I be confidous my lady would be angry with I for mention it ; and I shall draw myself into no such delemy . " at which word she lady 's bell rung , and be force to retire ; nor could he gain a second opportunity with she before they journey , which happen a few day afterwards . however , Andrews behave very thankfully and gratefully to he for he intend kindness , which he tell he he never would forget , and at the same time receive from the good man many admonition concern the regulation of he future conduct , and he perseverance in innocence and industry . . what happen after they journey to ._ no sooner be young Andrews arrive at than he begin to scrape a acquaintance with he party - colou breth , who endeavoure to make he despise he former course of life . he hair be cut after the newest fashion , and become he chief care ; he go abroad with it all the morning in papers , and drest it out in the afternoon . they could not , however , teach he to game , swear , drink , nor any other genteel vice the town abound with . he apply most of he leisure hour to music , in which he greatly improve himself ; and become so perfect a connoisseur in that art , that he lead the opinion of all the other footman at a opera , and they never condemn or applaude a single song contrary to he approbation or dislike . he be a little too forward in riot at the play - house and assemblie ; and when he attend he lady at church ( which be but seldom ) he behave with less see devotion than formerly : however , if he be outwardly a pretty fellow , he moral remain entirely uncorrupted , though he be at the same time smarter and genteeler than any of the beaus in town , either in or out of livery . he lady , who have often say of he that be the handsomest and genteelest footman in the kingdom , but that it be pity he want spirit , begin now to find that fault no longer ; on the contrary , she be frequently hear to cry out , " ay , there be some life in this fellow . " she plainly see the effect which the town air hath on the soberest constitution . she would now walk out with he into in a morning , and when tire , which happen almost every minute , would lean on he arm , and converse with he in great familiarity . whenever she steep out of she coach , she would take he by the hand , and sometimes , for fear of stumbling , press it very hard ; she admit he to deliver message at she bedside in a morning , leer at he at table , and indulge he in all those innocent freedom which woman of figure may permit without the least sully of they virtue . but though they virtue remain unsullied , yet now and then some small arrow will glance on the shadow of it , they reputation ; and so it fall out to , who happen to be walk arm - in - arm with one morning in , when and come accidentally by in they coach . " bless I , " say , " can I believe my eye ? be that ? " --" surely , " say . " but what make you surprize ? " --" why , be not that she footman ? " reply . at which Tattle laugh , and cry , " a old business , I assure you : be it possible you should not have hear it ? the whole town hath know it this half - year . " the consequence of this interview be a whisper through a hundred visit , which be separately perform by the two lady [ ] the same afternoon , and might have have a mischievous effect , have it not be stopt by two fresh reputation which be publish the day afterwards , and engross the whole talk of the town . [ ] it may seem a absurdity that should visit , as she actually do , to spread a know scandal : but the reader may reconcile this by suppose , with I , that , notwithstand what she say , this be she first acquaintance with it . but , whatever opinion or suspicion the scandalous inclination of defamer might entertain of 's innocent freedom , it be certain they make no impression on young Andrews , who never offer to encroach beyond the libertie which he lady allow he , -- a behaviour which she impute to the violent respect he preserve for she , and which serve only to heighten a something she begin to conceive , and which the next chapter will open a little farther . . the death of , with the affectionate and mournful behaviour of he widow , and the great purity of ._ at this time a accident happen which put a stop to those agreeable walk , which probably would have soon puffe up the cheek of fame , and cause she to blow she brazen trumpet through the town ; and this be no other than the death of , who , depart this life , leave he disconsolate lady confin to she house , as closely as if she herself have be attack by some violent disease . during the first six day the poor lady admit none but ,
, and three female friend , who make a party at card : but on the seventh she order , whom , for a good reason , we shall hereafter call , to bring up she tea - kettle . the lady be in bed , call to she , bay he sit down , and , have accidentally laid she hand on he , she ask he if he have ever be in love . answer , with some confusion , it be time enough for one so young as himself to think on such thing . " as young as you be , " reply the lady , " I be convince you be no stranger to that passion . come , , " say she , " tell I truly , who be the happy girl whose eye have make a conquest of you ? " return , that all the woman he have ever see be equally indifferent to he . " oh then , " say the lady , " you be a general lover . indeed , you handsome fellow , like handsome woman , be very long and difficult in fixing ; but yet you shall never persuade I that you heart be so insusceptible of affection ; I rather impute what you say to you secrecy , a very commendable quality , and what I be far from be angry with you for . nothing can be more unworthy in a young man , than to betray any intimacy with the ladie . " " lady ! madam , " say , " I be sure I never have the impudence to think of any that deserve that name . " " do not pretend to too much modesty , " say she , " for that sometimes may be impertinent : but pray answer I this question . suppose a lady should happen to like you ; suppose she should prefer you to all you sex , and admit you to the same familiarity as you might have hope for if you have be bear she equal , be you certain that no vanity could tempt you to discover she ? answer I honestly , ; have you so much more sense and so much more virtue than you handsome young fellow generally have , who make no scruple of sacrifice we dear reputation to you pride , without consider the great obligation we lay on you by we condescension and confidence ? can you keep a secret , my ? " " madam , " say he , " I hope you ladyship can not tax I with ever betraie the secret of the family ; and I hope , if you be to turn I away , I might have that character of you . " " I do not intend to turn you away , , " say she , and sigh ; " I be afraid it be not in my power . " she then raise herself a little in she bed , and discover one of the whitest neck that ever be see ; at which blush . " ! " say she , in a affected surprize , " what be I do ? I have trust myself with a man alone , naked in bed ; suppose you should have any wicked intention upon my honour , how should I defend myself ? " protest that he never have the least evil design against she . " no , " say she , " perhaps you may not call you design wick ; and perhaps they be not so . " -- he swore they be not . " you misunderstand I , " say she ; " I mean if they be against my honour , they may not be wick ; but the world call they so . but then , say you , the world will never know anything of the matter ; yet would not that be trust to you secrecy ? must not my reputation be then in you power ? would you not then be my master ? " beg she ladyship to be comforte ; for that he would never imagine the least wicked thing against she , and that he have rather die a thousand death than give she any reason to suspect he . " yes , " say she , " I must have reason to suspect you . be you not a man ? and , without vanity , I may pretend to some charms . but perhaps you may fear I should prosecute you ; indeed I hope you do ; and yet Heaven know I should never have the confidence to appear before a court of justice ; and you know , , I be of a forgive temper . tell I , , do not you think I should forgive you ? " --" indeed , madam , " say , " I will never do anything to disoblige you ladyship . " --" how , " say she , " do you think it would not disoblige I then ? do you think I would willingly suffer you ? " --" I do not understand you , madam , " say .--" do not you ? " say she , " then you be either a fool , or pretend to be so ; I find I be mistaken in you . so get you downstairs , and never let I see you face again ; you pretend innocence can not impose on I ." --" Madam , " say , " I would not have you ladyship think any evil of I . I have always endeavoure to be a dutiful servant both to you and my master . " --" o thou villain ! " answer my lady ; " why didst thou mention the name of
of that dear man , unless to torment I , to bring he precious memory to my mind ? " ( and then she burst into a fit of tear . ) " get thee from my sight ! I shall never endure thee more . " at which word she turn away from he ; and retreat from the room in a most disconsolate condition , and writ that letter which the reader will find in the next chapter . . writ a letter to he sister pamela._ " to , live with . " , -- since I receive you letter of you good lady 's death , we have have a misfortune of the same kind in we family . my worthy master die about four day ago ; and , what be worse , my poor lady be certainly gone distract . none of the servant expect she to take it so to heart , because they quarrell almost every day of they life : but no more of that , because you know , , I never love to tell the secret of my master 's family ; but to be sure you must have know they never love one another ; and I have hear she ladyship wish he honour dead above a thousand time ; but nobody know what it be to lose a friend till they have lose he . " do not tell anybody what I write , because I should not care to have folk say I discover what pass in we family ; but if it have not be so great a lady , I should have think she have have a mind to I . dear , do not tell anybody ; but she order I to sit down by she bedside , when she be in naked bed ; and she hold my hand , and talk exactly as a lady do to she sweetheart in a stage - play , which I have see in , while she want he to be no better than he should be . " if madam be mad , I shall not care for stay long in the family ; so I heartily wish you could get I a place , either at the squire 's , or some other neighbouring gentleman 's , unless it be true that you be go to be marry to , as folk talk , and then I should be very willing to be he clerk ; for which you know I be qualified , be able to read and to set a psalm . " I fancy I shall be discharge very soon ; and the moment I be , unless I hear from you , I shall return to my old master 's country - seat , if it be only to see parson Adam , who be the best man in the world . be a bad place , and there be so little good fellowship , that the next - door neighbour do not know one another . pray give my service to all friend that inquire for I . so I rest " you love brother , " . " as soon as have seal and direct this letter he walk downstairs , where he meet , with whom we shall take this opportunity to bring the reader a little better acquaint . she be a maiden gentlewoman of about forty - five year of age , who , have make a small slip in she youth , have continue a good maid ever since . she be not at this time remarkably handsome ; be very short , and rather too corpulent in body , and somewhat red , with the addition of pimple in the face . she nose be likewise rather too large , and she eye too little ; nor do she resemble a cow so much in she breath as in two brown glob which she carry before she ; one of she leg be also a little shorter than the other , which occasion she to limp as she walk . this fair creature have long cast the eye of affection on , in which she have not meet with quite so good success as she probably wish , though , besides the allurement of she native charms , she have give he tea , sweetmeat , wine , and many other delicacy , of which , by keep the key , she have the absolute command . , however , have not return the least gratitude to all these favour , not even so much as a kiss ; though I would not insinuate she be so easily to be satisfied ; for surely then he would have be highly blameable . the truth be , she be arrive at a age when she think she might indulge herself in any libertie with a man , without the danger of bring a third person into the world to betray they . she imagine that by so long a self - denial she have not only make amend for the small slip of she youth above hint at , but have likewise laid up a quantity of merit to excuse any future failings . in a word , she resolve to give a loose to she amorous inclination , and to pay off the debt of pleasure which she find she owed herself , as fast as possible . with these charms of person , and in this disposition of mind , she encounter poor at the bottom of the stair , and ask he if he would drink a glass of something good this morning . , whose spirit be not a little cast down , very readily and thankfully accept the offer ; and together they go into a closet , where , have deliver he a full glass of ratafia ,
, and desire he to sit down , thus begin :-- " sure nothing can be a more simple contract in a woman than to place she affections on a boy . if I have ever think it would have be my fate , I should have wish to die a thousand death rather than live to see that day . if we like a man , the lightest hint sophisticate . whereas a boy propose upon we to break through all the regulation of modesty , before we can make any oppression upon he . " , who do not understand a word she say , answer , " yes , madam . " --" yes , madam ! " reply with some warmth , " do you intend to result my passion ? be it not enough , ungrateful as you be , to make no return to all the favour I have do you ; but you must treat I with ironing ? Barbarous monster ! how have I deserve that my passion should be result and treat with ironing ? " " madam , " answer , " I do not understand you hard word ; but I be certain you have no occasion to call I ungrateful , for , so far from intend you any wrong , I have always love you as well as if you have be my own mother . " " how , sirrah ! " say in a rage ; " you own mother ? do you assinuate that I be old enough to be you mother ? I do not know what a stripling may think , but I believe a man would refer I to any green-sickness silly girl whatsomdever : but I ought to despise you rather than be angry with you , for refer the conversation of girl to that of a woman of sense . " --" madam , " say , " I be sure I have always value the honour you do I by you conversation , for I know you be a woman of learn . " --" yes , but , , " say she , a little soften by the compliment to she learn , " if you have a value for I , you certainly would have find some method of show it I ; for I be convict you must see the value I have for you . yes , , my eye , whether I would or no , must have declare a passion I can not conquer .-- oh ! ! " as when a hungry tigress , who long have traverse the wood in fruitless search , see within the reach of she claw a lamb , she prepare to leap on she prey ; or as a voracious pike , of immense size , survey through the liquid element a roach or gudgeon , which can not escape she jaw , open they wide to swallow the little fish ; so do prepare to lay she violent amorous hand on the poor , when luckily she mistress 's bell rung , and deliver the intend martyr from she clutch . she be obliged to leave he abruptly , and to defer the execution of she purpose till some other time . we shall therefore return to the , and give we reader some account of she behaviour , after she be leave by in a temper of mind not greatly different from that of the inflam Slipslop . . _Saying of wise man . a dialogue between the lady and she maid ; and a panegyric , or rather satire , on the passion of love , in the sublime style ._ it be the observation of some antient sage , whose name I have forget , that passion operate differently on the human mind , as disease on the body , in proportion to the strength or weakness , soundness or rottenness , of the one and the other . we hope , therefore , a judicious reader will give himself some pain to observe , what we have so greatly laboured to describe , the different operation of this passion of love in the gentle and cultivate mind of the , from those which it effect in the less polished and coarser disposition of . another philosopher , whose name also at present escape my memory , hath somewhere say , that resolution take in the absence of the beloved object be very apt to vanish in its presence ; on both which wise saying the follow chapter may serve as a comment . no sooner have leave the room in the manner we have before related than the lady , enrage at she disappointment , begin to reflect with severity on she conduct . she love be now change to disdain , which pride assist to torment she . she despise herself for the meanness of she passion , and for its ill success . however , she have now get the better of it in she own opinion , and determined immediately to dismiss the object . after much toss and turn in she bed , and many soliloquy , which if we have no better matter for we reader we would give he , she at last rng the bell as above mention , and be presently attend by , who be not much better pleased with than the lady herself . " , " say , " when do you see ? " the poor woman be so surprized at the unexpected sound of he name at so critical a time , that she have the greatest difficulty to conceal the confusion she be under from she mistress ; whom she answer , nevertheless , with pretty good confidence , though not entirely void of fear of suspicion , that she have not see he that morning .
. " I be afraid , " say , " he be a wild young fellow . " --" that he be , " say , " and a wick one too . to my knowledge he game , drink , swear , and fight eternally ; besides , he be horribly indict to wench . " -- " ay ! " say the lady , " I never hear that of he . " --" of madam ! " answer the other , " he be so lew a rascal , that if you ladyship keep he much longer , you will not have one virgin in you house except myself . and yet I can not conceive what the wench see in he , to be so foolishly fond as they be ; in my eye , he be as ugly a scarecrow as I ever upheld . " -- " Nay , " say the lady , " the boy be well enough . " -- " La! ma 'am , " cry , " I think he the ragmaticallest fellow in the family . " --" sure , , " say she , " you be mistaken : but which of the woman do you most suspect ? " --" Madam , " say , " there be the chambermaid , I be almost convict , be with child by he . " -- " ay ! " say the lady , " then pray pay she she wage instantly . I will keep no such slut in my family . and as for , you may discard he too . " --" would you ladyship have he pay off immediately ? " cry , " for perhaps , when be gone he may mmend : and really the boy be a good servant , and a strong healthy luscious boy enough . " -- " this morning , " answer the lady with some vehemence . " I wish , madam , " cry , " you ladyship would be so good as to try he a little longer . " --" I will not have my command dispute , " say the lady ; " sure you be not fond of he yourself ? " --" I , madam ! " cry , redden , if not blush , " I should be sorry to think you ladyship have any reason to respect I of fondness for a fellow ; and if it be you pleasure , I shall fulfil it with as much reluctance as possible . " -- " as little , I suppose you mean , " say the lady ; " and so about it instantly . " go out , and the lady have scarce take two turn before she fall to knock and ring with great violence . , who do not travel post haste , soon return , and be countermand as to , but order to send about she business without delay . she go out a second time with much greater alacrity than before ; when the lady begin immediately to accuse herself of want of resolution , and to apprehend the return of she affection , with its pernicious consequence ; she therefore apply herself again to the bell , and re-summon into she presence ; who again return , and be tell by she mistress that she have consider better of the matter , and be absolutely resolve to turn away ; which she order she to do immediately . , who know the violence of she lady 's temper , and would not venture she place for any Adonis or Hercules in the universe , leave she a third time ; which she have no sooner done , than the little , fear he have not yet do the lady 's business , take a fresh arrow with the sharpest point out of he quiver , and shoot it directly into she heart ; in other and plainer language , the lady 's passion get the better of she reason . she call back once more , and tell she she have resolve to see the boy , and examine he herself ; therefore bid she send he up . this waver in she mistress 's temper probably put something into the waiting - gentlewoman 's head not necessary to mention to the sagacious reader . be go to call she back again , but could not prevail with herself . the next consideration therefore be , how she should behave to when he come in . she resolve to preserve all the dignity of the woman of fashion to she servant , and to indulge herself in this last view of ( for that she be most certainly resolve it should be ) at he own expense , by first insulting and then discard he . of , what monstrous trick dost thou play with thy votary of both sex ! how dost thou deceive they , and make they deceive themselves ! they folly be thy delight ! they sigh make thee laugh , and they pang be thy merriment ! not the great , who turn man into monkey , wheel - barrow , and whatever else best humours he fancy , hath so strangely metamorphose the human shape ; nor the great Cibber , who confound all number , gender , and break through every rule of grammar at he will , hath so distort the english language as thou dost metamorphose and distort the human sense . thou puttest out we eye , stoppest up we ear , and takest away the power of we nostril ; so that we can neither see the largest object , hear the loudest noise , nor smell the most poignant perfume . again , when thou pleasest , thou canst make a molehill appear as a mountain , a 's -
- harp sound like a trumpet , and a daisy smell like a violet . thou canst make cowardice brave , avarice generous , pride humble , and cruelty tender - hear . in short , thou turnest the heart of man inside out , as a juggler doth a petticoat , and bringest whatsoever pleaseth thee out from it . if there be any one who doubt all this , let he read the next chapter . . _In which , after some very fine writing , the history go on , and relate the interview between the lady and ; where the latter hath set a example which we despair of see follow by he sex in this vicious age ._ now the rake have call for he breech , and , have well rub he drowsy eye , prepare to dress himself for all night ; by whose example he brother rake on earth likewise leave those bed in which they have sleep away the day . now Thetis , the good housewife , begin to put on the pot , in order to regale the good man Phoebus after he daily labour be over . in vulgar language , it be in the evening when attend he lady 's order . but as it become we to preserve the character of this lady , who be the heroine of we tale ; and as we have naturally a wonderful tenderness for that beautiful part of the human species call the fair sex ; before we discover too much of she frailty to we reader , it will be proper to give he a lively idea of the vast temptation , which overcome all the effort of a modest and virtuous mind ; and then we humbly hope he good nature will rather pity than condemn the imperfection of human virtue . [ ] Nay , the lady themselves will , we hope , be induce , by consider the uncommon variety of charms which in this young man 's person , to bridle they rampant passion for chastity , and be at least as mild as they violent modesty and virtue will permit they , in censur the conduct of a woman who , perhaps , be in she own disposition as chaste as those pure and sanctified virgin who , after a life innocently spend in the gaiety of the town , begin about fifty to attend twice _per diem_ at the polite church and chapel , to return thanks for the grace which preserve they formerly amongst beaus from temptation perhaps less powerful than what now attack the . be now in the one - and - twentieth year of he age . he be of the highest degree of middle stature ; he limb be put together with great elegance , and no less strength ; he leg and thigh be form in the exactest proportion ; he shoulders be broad and brawny , but yet he arm hung so easily , that he have all the symptom of strength without the least clumsiness . he hair be of a nut - brown colour , and be display in wanton ringlet down he back ; he forehead be high , he eye dark , and as full of sweetness as of fire ; he nose a little inclin to the ; he tooth white and even ; he lip full , red , and soft ; he beard be only rough on he ching and upper lip ; but he cheek , in which he blood glow , be overspread with a thick down ; he countenance have a tenderness join with a sensibility inexpressible . add to this the most perfect neatness in he dress , and a air which , to those who have not see many nobleman , would give a idea of nobility . such be the person who now appear before the lady . she viewed he some time in silence , and twice or thrice before she spake change she mind as to the manner in which she should begin . at length she say to he , " Joseph , I be sorry to hear such complaint against you : I be tell you behave so rudely to the maid , that they can not do they business in quiet ; I mean those who be not wick enough to hearke to you solicitation . as to other , they may , perhaps , not call you rude ; for there be wicked slut who make one asham of one 's own sex , and be as ready to admit any nauseous familiarity as fellow to offer it : nay , there be such in my family , but they shall not stay in it ; that impudent trollop who be with child by you be dischar by this time . " as a person who be strike through the heart with a thunderbolt look extremely surprised , nay , and perhaps be so too -- thus the poor receive the false accusation of he mistress ; he blush and look confound , which she misinterpret to be symptom of he guilt , and thus go on :-- " come hither , : another mistress might discard you for these offence ; but I have a compassion for you youth , and if I could be certain you would be no more guilty -- consider , child , " lay she hand carelessly upon he , " you be a handsome young fellow , and might do better ; you might make you fortune . " " madam , " say , " I do assure you ladyship I do not know whether any maid in the house be man or woman . " " oh fie ! , " answer the lady , " do not commit another crime in deny the truth . I could
could pardon the first ; but I hate a lyar . " " madam , " cry , " I hope you ladyship will not be offend at my assert my innocence ; for , by all that be sacr , I have never offer more than kissing . " " ! " say the lady , with great discomposure of countenance , and more redness in she cheek than anger in she eye ; " do you call that no crime ? , , be as a prologue to a play . can I believe a young fellow of you age and complexion will be content with kissing ? no , , there be no woman who grant that but will grant more ; and I be deceive greatly in you if you would not put she closely to it . what would you think , , if I admit you to kiss I ? " reply he would sooner die than have any such thought . " and yet , , " return she , " lady have admit they footman to such familiarity ; and footman , I confess to you , much less deserve they ; fellow without half you charms -- for such might almost excuse the crime . tell I therefore , , if I should admit you to such freedom , what would you think of I ?-- tell I freely . " " madam , " say , " I should think you ladyship condescende a great deal below yourself . " " ! " say she ; " that I be to answer to myself : but would not you insist on more ? would you be contente with a kiss ? would not you inclination be all on fire rather by such a favour ? " " madam , " say , " if they be , I hope I should be able to controul they , without suffer they to get the better of my virtue . " you have hear , reader , poet talk of the statue of Surprize ; you have hear likewise , or else you have hear very little , how make one of the son of speak , though he be dumb . you have see the face , in the eighteen - penny gallery , when , through the trap - door , to soave or no music , , , or some other of ghostly appearance , hath ascend , with a face all pale with powder , and a shirt all bloody with ribbon ; -- but from none of these , nor from Phidias or Praxiteles , if they should return to life -- no , not from the inimitable pencil of my friend , could you receive such a idea of surprize as would have enter in at you eye have they beheld the when those last word issue out from the lip of . " you virtue ! " say the lady , recovere after a silence of two minute ; " I shall never survive it . you virtue !-- intolerable confidence ! have you the assurance to pretend , that when a lady demean herself to throw aside the rule of decency , in order to honour you with the highest favour in she power , you virtue should resist she inclination ? that , when she have conquer she own virtue , she should find a obstruction in yours ? " " madam , " say , " I can not see why she have no virtue should be a reason against my have any ; or why , because I be a man , or because I be poor , my virtue must be subservient to she pleasure . " " I be out of patience , " cry the lady : " do ever mortal hear of a man 's virtue ? do ever the greatest or the gravest man pretend to any of this kind ? will magistrate who punish lewdness , or parson who preach against it , make any scruple of commit it ? and can a boy , a stripling , have the confidence to talk of he virtue ? " " madam , " say , " that boy be the brother of , and would be asham that the chastity of he family , which be preserve in she , should be stain in he . if there be such man as you ladyship mention , I be sorry for it ; and I wish they have a opportunity of reading over those letter which my father hath send I of my sister 's ; nor do I doubt but such a example would amend they . " " you impudent villain ! " cry the lady in a rage ; " do you insult I with the folly of my relation , who hath expose himself all over the country upon you sister 's account ? a little vixen , whom I have always wonder my late ever keep in she house . Sirrah ! get out of my sight , and prepare to set out this night ; for I will order you you wage immediately , and you shall be stripp and turn away . " " madam , " say , " I be sorry I have offend you ladyship , I be sure I never intend it . " " yes , sirrah , " cry she , " you have have the vanity to misconstrue the little innocent freedom I take , in order to try whether what I have hear be true . O' my conscience , you have have the assurance to imagine I be fond of you myself . " answer , he have only speak out of tenderness for he virtue ; at which word she fly into a violent passion , and refuse to hear more
more , order he instantly to leave the room . he be no sooner gone than she burst forth into the follow exclamation :--" doth this violent passion hurry we ? what meanness do we submit to from its impulse ! Wisely we resist it be first and least approaches ; for it be then only we can assure ourselves the victory . no woman could ever safely say , so far only will I go . have I not expose myself to the refusal of my footman ? I can not bear the reflection . " upon which she apply herself to the bell , and ring it with infinite more violence than be necessary -- the faithful Slipslop attend near at hand : to say the truth , she have conceive a suspicion at she last interview with she mistress , and have wait ever since in the antechamber , have carefully apply she ear to the keyhole during the whole time that the precede conversation pass between and the lady . . what pass between the lady and ; in which we prophesy there be some stroke which every one will not truly comprehend at the first reading ._ " , " say the lady , " I find too much reason to believe all thou hast tell I of this wick ; I have determine to part with he instantly ; so go you to the steward , and bid he pay he wage . " , who have preserve hitherto a distance to she lady -- rather out of necessity than inclination -- and who think the knowledge of this secret have throw down all distinction between they , answer she mistress very pertly -- " she wish she know she own mind ; and that she be certain she would call she back again before she be get half - way downstairs . " the lady reply , she have take a resolution , and be resolve to keep it . " I be sorry for it , " cry , " and , if I have know you would have punish the poor lad so severely , you should never have hear a particle of the matter . here be a fuss indeed about nothing ! " " nothing ! " return my lady ; " do you think I will countenance lewdness in my house ? " " if you will turn away every footman , " say , " that be a lover of the sport , you must soon open the coach door yourself , or get a set of mophrodite to wait upon you ; and I be sure I hate the sight of they even singe in a opera . " " do as I bid you , " say my lady , " and do not shock my ear with you beastly language . " " -come - up , " cry , " people 's ears be sometimes the nicest part about they . " the lady , who begin to admire the new style in which she wait - gentlewoman deliver herself , and by the conclusion of she speech suspect somewhat of the truth , call she back , and desire to know what she mean by the extraordinary degree of freedom in which she think proper to indulge she tongue . " freedom ! " say ; " I do not know what you call freedom , madam ; servants have tongue as well as they mistress . " " yes , and saucy one too , " answer the lady ; " but I assure you I shall bear no such impertinence . " " Impertinence ! I do not know that I be impertinent , " say . " yes , indeed you be , " cry my lady , " and , unless you mmend you manners , this house be no place for you . " " manners ! " cry ; " I never be think to want manners nor modesty neither ; and for place , there be more place than one ; and I know what I know . " " what do you know , mistress ? " answer the lady . " I be not oblige to tell that to everybody , " say , " any more than I be oblige to keep it a secret . " " I desire you would provide yourself , " answer the lady . " with all my heart , " reply the waiting -gentlewoman ; and so depart in a passion , and slap the door after she . the lady too plainly perceive that she wait - gentlewoman know more than she would willingly have have she acquaint with ; and this she impute to 's have discover to she what pass at the first interview . this , therefore , blow up she rage against he , and confirm she in a resolution of part with he . but the dismissing be a point not so easily to be resolve upon . she have the utmost tenderness for she reputation , as she know on that depend many of the most valuable blessing of life ; particularly card , make curtsy in public place , and , above all , the pleasure of demolish the reputation of other , in which innocent amusement she have a extraordinary delight . she therefore determi to submit to any insult from a servant , rather than run a risque of lose the title to so many great privileges . she therefore send for she steward , , and order he to pay he wage , to strip off he livery , and to turn he out of the house that even . she then call up , and , after refresh she spirits with a small cordial , which she keep in she corset , she begin
begin in the follow manner :-- " Slipslop , why will you , who know my passionate temper , attempt to provoke I by you answer ? I be convince you be a honest servant , and should be very unwilling to part with you . I believe , likewise , you have find I a indulgent mistress on many occasion , and have as little reason on you side to desire a change . I can not help be surprize , therefore , that you will take the surest method to offend I -- I mean , repeat my word , which you know I have always detest . " the prudent waiting - gentlewoman have duly weigh the whole matter , and find , on mature deliberation , that a good place in possession be better than one in expectation . as she find she mistress , therefore , inclin to relent , she think proper also to put on some small condescension , which be as readily accept ; and so the affair be reconcile , all offence forgive , and a present of a gown and petticoat make she , as a instance of she lady 's future favour . she offer once or twice to speak in favour of ; but find she lady 's heart so obdurate , that she prudently dropt all such effort . she consider there be more footman in the house , and some as stout fellows , though not quite so handsome , as ; besides , the reader hath already see she tender advance have not meet with the encouragement she might have reasonable expect . she think she have throw away a great deal of sack and sweetmeat on a ungrateful rascal ; and , be a little inclin to the opinion of that female sect , who hold one lusty young fellow to be nearly as good as another lusty young fellow , she at last give up and he cause , and , with a triumph over she passion highly commendable , walk off with she present , and with great tranquillity pay a visit to a stone - bottle , which be of sovereign use to a philosophical temper . she leave not she mistress so easy . the poor lady could not reflect without agony that she dear reputation be in the power of she servants . all she comfort as to be , that she hope he do not understand she meaning ; at least she could say for herself , she have not plainly express anything to he ; and as to , she imagine she could bribe she to secrecy . but what hurt she most be , that in reality she have not so entirely conquer she passion ; the little god lay lurk in she heart , though anger and distain so hood -wink she , that she could not see he . she be a thousand time on the very brink of revoke the sentence she have pass against the poor youth . love become he advocate , and whisper many thing in he favour . likewise endeavoure to vindicate he crime , and Pity to mitigate he punishment . on the other side , and speak as loudly against he . and thus the poor lady be torture with perplexity , opposite passion distract and tear she mind different way . so have I see , in the hall of , where hath be retain on the right side , and on the left , the balance of opinion ( so equal be they fee ) alternately incline to either scale . now Bramble throw in a argument , and 's scale strike the beam ; again Bramble share the like fate , overpower by the weight of . here Bramble hit , there Puzzle strike ; here one have you , there t'other have you ; till at last all become one scene of confusion in the torture mind of the hearer ; equal wager be laid on the success , and neither judge nor jury can possibly make anything of the matter ; all thing be so envelope by the careful serjeant in doubt and obscurity . or , as it happen in the conscience , where honour and honesty pull one way , and a bribe and necessity another . -- if it be we present business only to make simile , we could produce many more to this purpose ; but a simile ( as well as a word ) to the wise .-- we shall therefore see a little after we hero , for whom the reader be doubtless in some pain . . write another letter : he transaction with , & c. , with he departure from ._ the disconsolate would not have have a understanding sufficient for the principal subject of such a book as this , if he have any longer misunderstood the drift of he mistress ; and indeed , that he do not discern it sooner , the reader will be pleased to impute to a unwillingness in he to discover what he must condemn in she as a fault . have therefore quit she presence , he retire into he own garret , and enter himself into a ejaculation on the numberless calamity which attend beauty , and the misfortune it be to be handsomer than one 's neighbour . he then sit down , and address himself to he sister in the follow word :-- " dear ,-- hope you be well , what news have I to tell you ! of ! my mistress be fall in love with I - that be , what great folk call fall in love - she have a mind to ruin I ; but I hope I shall have more resolution and more grace than to part with my virtue to any lady upon earth .
. " hath often tell I , that chastity be as great a virtue in a man as in a woman . he say he never know any more than he wife , and I shall endeaavor to follow he example . indeed , it be owe entirely to he excellent sermon and advice , together with you letter , that I have be able to resist a temptation , which , he say , no man comply with , but he repent in this world , or be damned for it in the next ; and why should I trust to repentance on my deathbed , since I may die in my sleep ? what fine thing be good advice and good example ! but I be glad she turn I out of the chamber as she do : for I have once almost forget every word parson Adam have ever say to I . " I do not doubt , dear sister , but you will have to preserve you virtue against all trial ; and I beg you earnestly to pray I may be enable to preserve mine ; for truly it be very severely attack by more than one ; but I hope I shall copy you example , and that of my nameake , and maintain my virtue against all temptation . " have not finish he letter , when he be summon downstairs by , to receive he wage ; for , besides that out of eight pound a year he allow he father and mother four , he have be oblige , in order to furnish himself with musical instrument , to apply to the generosity of the aforesaid , who , on urgent occasion , use to advance the servants they wage : not before they be due , but before they be payable ; that be , perhaps , half a year after they be due ; and this at the moderate premium of fifty per cent , or a little more : by which charitable methods , together with lending money to other people , and even to he own master and mistress , the honest man have , from nothing , in a few year amass a small sum of twenty thousand pound or thereabout . have receive he little remainder of wage , and have stript off he livery , be force to borrow a frock and breech of one of the servants ( for he be so beloved in the family , that they would all have lent he anything ) : and , be tell by that he must not stay a moment longer in the house than be necessary to pack up he linen , which he easily do in a very narrow compass , he take a melancholy leave of he fellow - servants , and set out at seven in the evening . he have proceed the length of two or three street , before he absolutely determine with himself whether he should leave the town that night , or , procure a lodging , wait till the morning . at last , the moon shin very bright help he to come to a resolution of begin he journey immediately , to which likewise he have some other inducement ; which the reader , without be a conjurer , can not possibly guess , till we have give he those hint which it may be now proper to open . . of several new matter not expect ._ it be a observation sometimes make , that to indicate we idea of a simple fellow , we say , he be easily to be see through : nor do I believe it a more improper denotation of a simple book . instead of apply this to any particular performance , we chuse rather to remark the contrary in this history , where the scene open itself by small degree ; and he be a sagacious reader who can see two chapter before he . for this reason , we have not hithertoo hint a matter which now seem necessary to be explain ; since it may be wonder at , first , that make such extraordinary haste out of town , which hath be already shew ; and secondly , which will be now shewn , that , instead of proceeding to the habitation of he father and mother , or to he beloved sister , he choose rather to set out full speed to the 's country - seat , which he have leave on he journey to . be it know , then , that in the same parish where this seat stand there liv a young girl whom ( though the best of son and brother ) long more impatiently to see than he parent or he sister . she be a poor girl , who have formerly be breed up in 's family ; whence , a little before the journey to , she have be discard by , on account of she extraordinary beauty : for I never could find any other reason . this young creature ( who now live with a farmer in the parish ) have be always belove by , and return he affection . she be two year only younger than we hero . they have be acquaint from they infancy , and have conceive a very early liking for each other ; which have grow to such a degree of affection , that have with much ado prevent they from marrying , and persuade they to wait till a few year ' service and thrift have a little improved their experience , and enable they to live comfortably together . they follow this good man 's advice , as indeed he word be little less than a law in he parish ; for as he have show he parishioner , by a uniform behaviour
behaviour of thirty - five year ' duration , that he have they good entirely at heart , so they consult he on every occasion , and very seldom act contrary to he opinion . nothing can be imagine more tender than be the parting between these two lover . a thousand sigh heav the bosom of , a thousand tear distill from the lovely eye of ( for that be she name ) . though she modesty would only suffer she to admit he eager kiss , she violent love make she more than passive in he embrace ; and she often pull he to she breast with a soft pressure , which though perhaps it would not have squeeze a insect to death , cause more emotion in the heart of than the closest Cornish hug could have do . the reader may perhaps wonder that so fond a pair should , during a twelvemonth 's absence , never converse with one another : indeed , there be but one reason which do or could have prevent they ; and this be , that poor Fanny could neither write nor read : nor could she be prevail upon to transmit the delicacies of she tender and chaste passion by the hand of a amanuensis . they contente themselves therefore with frequent inquirie after each other 's health , with a mutual confidence in each other 's fidelity , and the prospect of they future happiness . have explain these matters to we reader , and , as far as possible , satisfied all he doubt , we return to honest , whom we leave just set out on he travels by the light of the moon . those who have read any romance or poetry , antient or modern , must have be inform that love hath wing : by which they be not to understand , as some young lady by mistake have do , that a lover can fly ; the writer , by this ingenious allegory , intend to insinuate no more than that lover do not march like horse - guard ; in short , that they put the best leg foremose ; which we lusty youth , who could walk with any man , do so heartily on this occasion , that within four hour he reach a famous house of hospitality well know to the western traveller . it present you a lion on the sign - post : and the master , who be christen , be commonly call plain . some have conceive that he hath particularly choose the lion for he sign , as he doth in countenance greatly resemble that magnanimous beast , though he disposition savour more of the sweetness of the lamb . he be a person well receive among all sort of man , be qualified to render himself agreeable to any ; as he be well verse in history and politics , hath a smattering in law and divinity , crack a good jest , and play wonderfully well on the french horn . a violent storm of hail force to take shelter in this inn , where he remember have dine in he way to town . have no sooner seate himself by the kitchen fire than , observe he livery , begin to condeal the loss of he late master ; who be , he say , he very particular and intimate acquaintance , with whom he have crack many a merry bottle , ay many a dozen , in he time . he then remark , that all these thing be over now , all pass , and just as if they have never be ; and conclude with a excellent observation on the certainty of death , which he wife say be indeed very true . a fellow now arrive at the same inn with two horse , one of which he be lead farther down into the country to meet he master ; these he put into the stable , and come and take he place by 's side , who immediately know he to be the servant of a neighbour gentleman , who use to visit at they house . this fellow be likewise force in by the storm ; for he have order to go twenty mile farther that evening , and luckily on the same road which himself intend to take . he , therefore , embrace this opportunity of compliment he friend with he master 's horse ( notwithstand he have receive express command to the contrary ) , which be readily accept ; and so , after they have drank a loving pot , and the storm be over , they set out together . . _Contain many surprizing adventur which meet with on the road , scarce credible to those who have never travel in a stage - coach ._ nothing remarkable happen on the road till they arrival at the inn to which the horse be order ; whither they come about two in the morning . the moon then shine very bright ; and , make he friend a present of a pint of wine , and thanke he for the favour of he horse , notwithstand all entreaty to the contrary , proceed on he journey on foot . he have not go above two mile , charme with the hope of shortly see he beloved Fanny , when he be meet by two fellows in a narrow lane , and order to stand and deliver . he readily give they all the money he have , which be somewhat less than two pound ; and tell they he hope they would be so generous as to return he a few shilling , to defray he charge on he way home . one of the ruffian answer with a oath , " yes , we will give you something presently :
: but first strip and be d --- and ' to you . " -- " Strip , " cry the other , " or I will blow you brain to the devil . " , remember that he have borrowed he coat and breech of a friend , and that he should be asham of make any excuse for not return they , reply , he hope they would not insist on he clothes , which be not worth much , but consider the coldness of the night . " you be cold , be you , you rascal ? " say one of the robber : " I will warm you with a vengeance ; " and , damne he eye , snap a pistol at he head ; which he have no sooner done than the other level a blow at he with he stick , which , who be expert at cudgel - play , catch with he , and return the favour so successfully on he adversary , that he lay he sprawl at he foot , and at the same instant receive a blow from behind , with the butt end of a pistol , from the other villain , which felle he to the ground , and totally deprive he of he sense . the thief who have be knock down have now recover himself ; and both together fall to belabour poor with they stick , till they be convince they have put a end to he miserable being : they then stripp he entirely naked , throw he into a ditch , and depart with they booty . the poor wretch , who lay motionless a long time , just begin to recover he sense as a stage - coach come by . the postillion , hear a man 's groan , stopt he horse , and tell the coachman he be certain there be a dead man lie in the ditch , for he hear he groan . " go on , sirrah , " say the coachman ; " we be confound late , and have no time to look after dead man . " a lady , who hear what the postillion say , and likewise hear the groan , call eagerly to the coachman to stop and see what be the matter . upon which he bid the postillion alight , and look into the ditch . he do so , and return , " that there be a man sit upright , as naked as ever he be bear . " -- " o J-- sus ! " cry the lady ; " a naked man ! dear coachman , drive on and leave he . " upon this the gentleman get out of the coach ; and beg they to have mercy upon he : for that he have be rob and almost beat to death . " ! " cry a old gentleman : " let we make all the haste imaginable , or we shall be rob too . " a young man who belong to the law answer , " he wish they have pass by without take any notice ; but that now they might be prove to have be last in he company ; if he should die they might be call to some account for he murder . he therefore think it advisable to save the poor creature 's life , for they own sake , if possible ; at least , if he die , to prevent the jury 's finding that they fle for it . he be therefore of opinion to take the man into the coach , and carry he to the next inn . " the lady insist , " that he should not come into the coach . that if they lift he in , she would herself alight : for she have rather stay in that place to all eternity than ride with a naked man . " the coachman object , " that he could not suffer he to be take in unless somebody would pay a shilling for he carriage the four mile . " which the two gentleman refuse to do . but the lawyer , who be afraid of some mischief happen to himself , if the wretch be leave behind in that condition , say no man could be too cautious in these matters , and that he remember very extraordinary case in the book , threaten the coachman , and bid he deny take he up at he peril ; for that , if he die , he should be indict for he murder ; and if he liv , and bring a action against he , he would willingly take a brief in it . these word have a sensible effect on the coachman , who be well acquaint with the person who speak they ; and the old gentleman above mention , think the naked man would afford he frequent opportunity of show he wit to the lady , offer to join with the company in give a mug of beer for he fare ; till , partly alarme by the threat of the one , and partly by the promise of the other , and be perhaps a little move with compassion at the poor creature 's condition , who stand bleed and shiver with the cold , he at length agree ; and be now advanc to the coach , where , see the lady , who hold the stick of she fan before she eye , he absolutely refuse , miserable as he be , to enter , unless he be furnish with sufficient covering to prevent give the least offence to decency -- so perfectly modest be this young man ; such mighty effect have the spotless example of the amiable , and the excellent sermon of , wrotch upon he
he . though there be several greatcoat about the coach , it be not easy to get over this difficulty which have start . the two gentleman complain they be cold , and could not spare a rag ; the man of wit say , with a laugh , that charity begin at home ; and the coachman , who have two greatcoat spread under he , refuse to lend either , lest they should be make bloody : the lady 's footman desire to be excuse for the same reason , which the lady herself , notwithstand she abhorrence of a naked man , approve : and it be more than probable poor , who obstinately adhere to he modest resolution , must have perish , unless the postillion ( a lad who hath be since transport for rob a hen - roost ) have voluntarily stript off a greatcoat , he only garment , at the same time swear a great oath ( for which he be rebuk by the passenger ) , " that he would rather ride in he shirt all he life than suffer a fellow - creature to lie in so miserable a condition . " , have put on the greatcoat , be lift into the coach , which now proceed on its journey . he declare himself almost dead with the cold , which give the man of wit a occasion to ask the lady if she could not accommodate he with a dram . she answer , with some resentment , " she wonder at he ask she such a question ; but assure he she never taste any such thing . " the lawyer be inquire into the circumstance of the robbery , when the coach stopt , and one of the ruffian , put a pistol in , demand they money of the passenger , who readily give it they ; and the lady , in she fright , deliver up a little silver bottle , of about a half - pint size , which the rogue , clapp it to he mouth , and drink she health , declare , hold some of the best Nantes he have ever taste : this the lady afterwards assure the company be the mistake of she maid , for that she have order she to fill the bottle with - water . as soon as the fellow be depart , the lawyer , who have , it seem , a case of pistol in the seat of the coach , inform the company , that if it have be daylight , and he could have come at he pistol , he would not have submit to the robbery : he likewise set forth that he have often meet highwayman when he travel on horseback , but none ever durst attack he ; conclude that , if he have not be more afraid for the lady than for himself , he should not have now part with he money so easily . as wit be generally observ to love to reside in empty pocket , so the gentleman whose ingenuity we have above remark , as soon as he have part with he money , begin to grow wonderfully facetious . he make frequent allusion to and , and say many excellent thing on fig and fig - leave ; which perhaps give more offence to than to any other in the company . the lawyer likewise make several very pretty jest without depart from he profession . he say , " if and the lady be alone , he would be more capable of make a conveyance to she , as he affair be not fetter with any incumbrance ; he would warrant he soon suffer a recovery by a writ of entry , which be the proper way to create heir in tail ; that , for he own part , he would engage to make so firm a settlement in a coach , that there should be no danger of a ejectment , " with a inundation of the like gibberish , which he continue to vent till the coach arrive at a inn , where one servant-maid only be up , in readiness to attend the coachman , and furnish he with cold meat and a dram . desire to alight , and that he might have a bed prepare for he , which the maid readily promise to perform ; and , be a good - natured wench , and not so squeamish as the lady have be , she clapt a large fagot on the fire , and , furnish with a greatcoat belong to one of the hostler , desire he to sit down and warm himself whilst she make he bed . the coachman , in the meantime , take a opportunity to call up a surgeon , who live within a few door ; after which , he remind he passenger how late they be , and , after they have take leave of , hurrie they off as fast as he could . the wench soon get to bed , and promise to use she interest to borrow he a shirt ; but imagine , as she afterwards say , by he be so bloody , that he must be a dead man , she run with all speed to hasten the surgeon , who be more than half drest , apprehend that the coach have be overturn , and some gentleman or lady hurt . as soon as the wench have inform he at he window that it be a poor foot - passenger who have be stripp of all he have , and almost murdered , he chide she for disturb he so early , slipp off he clothes again , and very quietly return to bed and to sleep . now begin to show she blooming cheek over the hill
hill , whilst ten million of feathered songster , in jocund chorus , repeat odes a thousand time sweeter than those of we laureat , and sung both the day and the song ; when the master of the , - wouse , arise , and learn from he may a account of the robbery , and the situation of he poor naked guest , he shook he head , and cry , " good - lack - a - day ! " and then order the girl to carry he one of he own shirts . tow -wouse be just awake , and have stretch out she arm in vain to fold she depart husband , when the maid enter the room . " who be there ? ? " --" yes , madam ." --" where be you master ? " --" he be without , madam ; he hath send I for a shirt to lend a poor naked man , who hath be rob and murder . " -- " touch one if you dare , you slut , " say - wouse : " you master be a pretty sort of a man , to take in naked vagabonds , and clothe they with he own clothes . I shall have no such doings . if you offer to touch anything , I will throw the chamber - pot at you head . go , send you master to I . " --" yes , madam , " answer . as soon as he come in , she thus begin : " what the do you mean by this , - wouse ? be I to buy shirt to lend to a set of scabby rascal ? " --" my dear , " say - wouse , " this be a poor wretch ." --" yes , " say she , " I know it be a poor wretch ; but what the have we to do with poor wretch ? the law make we provide for too many already . we shall have thirty or forty poor wretch in red coat shortly . " --" my dear , " cry -wouse , " this man hath be rob of all he hath . " --" well then , " say she , " where be he money to pay he reckon ? why doth not such a fellow go to a alehouse ? I shall send he pack as soon as I be up , I assure you . " --" my dear , " say he , " common charity will not suffer you to do that . " -- " common charity , a f -- t ! " say she , " common charity teach we to provide for ourselves and we family ; and I and mine will not be ruin by you charity , I assure you . " -- " well , " say he , " my dear , do as you will , when you be up ; you know I never contradict you . " -- " no , " say she ; " if the devil be to contradict I , I would make the house too hot to hold he . " with such like discourse they consume near half - a - hour , whilst provide a shirt from the hostler , who be one of she sweetheart , and put it on poor . the surgeon have likewise at last visit he , and wash and drest he wound , and be now come to acquaint - wouse that he guest be in such extreme danger of he life , that he scarce see any hope of he recovery . " here be a pretty kettle of fish , " cry - wouse , " you have bring upon we ! we be like to have a funeral at we own expense . " tow -wouse ( who , notwithstand he charity , would have give he vote as freely as ever he do at a election , that any other house in the kingdom should have quiet possession of he guest ) answer , " my dear , I be not to blame ; he be bring hither by the stage - coach , and have put he to bed before I be stirr . " --" I will Betty she , " say she .-- at which , with half she garment on , the other half under she arm , she sally out in quest of the unfortunate , whilst tow - wouse and the surgeon go to pay a visit to poor , and inquire into the circumstance of this melancholy affair . chapter XIII . what happen to during he sickness at the inn , with the curiious discourse between he and , the parson of the parish ._ as soon as have communicate a particular history of the robbery , together with a short account of himself , and he intend journey , he ask the surgeon if he apprehend he to be in any danger : to which the surgeon very honestly answer , " he fear he be ; for that he pulse be very exalted and feverish , and , if he fever should prove more than symptomatic , it would be impossible to save he . " , fetch a deep sigh , cry , " poor Fanny , I would I could have live to see thee ! but 's will be do . " the surgeon then advise he , if he have any worldly affair to settle , that he would do it as soon as possible ; for , though he hope he might recover , yet he think himself oblige to acquaint he he be in great danger ; and if the malign concoction of he humours should cause a suscitation of he fever , he might
might soon grow delirious and incapable to make he will . answer , " that it be impossible for any creature in the universe to be in a poorer condition than himself ; for since the robbery he have not one thing of any kind whatever which he could call he own . " " I have , " say he , " a poor little piece of gold , which they take away , that would have be a comfort to I in all my affliction ; but surly , , I want nothing to remind I of thee . I have thy dear image in my heart , and no villain can ever tear it thence . " desire paper and pens , to write a letter , but they be refuse he ; and he be advise to use all he endeavour to compose himself . they then leave he ; and tow - wouse send to a clergyman to come and administer he good office to the soul of poor , since the surgeon despair of make any successful application to he body . ( for that be the clergyman 's name ) come as soon as send for ; and , have first drank a dish of tea with the landlady , and afterwards a bowl of punch with the landlord , he walk up to the room where lay ; but , finde he asleep , return to take the other sneaker ; which when he have finish , he again creep softly up to the chamber - door , and , have open it , hear the sick man talk to himself in the follow manner :-- " of most adorable ! most virtuous sister ! whose example could alone enable I to withstand all the temptation of riche and beauty , and to preserve my virtue pure and chaste for the arm of my dear Fanny , if it have pleased Heaven that I should ever have come unto they . what rich , or honour , or pleasur , can make we amend for the loss of innocence ? not that alone afford we more consolation than all worldly acquisition ? what but innocence and virtue could give any comfort to such a miserable wretch as I be ? yet these can make I prefer this sick and painful bed to all the pleasure I should have find in my lady 's . these can make I face death without fear ; and though I love my more than ever man love a woman , these can teach I to resign myself to the divine will without repin . of thou delightful charme creature ! if have indulge thee to my arm , the poorest , humblest state would have be a paradise ; I could have live with thee in the lowest cottage without envy the palace , the dainty , or the riche of any man breathing . but I must leave thee , leave thee for ever , my dearest angel ! I must think of another world ; and I heartily pray thou may 'st meet comfort in this . " -- think he have hear enough , so downstairs he go , and tell tow - wouse he could do he guest no service ; for that he be very light - heade , and have utter nothing but a rhapsody of nonsense all the time he stay in the room . the surgeon return in the afternoon , and find he patient in a higher fever , as he say , than when he leave he , though not delirious ; for , notwithstand 's opinion , he have not be once out of he sense since he arrival at the inn . be again send for , and with much difficulty prevail on to make another visit . as soon as he enter the room he tell " he be come to pray by he , and to prepare he for another world : in the first place , therefore , he hope he have repent of all he sins . " answer , " he hope he have ; but there be one thing which he know not whether he should call a sin ; if it be , he fear he should die in the commission of it ; and that be , the regret of parting with a young woman whom he love as tenderly as he do he heart - string . " Barnabas bad he be assure " that any repining at the be one of the greatest sins he could commit ; that he ought to forget all carnal affections , and think of better thing . " say , " that neither in this world nor the next he could forget he Fanny ; and that the thought , however grievous , of part from she for ever , be not half so torment as the fear of what she would suffer when she know he misfortune . " say , " that such fear argue a diffidence and despondence very criminal ; that he must divest himself of all human passion , and fix he heart above . " answer , " that be what he desire to do , and should be oblige to he if he would enable he to accomplish it . " Barnabas reply , " that must be do by . " besotch he to discover how he might attain it . Barnabas answer , " by prayer and faith . " he then question he concern he forgiveness of the thief . answer , " he fear that be more than he could do ; for nothing would give he more pleasure than to hear they be take . " -- " that , " cry , " be for the sake of justice . " --" yes , " say
say , " but if I be to meet they again , I be afraid I should attack they , and kill they too , if I could . " -- " doubtless , " answer , " it be lawful to kill a thief ; but can you say you forgive they as a ought ? " desire to know what that forgiveness be . " that be , " answer , " to forgive they as -- as -- it be to forgive they as -- in short , it be to forgive they as a . " -- reply , " he forgave they as much as he could . " -- " well , well , " say , " that will do . " he then demand of he , " if he remember any more sins unrepented of ; and if he do , he desire he to make haste and repent of they as fast as he could , that they might repeat over a few prayer together . " answer , " he could not recollect any great crime he have be guilty of , and that those he have commit he be sincerely sorry for . " say that be enough , and then proceed to prayer with all the expedition he be master of , some company then wait for he below in the parlour , where the ingredient for punch be all in readiness ; but no one would squeeze the orang till he come . complain he be dry , and desire a little tea ; which Barnabas report to - wouse , who answer , " she have just do drink it , and could not be slopp all day ; " but order to carry he up some small beer . obey she mistress 's command ; but , as soon as he have taste it , say , he fear it would increase he fever , and that he long very much for tea ; to which the good - nature answer , he should have tea , if there be any in the land ; she accordingly go and buy he some herself , and attend he with it ; where we will leave she and together for some time , to entertain the reader with other matters . . _Be very full of adventure which succeed each other at the inn ._ it be now the dusk of the evening , when a grave person rode into the inn , and , commit he horse to the hostler , go directly into the kitchen , and , have call for a pipe of tobacco , take he place by the fireside , where several other person be likewise assemble . the discourse run altogether on the robbery which be commit the night before , and on the poor wretch who lay above in the dreadful condition in which we have already see he . tow -wouse say , " she wonder what the mean by bring such guest to she house , when there be so many alehouse on the road proper for they reception . but she assure he , if he die , the parish should be at the expense of the funeral . " she add , " nothing would serve the fellow 's turn but tea , she would assure he . " , who be just return from she charitable office , answer , she believe he be a gentleman , for she never see a finer skin in she life . " Pox on he skin ! " reply tow -wouse , " I suppose that be all we be like to have for the reckoning . I desire no such gentleman should ever call at the " ( which it seem be the sign of the inn ) . the gentleman lately arrive discover a great deal of emotion at the distress of this poor creature , whom he observe to be fall not into the most compassionate hands . and indeed , if - wouse have give no utterance to the sweetness of she temper , nature have take such pain in she countenance , that himself never give more expression to a picture . she person be short , thing , and crook . she forehead project in the middle , and thence descende in a declivity to the top of she nose , which be sharp and red , and would have hang over she lip , have not nature turn up the end of it . she lip be two bit of skin , which , whenever she speak , she draw together in a purse . she ching be peak ; and at the upper end of that skin which compose she cheek , stand two bone , that almost hide a pair of small red eye . add to this a voice most wonderfully adapt to the sentiment it be to convey , be both loud and hoarse . it be not easy to say whether the gentleman have conceive a greater dislike for he landlady or compassion for she unhappy guest . he inquire very earnestly of the surgeon , who be now come into the kitchen , whether he have any hope of he recovery ? he beg he to use all possible means towards it , tell he , " it be I the duty of man of all profession to apply they skill gratis for the relief of the poor and necessitous . " the surgeon answer , " he should take proper care ; but he defy all the surgeon in to do he any good . " -- " pray , sir , " say the gentleman , " what be he wound ? " --" why , do you know anything of wound ? " say the surgeon ( wink upon -wouse ) .--"
.--" , I have a small smattering in surgery , " answer the gentleman .--" a smattering -- ho , ho , ho ! " say the surgeon ; " I believe it be a smattering indeed . " the company be all attentive , expect to hear the doctor , who be what they call a dry fellow , expose the gentleman . he begin therefore with a air of triumph : " I I suppose , sir , you have travel ? " -- " no , really , sir , " say the gentleman .--" ! then you have practise in the hospital perhaps ? " -- " no , sir . " --" ! not that neither ? Whence , sir , then , if I may be so bold to inquire , have you get you knowledge in surgery ? " --" , " answer the gentleman , " I do not pretend to much ; but the little I know I have from book . " --" books ! " cry the doctor . " what , I suppose you have read and ! " -- " no , sir , " say the gentleman .--" how ! you understand surgery , " answer the doctor , " and not read and ? " -- " , " cry the other , " I believe there be many surgeon who have never read these authors . " --" I believe so too , " say the doctor , " more shame for they ; but , thanks to my education , I have they by heart , and very seldom go without they both in my pocket . " --" they be pretty large book , " say the gentleman .-- " aye , " say the doctor , " I believe I know how large they be better than you . " ( at which he fall a winking , and the whole company burst into a laugh . ) the doctor pursue he triumph , ask the gentleman , " if he do not understand physic as well as surgery . " " rather better , " answer the gentleman .-- " aye , like enough , " cry the doctor , with a wink . " why , I know a little of physic too . " --" I wish I know half so much , " say -wouse , " I would never wear a apron again . " --" why , I believe , landlord , " cry the doctor , " there be few man , though I say it , within twelve mile of the place , that handle a fever better . _Veniente accurrite morbo _: that be my method . I suppose , brother , you understand ? " --" a little , " say the gentleman .-- " aye , and now , I will warrant you : dapomibomino poluflosboio Thalass . but I have almost forget these thing : I could have repeat Homer by heart once . " -- " ! the gentleman have catch a traytor , " say - wouse ; at which they all fall a laughing . the gentleman , who have not the least affection for joking , very contentedly suffer the doctor to enjoy he victory , which he do with no small satisfaction ; and , have sufficiently sound he depth , tell he , " he be thoroughly convinced of he great learning and abilitie ; and that he would be oblige to he if he would let he know he opinion of he patient 's case above - stair . " --" , " say the doctor , " he case be that of a dead man -- the contusion on he head have perforate the internal membrane of the occiput , and divelicate that radical small minute invisible nerve which cohere to the pericranium ; and this be attend with a fever at first symptomatic , then pneumatic ; and he be at length grow deliriuus , or delirious , as the vulgar express it . " he be proceed in this learn manner , when a mighty noise interrupt he . some young fellow in the neighbourhood have take one of the thief , and be bring he into the inn . run upstairs with this news to , who beg they might search for a little piece of broken gold , which have a ribband tie to it , and which he could swear to amongst all the hoard of the richest man in the universe . Notwithstand the fellow 's persisting in he innocence , the mob be very busy in search he , and presently , among other thing , pull out the piece of gold just mention ; which no sooner see than she laid violent hand on it , and convey it up to , who receive it with rapture of joy , and , hug it in he bosom , declare he could now die contente . within a few minute afterwards come in some other fellow , with a bundle which they have find in a ditch , and which be indeed the cloath which have be stripp off from , and the other thing they have take from he . the gentleman no sooner see the coat than he declare he know the livery ; and , if it have be take from the poor creature above - stair , desire he might see he ; for that he be very well acquaint with the family to whom that livery belong . he be accordingly conduct up by ; but what , reader , be the surprize on both side , when he see be the person in bed , and when discover the face of he good friend ! it would be impertinent to insert a discourse which chiefly turn on the relation
relation of matter already well know to the reader ; for , as soon as the curate have satisfied concern the perfect health of he Fanny , he be on he side very inquisitive into all the particular which have produce this unfortunate accident . to return therefore to the kitchen , where a great variety of company be now assemble from all the room of the house , as well as the neighbourhood : so much delight do man take in contemplate the countenance of a thief . tow -wouse begin to rub he hand with pleasure at see so large a assembly ; who would , he hope , shortly adjourn into several apartment , in order to discourse over the robbery , and drink a health to all honest man . but tow -wouse , whose misfortune it be commonly to see thing a little perversely , begin to rail at those who bring the fellow into she house ; tell she husband , " they be very likely to thrive who keep a house of entertainment for beggar and thief . " the mob have now finish they search , and could find nothing about the captive likely to prove any evidence ; for as to the cloath , though the mob be very well satisfied with that proof , yet , as the surgeon observe , they could not convict he , because they be not find in he custody ; to which Barnabas agree , and add that these be _bona waviata_ , and belong to the lord of the manor . " how , " say the surgeon , " do you say these goods belong to the lord of the manor ? " --" I do , " cry .--" then I deny it , " say the surgeon : " what can the lord of the manor have to do in the case ? will any one attempt to persuade I that what a man find be not he own ? " --" I have hear , " say a old fellow in the corner , " justice wise - one say , that , if every man have he right , whatever be find belong to the king of . " --" that may be true , " say , " in some sense ; for the law make a difference between thing stolen and thing find ; for a thing may be steal that never be find , and a thing may be find that never be steal : now , good that be both steal and find be _waviata_ ; and they belong to the lord of the manor . " --" so the lord of the manor be the receiver of stolen goods , " say the doctor ; at which there be a universal laugh , be first begin by himself . while the prisoner , by persist in he innocence , have almost ( as there be no evidence against he ) bring over , the surgeon , -wouse , and several other to he side , inform they that they have overlook a little piece of gold , which she have carry up to the man in bed , and which he offer to swear to amongst a million , aye , amongst ten thousand . this immediately turn the scale against the prisoner , and every one now conclude he guilty . it be resolve , therefore , to keep he secure that night , and early in the morning to carry he before a justice . . show how tow - wouse be a little mollified ; and how officious and the surgeon be to prosecute the thief : with a dissertation accounting for they zeal , and that of many other person not mention in this history ._ tell she mistress she believe the man in bed be a greater man than they take he for ; for , besides the extreme whiteness of he skin , and the softness of he hand , she observe a very great familiarity between the gentleman and he ; and add , she be certain they be intimate acquaintance , if not relation . this somewhat abate the severity of -wouse 's countenance . she say , " God forbid she should not discharge the duty of a , since the poor gentleman be bring to she house . she have a natural antipathy to vagabond ; but could pity the misfortunes of a as soon as another . " tow - wouse say , " if the traveller be a gentleman , though he hath no money about he now , we shall most likely be pay hereafter ; so you may begin to score whenever you will . " tow -wouse answer , " hold you simple tongue , and do not instruct I in my business . I be sure I be sorry for the gentleman 's misfortune with all my heart ; and I hope the villain who hath use he so barbarously will be hang . Betty , go see what he want . forbid he should want anything in my house . " and the surgeon go up to to satisfy themselves concern the piece of gold ; be with difficulty prevail upon to show it they , but would by no entreaty be bring to deliver it out of he own possession . he however attest this to be the same which have be take from he , and be ready to swear to the finde it on the thief . the only difficulty that remain be , how to produce this gold before the justice ; for as to carry himself , it seem impossible ; nor be there any great likelihood of obtain it from he , for he have fasten it with a ribband to he arm , and solemnly vow that nothing but irresistible
irresistible force should ever separate they ; in which resolution , , clench a fist rather less than the knuckle of a ox , declare he would support he . a dispute arise on this occasion concern evidence not very necessary to be relate here ; after which the surgeon dress 's head , still persist in the imminent danger in which he patient lay , but conclude , with a very important look , " that he begin to have some hope ; that he should send he a sanative soporiferous dratch , and would see he in the morning . " after which and he depart , and leave and together . 's inform of the occasion of this journey which he be make to , namely , to publish three volume of sermon ; be encourage , as he say , by a advertisement lately set forth by the society of bookseller , who propose to purchase any copy offer to they , at a price to be settle by two person ; but though he imagine he should get a considerable sum of money on this occasion , which he family be in urgent need of , he protest he would not leave in he present condition : finally , he tell he , " he have nine shilling and threepence halfpenny in he pocket , which he be welcome to use as he please . " this goodness of parson Adams bring tear into 's eye ; he declare , " he have now a second reason to desire life , that he might show he gratitude to such a friend . " Adams bade he " be cheerful ; for that he plainly see the surgeon , besides he ignorance , desire to make a merit of cure he , though the wound in he head , he perceive , be by no means dangerous ; that he be convince he have no fever , and doubt not but he would be able to travel in a day or two . " these word infuse a spirit into ; he say , " he find himself very sore from the bruise , but have no reason to think any of he bone injur , or that he have receive any harm in he inside , unless that he feel something very odd in he stomach ; but he know not whether that might not arise from not have eat one morsel for above twenty - four hour . " then ask if he have any inclination to eat , he answer in the affirmative . then desire he to " name what he have the greatest fancy for ; whether a poached egg , or chicken - broth . " he answer , " he could eat both very well ; but that he seem to have the greatest appetite for a piece of boiled beef and cabbage . " Adams be pleased with so perfect a confirmation that he have not the least fever , but advise he to a lighter diet for that evening . he accordingly eat either a rabbit or a fowl , I never could with any tolerable certainty discover which ; after this he be , by - wouse 's order , convey into a better bed and equip with one of she husband 's shirt . in the morning early , and the surgeon come to the inn , in order to see the thief convey before the justice . they have consume the whole night in debating what measure they should take to produce the piece of gold in evidence against he ; for they be both extremely zealous in the business , though neither of they be in the least interested in the prosecution ; neither of they have ever receive any private injury from the fellow , nor have either of they ever be suspect of love the publick well enough to give they a sermon or a dose of physic for nothing . to help we reader , therefore , as much as possible to account for this zeal , we must inform he that , as this parish be so unfortunate as to have no lawyer in it , there have be a constant contention between the two doctor , spiritual and physical , concern they abilitie in a science , in which , as neither of they profess it , they have equal pretension to dispute each other 's opinion . these dispute be carry on with great contempt on both side , and have almost divide the parish ; tow - wouse and one half of the neighbour inclin to the surgeon , and - wouse with the other half to the parson . the surgeon draw he knowledge from those inestimable fountain , call the 's , and 's Law - table ; Barnabas trust entirely to 's . it happen on this occasion , as be pretty frequently the case , that these two learned man differ about the sufficiency of evidence ; the doctor be of opinion that the maid 's oath would convict the prisoner without produce the gold ; the parson , _e contra , totis viribus ._ to display they part , therefore , before the justice and the parish , be the sole motive which we can discover to this zeal which both of they pretend to have for public justice . of Vanity ! how little be thy force acknowledge , or thy operation discern ! how wantonly dost thou deceive mankind under different disguise ! sometimes thou dost wear the face of pity , sometimes of generosity : nay , thou hast the assurance even to put on those glorious ornament which belong only to heroic virtue . Thout odious , deform monster ! whom priests have rail at , philosopher despise , and poet ridicule ; be there a wretch so
so abandoned as to own thee for a acquaintance in public ?--yet , how few will refuse to enjoy thee in private ? nay , thou be the pursuit of most man through they life . the greatest villainy be daily practise to please thee ; nor be the meanest thief below , or the greatest hero above , thy notice . thy embrace be often the sole aim and sole reward of the private robbery and the plunder province . it be to pamper up thee , thou harlot , that we attempt to withdraw from other what we do not want , or to withhold from they what they do . all we passion be thy slave . Avarice itself be often no more than thy handmaid , and even Lust thy pimp . the bully fear , like a coward , fly before thee , and and hide they head in thy presence . I know thou will think that whilst I abuse thee I court thee , and that thy love hath inspire I to write this sarcastical panegyric on thee ; but thou be deceive : I value thee not of a farthing ; nor will it give I any pain if thou shouldst prevail on the reader to censure this digression as arrant nonsense ; for know , to thy confusion , that I have introduce thee for no other purpose than to lengthen out a short chapter , and so I return to my history . . the escape of the thief . 's disappointment . the arrival of two very extraordinary personage , and the introduction of parson Adams to ._ and the surgeon , be return , as we have say , to the inn , in order to convey the thief before the justice , be greatly concerned to find a small accident have happen , which somewhat disconcert they ; and this be no other than the thief 's escape , who have modestly withdraw himself by night , decline all ostentation , and not chuse , in imitation of some great man , to distinguish himself at the expense of be point at . when the company have retire the evening before , the thief be detain in a room where the constable , and one of the young fellow who take he , be plan as he guard . about the second watch a general complaint of drotch be make , both by the prisoner and he keeper . among whom it be at last agree that the constable should remain on duty , and the young fellow call up the tapster ; in which disposition the latter apprehend not the least danger , as the constable be well armed , and could besides easily summon he back to he assistance , if the prisoner make the least attempt to gain he liberty . the young fellow have not long leave the room before it come into the constable 's head that the prisoner might leap on he by surprize , and , thereby prevent he of the use of he weapon , especially the long staff in which he chiefly confide , might reduce the success of a struggle to a equal chance . he wisely , therefore , to prevent this inconvenience , slipt out of the room himself , and lock the door , wait without with he staff in he hand , ready lift to fall the unhappy prisoner , if by ill fortune he should attempt to break out . but human life , as hath be discover by some great man or other ( for I would by no means be understand to affect the honour of make any such discovery ) , very much resemble a game at chess ; for as in the latter , while a gamester be too attentive to secure himself very strongly on one side the board , he be apt to leave a unguarded opening on the other ; so doth it often happen in life , and so do it happen on this occasion ; for whilst the cautious constable with such wonderful sagacity have possess himself of the door , he most unhappily forget the window . the thief , who play on the other side , no sooner perceive this opening than he begin to move that way ; and , find the passage easy , he take with he the young fellow 's hat , and without any ceremony step into the street and make the best of he way . the young fellow , return with a double mug of strong beer , be a little surprized to find the constable at the door ; but much more so when , the door be open , he perceive the prisoner have make he escape , and which way . he throw down the beer , and , without utter anything to the constable except a hearty curse or two , he nimbly leapt out of the window , and go again in pursuit of he prey , be very unwilling to lose the reward which he have assure himself of . the constable hath not be dischar of suspicion on this account ; it hath be say that , not be concerned in the take the thief , he could not have be entitle to any part of the reward if he have be convict ; that the thief have several guinea in he pocket ; that it be very unlikely he should have be guilty of such a oversight ; that he pretence for leave the room be absurd ; that it be he constant maxim , that a wise man never refuse money on any condition ; that at every election he always have sell he vote to both party , &c . but , notwithstand these and many other such allegation , I be sufficiently convinced of
of he innocence ; have be positively assure of it by those who receive they information from he own mouth ; which , in the opinion of some modern , be the best and indeed only evidence . all the family be now up , and with many other assemble in the kitchen , where tow - wouse be in some tribulation ; the surgeon have declare that by law he be liable to be indict for the thief 's escape , as it be out of he house ; he be a little comforted , however , by 's opinion , that as the escape be by night the indictment would not lie . tow -wause deliver herself in the follow word : " sure never be such a fool as my husband ; would any other person live have leave a man in the custody of such a drunken drowsy blockhead as ? " ( which be the constable 's name ) ; " and if he could be indict without any harm to he wife and child , I should be glad of it . " ( then the bell ring in 's room . ) " why , , , where the be you all ? have you no ears , or no conscience , not to tend the sick better ? see what the gentleman want . why do not you go yourself , tow - wouse ? but any one may die for you ; you have no more feeling than a deal board . if a man live a fortnight in you house without spend a penny , you would never put he in mind of it . see whether he drink tea or coffee for breakfast . " " yes , my dear , " cry tow - wouse . she then ask the doctor and what morning 's dratch they choose , who answer , they have a pot of cyder - and at the fire ; which we will leave they merry over , and return to . he have rise pretty early this morning ; but , though he wound be far from threaten any danger , he be so sore with the bruise , that it be impossible for he to think of undertake a journey yet ; , therefore , whose stock be visibly decrease with the expense of supper and breakfast , and which could not survive that day 's scoring , begin to consider how it be possible to recruit it . at last he cry , " he have luckily hit on a sure method , and , though it would oblige he to return himself home together with , it matter not much . " he then send for -wouse , and , take he into another room , tell he " he want to borrow three guinea , for which he would put ample security into he hand . " tow -wouse , who expect a watch , or ring , or something of double the value , answer , " he believe he could furnish he . " upon which , point to he saddle - bag , tell he , with a face and voice full of solemnity , " that there be in that bag no less than nine volume of manuscript sermon , as well worth a hundred pound as a shilling be worth twelve pence , and that he would deposit one of the volume in he hand by way of ; not doubt but that he would have the honesty to return it on he repayment of the money ; for otherwise he must be a very great loser , see that every volume would at least bring he ten pound , as he have be inform by a neighbour clergyman in the country ; for , " say he , " as to my own part , have never yet deal in printing , I do not pretend to ascertain the exact value of such thing . " tow - wouse , who be a little surprized at the pawn , say ( and not without some truth ) , " that he be no judge of the price of such kind of goods ; and as for money , he really be very short . " Adam answer , " certainly he would not scruple to lend he three guinea on what be undoubtedly worth at least ten . " the landlord reply , " he do not believe he have so much money in the house , and besides , he be to make up a sum . he be very confident the book be of much higher value , and heartily sorry it do not suit he . " he then cry out , " come sy ! " though nobody call ; and run downstairs without any fear of break he neck . poor Adam be extremely deject at this disappointment , nor know he what further stratagem to try . he immediately apply to he pipe , he constant friend and comfort in he affliction ; and , lean over the rail , he devote himself to meditation , assist by the inspiring fume of tobacco . he have on a nightcap drawn over he wig , and a short greatcoat , which half cover he cassock -- a dress which , add to something comical enough in he countenance , compose a figure likely to attract the eye of those who be not over give to observation . whilst he be smoak he pipe in this posture , a coach and six , with a numerous attendance , drive into the inn . there alight from the coach a young fellow and a brace of pointer , after which another young fellow leapt from the box , and shake the former by the hand ; and both , together with
with the dog , be instantly conduct by - wouse into a apartment ; whither as they pass , they entertaine themselves with the follow short facetious dialogue :-- " you be a pretty fellow for a coachman , ! " say he from the coach ; " you have almost overturned we just now . " -- " take you ! " say the coachman ; " if I have only break you neck , it would have be save somebody else the trouble ; but I should have be sorry for the pointer . " --" why , you son of a benefit --, " answer the other , " if nobody could shoot better than you , the pointer would be of no use ."--" d -- and I , " say the coachman , " I will shoot with you five guinea a shot . " --" you be hang , " say the other ; " for five guinea you shall shoot at my a --. " -- " do , " say the coachman ; " I will pepper you better than ever you be pepper by . " -- " pepper you grandmother , " say the other : " here 's tow - wouse will let you shoot at he for a shilling a time . " --" I know he honour better , " cry tow - wouse ; " I never see a surer shot at a partridge . every man miss now and then ; but if I could shoot half as well as he honour , I would desire no better livelihood than I could get by my gun . " -- " Pox on you , " say the coachman , " you demolish more game now than you head 's worth . there be a bitch , tow - wouse : by g -- she never blink [ ] a bird in she life . " --" I have a puppy , not a year old , shall hunt with she for a hundred , " cry the other gentleman .-- " do , " say the coachman : " but you will be pox ' before you make the bett . " --" if you have a mind for a bett , " cry the coachman , " I will match my spot dog with you white bitch for a hundred , play or pay . " -- " do , " say the other : " and I will run against with you for another . " -- " no , " cry he from the box ; " but I will venture against , or either . " --" go to the devil , " cry he from the coach : " I will make every bett you own way , to be sure ! I will match with for a thousand , if you dare ; and I say do first . " [ Footnote a : to blink be a term use to signify the dog 's pass by a bird without point at it . ] they be now arrive ; and the reader will be very contented to leave they , and repair to the kitchen ; where , the surgeon , and a exciseman be smoak they pipe over some cyder - and ; and where the servants , who attend the two noble gentleman we have just see alight , be now arrive . " , " cry one of the footman , " there be parson Adams smoak he pipe in the gallery . " --" yes , " say ; " I pull off my hat to he , and the parson speak to I . " " be the gentleman a clergyman , then ? " say ( for he cassock have be tie up when he arrive ) . " yes , sir , " answer the footman ; " and one there be but few like . " -- " aye , " say ; " if I have know it sooner , I should have desire he company ; I would always show a proper respect for the cloth : but what say you , doctor , shall we adjourn into a room , and invite he to take part of a bowl of punch ? " this proposal be immediately agree to and execute ; and parson Adams accept the invitation , much civility pass between the two clergyman , who both declare the great honour they have for the cloth . they have not be long together before they enter into a discourse on small tithes , which continue a full hour , without the doctor or exciseman 's have one opportunity to offer a word . it be then propose to begin a general conversation , and the exciseman open on foreign affair ; but a word unluckily drop from one of they introduce a dissertation on the hardship suffer by the inferior clergy ; which , after a long duration , conclude with bring the nine volume of sermon on the carpet . Barnabas greatly discourage poor Adam ; he say , " the age be so wicked , that nobody read sermon : would you think it , ? " say he , " I once intend to print a volume of sermon myself , and they have the approbation of two or three bishop ; but what do you think a bookseller offer I ? " --" twelve guinea perhaps , " cry .-- " not twelve pence , I assure you , " answer : " nay , the dog refuse I a Concordance in exchange . at last I offer to give he the print they , for the sake of dedica they to that very gentleman who just now drive he own coach into the inn ; and , I assure you ,
, he have the impudence to refuse my offer ; by which mean I lose a good living , that be afterwards give away in exchange for a pointer , to one who -- but I will not say anything against the cloth . so you may guess , , what you be to expect ; for if sermon would have go down , I believe -- I will not be vain ; but to be concise with you , three bishop say they be the best that ever be writ : but indeed there be a pretty moderate number print already , and not all sell yet . " -- " pray , sir , " say , " to what do you think the number may amount ? " --" , " answer , " a bookseller tell I , he believe five thousand volume at least . " -- " five thousand ? " quoth the surgeon : " what can they be writ upon ? I remember when I be a boy , I use to read one 's sermon ; and , I be sure , if a man practise half so much as be in one of those sermon , he will go to heaven . " --" Doctor , " cry , " you have a prophane way of talking , for which I must reprove you . a man can never have he duty too frequently inculcate into he . and as for , to be sure he be a good writer , and say thing very well ; but comparison be odious ; another man may write as well as he -- I believe there be some of my sermon , " -- and then he apply the candle to he pipe .-- " and I believe there be some of my discourse , " cry Adams , " which the bishop would not think totally unworthy of be print ; and I have be inform I might procure a very large sum ( indeed a immense one ) on they . " --" I doubt that , " answer : " however , if you desire to make some money of they , perhaps you may sell they by advertise the manuscript sermon of a clergyman lately decease , all warrant original , and never print . and now I think of it , I should be oblige to you , if there be ever a funeral one among they , to lend it I ; for I be this very day to preach a funeral sermon , for which I have not penn a line , though I be to have a double price . " -- Adams answer , " he have but one , which he fear would not serve he purpose , be sacr to the memory of a magistrate , who have exert himself very singularly in the preservation of the morality of he neighbour , insomuch that he have neither alehouse nor lewd woman in the parish where he liv . " -- " no , " reply , " that will not do quite so well ; for the deceased , upon whose virtue I be to harangue , be a little too much addicte to liquor , and publickly keep a mistress .-- I believe I must take a common sermon , and trust to my memory to introduce something handsome on he . " --" to you invention rather , " say the doctor : " you memory will be apter to put you out ; for no man live remember anything good of he . " with such kind of spiritual discourse , they empty the bowl of punch , pay they reckoning , and separate : Adam and the doctor go up to , depart to celebrate the aforesaid decease , and the exciseman descende into the cellar to gauge the vessel . be now ready to sit down to a loin of mutton , and wait for , when he and the doctor come in . the doctor , have feel he pulse and examine he wound , declare he much better , which he impute to that sanative soporiferous dratch , a medicine " whose virtue , " he say , " be never to be sufficiently extoll . " and great indeed they must be , if be so much indebt to they as the doctor imagine ; since nothing more than those effluvia which escape the cork could have contribute to he recovery ; for the medicine have stood untouched in the window ever since its arrival . pass that day , and the three follow , with he friend , in which nothing so remarkable happene as the swift progress of he recovery . as he have a excellent habit of body , he wound be now almost heale ; and he bruise give he so little uneasiness , that he press to let he depart ; tell he he should never be able to return sufficient thanks for all he favour , but beg that he might no longer delay he journey to . Adam , notwithstand the ignorance , as he conceive it , of - wouse , and the envy ( for such he think it ) of , have great expectation from he sermon : see therefore in so good a way , he tell he he would agree to he set out the next morning in the stage - coach , that he believe he should have sufficient , after the reckoning pay , to procure he one day 's conveyance in it , and afterwards he would be able to get on on foot , or might be favour with a lift in some neighbour 's waggon , especially as there be then to be a fair in the town whither the coach would carry he , to which
which number from he parish resorte -- and as to himself , he agree to proceed to the great city . they be now walk in the inn -yard , when a fat , fair , short person ride in , and , alight from he horse , go directly up to , who be smoak he pipe on a bench . the parson and the stranger shook one another very lovingly by the hand , and go into a room together . the evening now come on , retire to he chamber , whither the good accompany he , and take this opportunity to expatiate on the great mercy have lately show he , of which he ought not only to have the deepest inward sense , but likewise to express outward thankfulness for they . they therefore fall both on they knee , and spend a considerable time in prayer and thanksgive . they have just finish when come in and tell desire to speak to he on some business of consequence below - stair . desire , if it be likely to detain he long , he would let he know it , that he might go to bed , which promise , and in that case they wish one another good - night . . _a pleasant discourse between the two parson and the bookseller , ' which be break off by a unlucky accident happen in the inn , which produce a dialogue between - wouse and she maid of no gentle kind ._ as soon as come into the room , introduce he to the stranger , who be , he tell he , a bookseller , and would be as likely to deal with he for he sermon as any man whatever . Adam , salut the stranger , answer , that he be very much oblige to he ; that nothing could be more convenient , for he have no other business to the great city , and be heartily desirous of return with the young man , who be just recover of he misfortune . he then snapt he finger ( as be usual with he ) , and take two or three turn about the room in a extasy . and to induce the bookseller to be as expeditious as possible , as likewise to offer he a better price for he commodity , he assure they they meeting be extremely lucky to himself ; for that he have the most pressing occasion for money at that time , he own be almost spend , and have a friend then in the same inn , who be just recover from some wound he have receive from robber , and be in a most indigent condition . " so that nothing , " say he , " could be so opportune for the supplying both we necessity as my make a immediate bargain with you . " as soon as he have seat himself , the stranger begin in these word : " Sir , I do not care absolutely to deny engage in what my friend recommend ; but sermon be mere drug . the trade be so vastly stock with they , that really , unless they come out with the name of or , or some other such great man , as a bishop , or those sort of people , I do not care to touch ; unless now it be a sermon preach on the 30th of ; or we could say in the title - page , publish at the earnest request of the congregation , or the inhabitant ; but , truly , for a dry piece of sermon , I have rather be excuse ; especially as my hand be so full at present . however , sir , as mention they to I , I will , if you please , take the manuscript with I to town , and send you my opinion of it in a very short time . " " oh ! " say , " if you desire it , I will read two or three discourse as a specimen . " this , who love sermon no better than a grocer doth fig , immediately object to , and advise Adams to let the bookseller have he sermon : tell he , " if he give he a direction , he might be certain of a speedy answer ; " add , he need not scruple trust they in he possession . " no , " say the bookseller , " if it be a play that have be act twenty night together , I believe it would be safe . " Adams do not at all relish the last expression ; he say " he be sorry to hear sermon compare to play . " " not by I , I assure you , " cry the bookseller , " though I do not know whether the licensing act may not shortly bring they to the same footing ; but I have formerly know a hundred guinea give for a play . " -- " more shame for those who give it , " cry .--" why so ? " say the bookseller , " for they get hundred by it ." --" but be there no difference between convey good or ill instruction to mankind ? " say : " would not a honest mind rather lose money by the one , than gain it by the other ? " --" if you can find any such , I will not be they hindrance , " answer the bookseller ; " but I think those person who get by preaching sermon be the properest to lose by print they : for my part , the copy that sell best will be always the best copy in my opinion ; I be no enemy to sermon
sermon , but because they do not sell : for I would as soon print one of 's as any farce whatever . " " whoever print such heterodox stuff ought to be hang , " say . " , " say he , turn to , " this fellow 's writing ( I know not whether you have see they ) be level at the clergy . he would reduce we to the example of the primitive ag , forsooth ! and would insinuate to the people that a clergyman ought to be always preach and pray . he pretend to understand the Scripture literally ; and would make mankind believe that the poverty and low estate which be recommend to the Church in its infancy , and be only temporary doctrine adapt to she under persecution , be to be preserve in she flourishing and establish state . , the principles of , , and all the freethinker , be not calculate to do half the mischief , as those profess by this fellow and he follower . " " , " answer , " if have carry he doctrine no farther than you mention , I should have remain , as I once be , he well - wisher . I be , myself , as great a enemy to the luxury and splendour of the clergy as he can be . I do not , more than he , by the flourishing estate of the , understand the palace , equipage , dress , furniture , rich dainty , and vast fortune , of she ministers . surely those thing , which saavor so strongly of this world , become not the servants of one who profess he kingdom be not of it . but when he begin to call nonsense and enthusiasm to he aid , and set up the detestable doctrine of faith against good work , I be he friend no longer ; for surely that doctrine be coin in hell ; and one would think none but the devil himself could have the confidence to preach it . for can anything be more derogatory to the honour of than for man to imagine that the all - wise be will hereafter say to the good and virtuous , ' Notwithstand the purity of thy life , notwithstand that constant rule of virtue and goodness in which you walk upon earth , still , as thou didst not believe everything in the true orthodox manner , thy want of faith shall condemn thee ? ' or , on the other side , can any doctrine have a more pernicious influence on society , than a persuasion that it will be a good plea for the villain at the last day , it be true I never obey one of thy commandment , yet punish I not , for I believe they all ? ' " --" I suppose , sir , " say the bookseller , " you sermon be of a different kind . " -- " aye , sir , " say ; " the contrary , I thank , be inculcate in almost every page , or I should belye my own opinion , which hath always be , that a virtuous and good , or heathen , be more acceptable in the sight of they Creator than a vicious and wick , through he faith be as perfectly orthodox as 's himself . " --" I wish you success , " say the bookseller , " but must beg to be excuse , as my hand be so very full at present ; and , indeed , I be afraid you will find a backwardness in the trade to engage in a book which the clergy would be certain to cry down ." --" forbid , " say , " any book should be propagate which the clergy would cry down ; but if you mean by the clergy , some few design factious man , who have it at heart to establish some favourite scheme at the price of the liberty of mankind , and the very essence of religion , it be not in the power of such person to decry any book they please ; witness that excellent book call , ' a plain account of the and of the Sacrament ;' a book write ( if I may venture on the expression ) with the pen of a angel , and calculate to restore the true use of , and of that sacr institution ; for what could tend more to the noble purpose of religion than frequent chearful meeting among the member of a society , in which they should , in the presence of one another , and in the service of the , make promise of be good , friendly , and benevolent to each other ? now , this excellent book be attack by a party , but unsuccessfully . " at these word fall a -ringing with all the violence imaginable ; upon which a servant attending , he bid he " bring a bill immediately ; for that he be in company , for atch he know , with the devil himself ; and he expect to hear the , the , or commend , if he stay a few minute longer . " Adam desire , " as he be so much move at he mention a book which he do without apprehend any possibility of offence , that he would be so kind to propose any objection he have to it , which he would endeaavor to answer . " --" I propose objection ! " say , " I never read a syllable in any such wick book ; I never see it in my life , I assure you . " -- be go to answer , when a most hideous uproar begin in the inn
inn . , -wouse , and , all lift up they voice together ; but - wouse 's voice , like a bass viol in a concert , be clearly and distinctly distinguished among the rest , and be hear to articulate the follow sound :--" of you damn would villain ! be this the return to all the care I have take of you family ? this the reward of my virtue ? be this the manner in which you behave to one who bring you a fortune , and prefer you to so many match , all you betters ? to abuse my bed , my own bed , with my own servant ! but I will maul the slut , I will tear she nasty eye out ! be ever such a pitiful dog , to take up with such a mean trollop ? if she have be a gentlewoman , like myself , it have be some excuse ; but a beggarly , saucy , dirty servant - maid . get you out of my house , you whore . " to which she add another name , which we do not care to stain we paper with . it be a monosyllable begin with a benefit --, and indeed be the same as if she have pronounce the word , she - dog . which term we shall , to avoid offence , use on this occasion , though indeed both the mistress and maid utter the above - mention b --, a word extremely disgustful to female of the lower sort . have borne all hithertoo with patience , and have utter only lamentation ; but the last appellation sting she to the quick . " I be a woman as well as yourself , " she roar out , " and no she - dog ; and if I have be a little naughty , I be not the first ; if I have be no better than I should be , " cry she , sobb , " that be no reason you should call I out of my name ; my be - better be will -rse than I . " --" Huzzy , huzzy , " say tow -wouse , " have you the impudence to answer I ? do I not catch you , you saucy " -- and then again repeat the terrible word so odious to female ear . " I can not bear that name , " answer : " if I have be wick , I be to answer for it myself in the other world ; but I have do nothing that be unnatural ; and I will go out of you house this moment , for I will never be call she - dog by any mistress in . " tow -wouse then arm herself with the spit , but be prevent from execute any dreadful purpose by , who confin she arm with the strength of a wrist which Hercule would not have be asham of . tow -wouse , be catch , as we lawyer express it , with the manner , and have no defence to make , very prudently withdraw himself ; and commit herself to the protection of the hostler , who , though she could not conceive he pleased with what have happen , be , in she opinion , rather a gentler beast than she mistress . tow -wouse , at the intercession of , and find the enemy vanish , begin to compose herself , and at length recover the usual serenity of she temper , in which we will leave she , to open to the reader the step which lead to a catastrophe , common enough , and comical enough too perhaps , in modern history , yet often fatal to the repose and well - being of family , and the subject of many tragedy , both in life and on the stage . . the history of the chambermaid , and a account of what occasion the violent scene in the preceding chapter ._ , who be the occasion of all this hurry , have some good quality . she have good - nature , generosity , and compassion , but unfortunately , she constitution be compose of those warm ingredient which , though the purity of court or nunnery might have happily controule they , be by no means able to endure the ticklish situation of a chambermaid at a inn ; who be daily liable to the solicitation of lover of all complexion ; to the dangerous address of fine gentleman of the army , who sometimes be obliged to reside with they a whole year together ; and , above all , be expose to the caress of footman , stage - coachman , and drawer ; all of whom employ the whole artillery of kissing , flatter , brib , and every other weapon which be to be find in the whole armoury of love , against they . , who be but one - and - twenty , have now live three year in this dangerous situation , during which she have escape pretty well . a ensign of foot be the first person who make a impression on she heart ; he do indeed raise a flame in she which require the care of a surgeon to cool . while she burn for he , several other burnt for she . officer of the army , young gentleman travel the western circuit , inoffensive squire , and some of graver character , be set a - fire by she charms ! at length , have perfectly recover the effect of she first unhappy passion , she seem to have vow a state of perpetual chastity . she be long deaf to all the suffering of she lover , till one day , at a neighbouring fair
fair , the rhetoric of the hostler , with a new straw hat and a pint of wine , make a second conquest over she . she do not , however , feel any of those flame on this occasion which have be the consequence of she former amour ; nor , indeed , those other ill effect which prudent young woman very justly apprehend from too absolute a indulgence to the press endearment of they lover . this latter , perhaps , be a little owe to she not be entirely constant to , with whom she permit the stage - coachman , and now and then a handsome young traveller , to share she favour . tow -wause have for some time cast the languishing eye of affection on this young maiden . he have laid hold on every opportunity of say tender thing to she , squeeze she by the hand , and sometimes kiss she lip ; for , as the violence of he passion have considerably abate to - wouse , so , like water , which be stopt from its usual current in one place , it naturally seek a vent in another . tow -wouse be think to have perceive this abatement , and , probably , it add very little to the natural sweetness of she temper ; for though she be as true to she husband as the dial to the sun , she be rather more desirous of be shone on , as be more capable of feel he warmth . ever since 's arrival , have conceive a extraordinary liking to he , which discover itself more and more as he grow better and better ; till that fatal evening , when , as she be warm he bed , she passion grow to such a height , and so perfectly master both she modesty and she reason , that , after many fruitless hint and sly insinuation , she at last threw down the warming -pan , and , embrace he with great eagerness , swore he be the handsomest creature she have ever see . , in great confusion , leapt from she , and tell she he be sorry to see a young woman cast off all regard to modesty ; but she have go too far to recede , and grow so very indecent , that be obliged , contrary to he inclination , to use some violence to she ; and , take she in he arm , he shut she out of the room , and lock the door . how ought man to rejoice that he chastity be always in he own power ; that , if he hath sufficient strength of mind , he hath always a competent strength of body to defend himself , and cannot , like a poor weak woman , be ravish against he will ! be in the most violent agitation at this disappointment . and pull she heart , as with two string , two different way ; one moment she think of stab ; the next , of take he in she arm , and devour he with kiss ; but the latter passion be far more prevalent . then she think of revenge he refusal on herself ; but , whilst she be engage in this meditation , happily death present himself to she in so many shape , of drowning , hang , poiso , & c. , that she distract mind could resolve on none . in this perturbation of spirit , it accidentally occur to she memory that she master 's bed be not make ; she therefore go directly to he room , where he happen at that time to be engage at he bureau . as soon as she see he , she attempt to retire ; but he call she back , and , take she by the hand , squeeze she so tenderly , at the same time whisper so many soft thing into she ear , and then press she so closely with he kiss , that the vanquished fair one , whose passion be already raise , and which be not so whimsically capricious that one man only could lay they , though , perhaps , she would have rather prefer that one -- the vanquished fair one quietly submit , I say , to she master 's will , who have just attaine the accomplishment of he bliss when - wouse unexpectedly enter the room , and cause all that confusion which we have before see , and which it be not necessary , at present , to take any farther notice of ; since , without the assistance of a single hint from we , every reader of any speculation or experience , though not marry himself , may easily conjecture that it conclude with the discharge of , the submission of - wouse , with some thing to be perform on he side by way of gratitude for he wife 's goodness in be reconcile to he , with many hearty promise never to offend any more in the like manner ; and , lastly , he quietly and contentedly bear to be remind of he transgression , as a kind of penance , once or twice a day during the residue of he life . . chapter I . _on division in . there be certain mystery or secret in all trade , from the highest to the lowest , from that of prime-ministering to this of authoring , which be seldom discover unless to member of the same calling . among those use by we gentleman of the latter occupation , I take this of divide we work into book and chapter to be none of the least considerable . now , for want of be truly acquaint with this secret , common reader imagine , that by this art
art of dividing we mean only to swell we work to a much larger bulk than they would otherwise be extend to . these several place therefore in we paper , which be fill with we book and chapter , be understood as so much buckram , stay , and stay - tape in a taylor 's bill , serve only to make up the sum total , commonly find at the bottom of we first page and of he last . but in reality the case be otherwise , and in this as well as all other instance we consult the advantage of we reader , not we own ; and indeed , many notable use arise to he from this method ; for , first , those little spaces between we chapter may be look upon as a inn or resting - place where he may stop and take a glass or any other refreshment as it please he . Nay , we fine reader will , perhaps , be scarce able to travel farther than through one of they in a day . as to those vacant page which be place between we book , they be to be regard as those stage where in long journy the traveller stay some time to repose himself , and consider of what he hath see in the part he hath already pass through ; a consideration which I take the liberty to recommend a little to the reader ; for , however swift he capacity may be , I would not advise he to travel through these page too fast ; for if he doth , he may probably miss the see some curiious productions of nature , which will be observe by the slower and more accurate reader . a volume without any such place of rest resemble the opening of wilds or seas , which tire the eye and fatigue the spirit when enter upon . secondly , what be the contents prefix to every chapter but so many inscription over the gate of inns ( to continue the same metaphor ) , inform the reader what entertainment he be to expect , which if he like not , he may travel on to the next ; for , in biography , as we be not tie down to a exact concatenation equally with other historian , so a chapter or two ( for instance , this I be now write ) may be often pass over without any injury to the whole . and in these inscription I have be as faithful as possible , not imitat the celebrated , who promise you one thing and give you another ; nor some title - page author , who promise a great deal and produce nothing at all . there be , besides these more obvious benefit , several other which we reader enjoy from this art of dividing ; though perhaps most of they too mysterious to be presently understand by any who be not initiate into the science of authoring . to mention , therefore , but one which be most obvious , it prevent spoil the beauty of a book by turn down its leave , a method otherwise necessary to those reader who ( though they read with great improvement and advantage ) be apt , when they return to they study after half - a - hour 's absence , to forget where they leave off . these division have the sanction of great antiquity . Homer not only divide he great work into twenty - four book ( in compliment perhaps to the twenty - four letter to which he have very particular obligation ) , but , accord to the opinion of some very sagacious critics , hawk they all separately , deliver only one book at a time ( probably by subscription ) . he be the first inventor of the art which hath so long lain dormant , of publish by number ; a art now bring to such perfection , that even dictionary be divide and exhibit piecemeal to the public ; nay , one bookseller hath ( to encourage learn and ease the public ) contrive to give they a dictionary in this divided manner for only fifteen shilling more than it would have cost entire . Virgil hath give we he poem in twelve book , a argument of he modesty ; for by that , doubtless , he would insinuate that he pretend to no more than half the merit of the ; for the same reason , we go originally no farther than ten ; till , be puffe up by the praise of he friend , he put himself on the same footing with the poet . I shall not , however , enter so deep into this matter as some very learned critick have do ; who have with infinite labour and acute discernment discover what book be proper for embellishment , and what require simplicity only , particularly with regard to simile , which I think be now generally agree to become any book but the first . I will dismiss this chapter with the follow observation : that it become a author generally to divide a book , as it do a butcher to not he meat , for such assistance be of great help to both the reader and the carver . and now , have indulge myself a little , I will endeaavor to indulge the curiosity of my reader , who be no doubt impatient to know what he will find in the subsequent chapter of this book . chapter ii . _a surprizing instance of 's short memory , with the unfortunate consequence which it brotch on ._ and be now ready to depart different way , when a accident determine the former to return with he friend , which tow -wouse , , and the
the bookseller have not be able to do . this accident be , that those sermon , which the parson be travel to to publish , be , of my good reader ! leave behind ; what he have mistaken for they in the saddlebag be no other than three shirt , a pair of shoe , and some other necessary , which , who think she husband would want shirt more than sermon on he journey , have carefully provide he . this discovery be now luckily owe to the presence of at the opening the saddlebag ; who , have hear he friend say he carry with he nine volume of sermon , and not be of that sect of philosopher who can reduce all the matter of the world into a nutshell , see there be no room for they in the bag , where the parson have say they be deposit , have the curiosity to cry out , " bless I , sir , where be you sermon ? " the parson answer , " there , there , child ; there they be , under my shirts . " now it happen that he have take forth he last shirt , and the vehicle remain visibly empty . " sure , sir , " say , " there be nothing in the bag . " upon which , start , and testify some surprize , cry , " hey ! fie , fie upon it ! they be not here sure enough . ay , they be certainly leave behind . " be greatly concerned at the uneasiness which he apprehend he friend must feel from this disappointment ; he beg he to pursue he journey , and promise he would himself return with the book to he with the utmost expedition . " no , thank you , child , " answer ; " it shall not be so . what would it avail I , to tarry in the great city , unless I have my discourse with I , which be _ut ita dicam , the sole cause , the _aitia monotate_ of my peregrination ? no , child , as this accident hath happen , I be resolve to return back to my cure , together with you ; which indeed my inclination sufficiently lead I to . this disappointment may perhaps be intend for my good . " he conclude with a verse out of , which signify no more than that sometimes it rain , and sometimes the sun shine . bow with obedience and thankfulness for the inclination which the parson express of return with he ; and now the bill be call for , which , on examination , amount within a shilling to the sum have in he pocket . perhaps the reader may wonder how he be able to produce a sufficient sum for so many day : that he may not be surprize , therefore , it can not be unnecessary to acquaint he that he have borrowed a guinea of a servant belong to the coach and six , who have be formerly one of he parishioner , and whose master , the owner of the coach , then live within three mile of he ; for so good be the credit of , that even , the 's steward , would have lent he a guinea with very little security . [ ] discharge the bill , and they be both set out , have agree to ride and tie ; a method of travelling much use by person who have but one horse between they , and be thus perform . the two traveller set out together , one on horseback , the other on foot : now , as it generally happen that he on horseback outgo he on foot , the custom be , that , when he arrive at the distance agree on , he be to dismount , tie the horse to some gate , tree , post , or other thing , and then proceed on foot ; when the other come up to the horse he unty he , mount , and gallop on , till , have pass by he fellow - traveller , he likewise arrive at the place of tying . and this be that method have travel so much in use among we prudent ancestor , who know that horse have mouth as well as leg , and that they could not use the latter without be at the expense of suffer the beasts themselves to use the former . this be the method in use in those day when , instead of a coach and six , a member of parliament 's lady use to mount a pillion behind she husband ; and a grave serjeant at law condescende to amble to on a easy pad , with he clerk kick he heel behind he . be now go some minute , have insist on 's begin the journey on horseback , and have he foot in the stirrup , when the hostler present he a bill for the horse 's board during he residence at the inn . say have pay all ; but this matter , be refer to - wouse , be by he decide in favour of the hostler , and indeed with truth and justice ; for this be a fresh instance of that shortness of memory which do not arise from want of part , but that continual hurry in which parson be always involved . be now reduce to a dilemma which extremely puzzl he . the sum due for horse - meat be twelve shilling ( for Adams , who have borrow the beast of he clerk , have order he to be feed as well as they could feed he ) , and the cash in he pocket amount to sixpence
sixpence ( for Adams have divide the last shilling with he ) . now , though there have be some ingenious person who have contrive to pay twelve shilling with sixpence , be not one of they . he have never contract a debt in he life , and be consequently the less ready at a expedient to extricate himself . tow -wouse be willing to give he credit till next time , to which tow - wouse would probably have consent ( for such be 's beauty , that it have make some impression even on that piece of flint which that good woman wore in she bosom by way of heart ) . would have find , therefore , very likely the passage free , have he not , when he honestly discover the nakedness of he pocket , pull out that little piece of gold which we have mention before . this cause - wouse 's eye to water ; she tell she do not conceive a man could want money whilst he have gold in he pocket . answer he have such a value for that little piece of gold , that he would not part with it for a hundred time the riche which the greatest esquire in the county be worth . " a pretty way , indeed , " say - wouse , " to run in debt , and then refuse to part with you money , because you have a value for it ! I never know any piece of gold of more value than as many shilling as it would change for . " -- " not to preserve my life from starving , nor to redeem it from a robber , would I part with this dear piece ! " answer . " what , " say - wouse , " I suppose it be give you by some vile trollop , some miss or other ; if it have be the present of a virtuous woman , you would not have have such a value for it . my husband be a fool if he part with the horse without be pay for he . " -- " no , no , I can not part with the horse , indeed , till I have the money , " cry tow -wouse . a resolution highly commend by a lawyer then in the yard , who declare - wouse might justify the detainer . as we can not therefore at present get out of the inn , we shall leave he in it , and carry we reader on after parson Adam , who , he mind be perfectly at ease , fall into a contemplation on a passage in , which entertaine he for three mile together , without suffer he once to reflect on he fellow - traveller . at length , have spun out he thread , and be now at the summit of a hill , he cast he eye backward , and wonder that he could not see any sign of . as he leave he ready to mount the horse , he could not apprehend any mischief have happen , neither could he suspect that he miss he way , it be so broad and plain ; the only reason which present itself to he be , that he have meet with a acquaintance who have prevail with he to delay some time in discourse . he therefore resolve to proceed slowly forwards , not doubt but that he should be shortly overtaken ; and soon come to a large water , which , fill the whole road , he see no method of passing unless by wad through , which he accordingly do up to he middle ; but be no sooner get to the other side than he perceive , if he have look over the hedge , he would have find a footpath capable of conduct he without wett he shoe . he surprize at be not come up grow now very troublesome : he begin to fear he know not what ; and as he determine to move no farther , and , if he do not shortly overtake he , to return back , he wish to find a house of public entertainment where he might dry he clothes and refresh himself with a pint ; but , see no such ( for no other reason than because he do not cast he eye a hundred yard forward ) , he sit himself down on a stile , and pull out he . a fellow pass presently by , ask he if he could direct he to a alehouse . the fellow , who have just leave it , and perceive the house and sign to be within sight , think he have jeer he , and be of a morose temper , bay he follow he nose and be d --- n' . Adams tell he he be a saucy jackanape ; upon which the fellow turn about angrily ; but , perceive Adams clench he fist , he think proper to go on without take any farther notice . a horseman , follow immediately after , and be ask the same question , answer , " friend , there be one within a stone be throw ; I believe you may see it before you . " Adams , lift up he eye , cry , " I protest , and so there be ; " and , thank he informer , proceed directly to it . chapter III . the opinion of two lawyer concern the same gentleman , with 's inquiry into the religion of he host ._ he have just enter the house , and call for he pint , and seate himself , when two horseman come to the door , and , fasten they horse to the rail , alight .
. they say there be a violent shower of rain come on , which they intend to weather there , and go into a little room by themselves , not perceive . one of these immediately ask the other , " if he have see a more comical adventure a great while ? " upon which the other say , " he doubt whether , by law , the landlord could justify detain the horse for he corn and hay . " but the former answer , " undoubtedly he can ; it be a adjudged case , and I have know it try . " Adams , who , though he be , as the reader may suspect , a little inclin to forgetfulness , never want more than a hint to remind he , overhear they discourse , immediately suggest to himself that this be he own horse , and that he have forget to pay for he , which , upon inquiry , he be certify of by the gentleman ; who add , that the horse be likely to have more rest than food , unless he be pay for . the poor parson resolve to return presently to the inn , though he know no more than how to procure he horse he liberty ; he be , however , prevail on to stay under covert , till the shower , which be now very violent , be over . the three traveller then sit down together over a mug of good beer ; when , who have observe a gentleman 's house as he pass along the road , inquire to whom it belong ; one of the horseman have no sooner mention the owner 's name , than the other begin to revile he in the most opprobrious term . the english language scarce afford a single reproachful word , which he do not vent on this occasion . he charge he likewise with many particular fact . he say , " he no more regard a field of wheat when he be hunt , than he do the highway ; that he have injure several poor farmer by trampl they corn under he horse 's heel ; and if any of they beg he with the utmost submission to refrain , he horsewhip be always ready to do they justice . " he say , " that he be the greatest tyrant to the neighbour in every other instance , and would not suffer a farmer to keep a gun , though he might justify it by law ; and in he own family so cruel a master , that he never keep a servant a twelvemonth . in he capacity as a justice , " continue he , " he behave so partially , that he commit or acquit just as he be in the humour , without any regard to truth or evidence ; the devil may carry any one before he for I ; I would rather be try before some judge , than be a prosecutor before he : if I have a estate in the neighbourhood , I would sell it for half the value rather than live near he . " 's shook he head , and say , " he be sorry such man be suffer to proceed with impunity , and that riche could set any man above the law . " the reviler , a little after , retire into the yard , the gentleman who have first mention he name to Adams begin to assure he " that he companion be a prejudiced person . it be true , " say he , " perhaps , that he may have sometimes pursue he game over a field of corn , but he hath always make the party ample satisfaction : that so far from tyrannise over he neighbour , or take away they gun , he himself know several farmers not qualified , who not only keep gun , but kill game with they ; that he be the best of master to he servants , and several of they have grow old in he service ; that he be the best justice of peace in the kingdom , and , to he certain knowledge , have decide many difficult point , which be refer to he , with the greatest equity and the highest wisdom ; and he verily believe , several person would give a year 's purchase more for a estate near he , than under the wing of any other great man . " he have just finish he encomium when he companion return and acquaint he the storm be over . upon which they presently mount they horse and depart . Adams , who be in the utmost anxiety at those different characters of the same person , ask he host if he know the gentleman : for he begin to imagine they have by mistake be speak of two several gentleman . " no , no , master , " answer the host ( a shrewd , cunn fellow ) ; " I know the gentleman very well of whom they have be speak , as I do the gentleman who speak of he . as for riding over other man 's corn , to my knowledge he hath not be on horseback these two year . I never hear he do any injury of that kind ; and as to make reparation , he be not so free of he money as that come to neither . do I ever hear of he take away any man 's gun ; nay , I know several who have gun in they house ; but as for kill game with they , no man be stricter ; and I believe he would ruin any who do . you hear one of the gentleman say he be the worst
worst master in the world , and the other that he be the best ; but for my own part , I know all he servants , and never hear from any of they that he be either one or the other . " -- " aye ! aye ! " say Adams ; " and how doth he behave as a justice , pray ? " --" faith , friend , " answer the host , " I question whether he be in the commission ; the only cause I have hear he hath decide a great while , be one between those very two person who just go out of this house ; and I be sure he determine that justly , for I hear the whole matter . " -- " which do he decide it in favour of ? " quoth Adams .--" I think I need not answer that question , " cry the host , " after the different character you have hear of he . it be not my business to contradict gentlemen while they be drink in my house ; but I know neither of they speak a syllable of truth ."--" forbid ! " say , " that man should arrive at such a pitch of wickedness to belye the character of they neighbour from a little private affection , or , what be infinitely worse , a private spite . I rather believe we have mistake they , and they mean two other person ; for there be many house on the road . " --" why , prithee , friend , " cry the host , " dost thou pretend never to have tell a lye in thy life ? " --" never a malicious one , I be certain , " answer , " nor with a design to injure the reputation of any man liive . " -- " ! malicious ; no , no , " reply the host ; " not malicious with a design to hang a man , or bring he into trouble ; but surly , out of love to oneself , one must speak better of a friend than a enemy . " --" out of love to yourself , you should confine yourself to truth , " say Adams , " for by do otherwise you injure the noblest part of yourself , you immortal soul . I can hardly believe any man such a idiot to risque the loss of that by any trifling gain , and the greatest gain in this world be but dirt in comparison of what shall be reveal hereafter . " upon which the host , take up the cup , with a smile , drank a health to hereafter ; add , " he be for something present . " --" why , " say Adams very gravely , " do not you believe another world ? " to which the host answer , " yes ; he be no atheist . " --" and you believe you have a immortal soul ? " cry Adam . he answer , " forbid he should not . " -- " and heaven and hell ? " say the parson . the host then by he " not to profane ; for those be thing not to be mention nor think of but in church . " Adams ask he , " why he go to church , if what he learn there have no influence on he conduct in life ? " " I go to church , " answer the host , " to say my prayer and behave godly . " -- " and dost not thou , " cry , " believe what thou hearest at church ? " --" Most part of it , master , " return the host . " and dost not thout then tremble , " cry Adams , " at the thought of eternal punishment ? " --" as for that , master , " say he , " I never once think about it ; but what signify talk about matter so far off ? the mug be out , shall I draw another ? " whilst he be go for that purpose , a stage - coach drive up to the door . the coachman come into the house be ask by the mistress what passenger he have in he coach ? " a parcel of squinny - gut b -- , " say he ; " I have a good mind to overturn they ; you will not prevail upon they to drink anything , I assure you . " Adams ask he , " if he have not see a young man on horseback on the road " ( describe ) . " aye , " say the coachman , " a gentlewoman in my coach that be he acquaintance redeem he and he horse ; he would have be here before this time , have not the storm drive he to shelter . " " bless she ! " say , in a rapture ; nor could he delay walk out to satisfy himself who this charitable woman be ; but what be he surprize when he see he old acquaintance , ? hers indeed be not so great , because she have be inform by that he be on the road . very civil be the salutation on both side ; and rebuk the hostess for deny the gentleman to be there when she ask for he ; but indeed the poor woman have not er designedly ; for ask for a clergyman , and she have unhappily mistaken Adam for a person travel to a neighbour fair with the thimble and button , or some other such operation ; for he march in a swing great but short white coat with black buttons , a short wig , and
and a hat which , so far from have a black hatband , have nothing black about it . be now come up , and would have have he quit he horse to the parson , and come himself into the coach ; but he absolutely refuse , say , he thank he be well enough recover to be very able to ride ; and add , he hope he know he duty better than to ride in a coach while be on horseback . would have persist longer , have not a lady in the coach put a short end to the dispute , by refuse to suffer a fellow in a livery to ride in the same coach with herself ; so it be at length agree that should fill the vacant place in the coach , and should proceed on horseback . they have not proceed far before , address herself to the parson , speak thus :-- " there hath be a strange alteration in we family , , since 's death . " " a strange alteration indeed , " say Adams , " as I gather from some hints which have drop from . " --" aye , " say she , " I could never have believe it ; but the longer one live in the world , the more one see . so hath give you hint . " " but of what nature will always remain a perfect secret with I , " cry the parson : " he force I to promise before he would communicate anything . I be indeed concerned to find she ladyship behave in so unbecoming a manner . I always think she in the main a good lady , and should never have suspect she of thought so unworthy a , and with a young lad she own servant . " " these thing be no secret to I , I assure you , " cry , " and I believe they will be none anywhere shortly ; for ever since the boy 's departure , she hath behave more like a mad woman than anything else . " " truly , I be heartily concerned , " say Adams , " for she be a good sort of a lady . indeed , I have often wish she have attend a little more constantly at the service , but she hath do a great deal of good in the parish . " " of , " say , " people that do not see all , often know nothing . many thing have be give away in we family , I do assure you , without she knowledge . I have hear you say in the pulpit we ought not to brag ; but indeed I can not avoid say , if she have keep the key herself , the poor would have want many a cordial which I have let they have . as for my late master , he be as worthy a man as ever liv , and would have do infinite good if he have not be control ; but he love a quiet life , rest he soul ! I be confident he be there , and enjoy a quiet life , which some folk would not allow he here . " -- answer , " he have never hear this before , and be mistaken if she herself ( for he remember she use to commend she mistress and blame she master ) have not formerly be of another opinion . " " I do not know , " reply she , " what I might once think ; but now I be confidous matter be as I tell you ; the world will shortly see who hath be deceive ; for my part , I say nothing , but that it be wondersome how some people can carry all thing with a grave face . " thus and she discourse , till they come opposite to a great house which stand at some distance from the road : a lady in the coach , spy it , cry , " live the unfortunate , if one can justly call a woman unfortunate whom we must own at the same time guilty and the author of she own calamity . " this be abundantly sufficient to awake the curiosity of , as indeed it do that of the whole company , who jointly solicite the lady to acquaint they with 's history , since it see , by what she have say , to contain something remarkable . the lady , who be perfectly well - breed , do not require many entreaty , and have only wish they entertainment might make amend for the company 's attention , she begin in the follow manner . . the history of , or the unfortunate jilt ._ be the daughter of a gentleman of fortune ; she be tall and well - sha , with a sprightliness in she countenance which often attract beyond more regular feature join with a insipid air : nor be this kind of beauty less apt to deceive than allure ; the good humour which it indicate be often mistaken for good nature , and the vivacity for true understanding . , who be now at the age of eighteen , live with a aunt of hers in a town in the north of . she be a extreme lover of gaiety , and very rarely miss a ball or any other public assembly ; where she have frequent opportunity of satisfy a greedy appetite of vanity , with the preference which be give she by the man to almost every other woman present . among many young fellow who be particular in they gallantry towards she , soon distinguished himself in she eye beyond all he competitor ; she dance with more than ordinary
ordinary gaiety when he happen to be she partner ; neither the fairness of the evening , nor the musick of the nightingale , could lengthen she walk like he company . she affec no longer to understand the civility of other ; whilst she inclin so attentive a ear to every compliment of , that she often smile even when it be too delicate for she comprehension . " pray , madam , " say Adams , " who be this squire ? " , say the lady , be a young gentleman of a good family , breed to the law , and have be some few year call to the degree of a barrister . he face and person be such as the generality allow handsome ; but he have a dignity in he air very rarely to be see . he temper be of the saturnine complexion , and without the least taint of moroseness . he have wit and humour , with a inclination to satire , which he indulge rather too much . this gentleman , who have contract the most violent passion for , be the last person who perceive the probability of its success . the whole town have make the match for he before he himself have draw a confidence from she action sufficient to mention he passion to she ; for it be he opinion ( and perhaps he be there in the right ) that it be highly impolitick to talk seriously of love to a woman before you have make such a progress in she affections , that she herself expect and desire to hear it . but whatever diffidence the fear of a lover may create , which be apt to magnify every favour confer on a rival , and to see the little advance towards themselves through the other end of the perspective , it be impossible that 's passion should so blind he discernment as to prevent he conceiving hope from the behaviour of , whose fondness for he be now as visible to a indifferent person in they company as he for she . " I never know any of these forward slut come too good " ( say the lady who refuse 's entrance into the coach ) , " nor shall I wonder at anything she doth in the sequel . " the lady proceed in she story thus : it be in the midst of a gay conversation in the walk one evening , when whisper , that he be desirous to take a turn or two with she in private , for that he have something to communicate to she of great consequence . " be you sure it be of consequence ? " say she , smile . " I hope , " answer he , " you will think so too , since the whole future happiness of my life must depend on the event . " , who very much suspect what be come , would have defer it till another time ; but , who have more than half conquer the difficulty of speak by the first motion , be so very importunate , that she at last yielded , and , leave the rest of the company , they turn aside into a unfrequented walk . they have retire far out of the sight of the company , both maintain a strict silence . at last make a full stop , and take , who stand pale and trembl , gently by the hand , he fetch a deep sigh , and then , look on she eye with all the tenderness imaginable , he cry out in a falter accent , " o ! be it necessary for I to declare to you on what the future happiness of my life must be founde ? must I say there be something belong to you which be a bar to my happiness , and which unless you will part with , I must be miserable ! " --" what can that be ? " reply . " no wonder , " say he , " you be surprize that I should make a objection to anything which be yours : yet sure you may guess , since it be the only one which the riche of the world , if they be mine , should purchase for I . oh , it be that which you must part with to bestow all the rest ! can , or rather will she , doubt longer ? let I then whisper it in she ear -- it be you name , madam . it be by part with that , by you condescension to be for ever mine , which must at once prevent I from be the most miserable , and will render I the happiest of mankind . " , cove with blush , and with as angry a look as she could possibly put on , tell he , " that have she suspect what he declaration would have be , he should not have decoy she from she company , that he have so surprized and fright she , that she beg he to convey she back as quick as possible ; " which he , trembl very near as much as herself , do . " more fool he , " cry ; " it be a sign he know very little of we sect . " -- " truly , madam , " say , " I think you be in the right : I should have insist to know a piece of she mind , when I have carry matter so far . " but grave - air desire the lady to omit all such fulsome stuff in she story , for that it make she sick . well then , madam , to be as concise as possible , say
say the lady , many week have not pass after this interview before and be what they call on a good footing together . all ceremony except the last be now over ; the writings be now draw , and everything be in the utmost forwardness preparative to the put Horatio in possession of all he wish . I will , if you please , repeat you a letter from each of they , which I have get by heart , and which will give you no small idea of they passion on both side . grave - air object to hear these letter ; but be put to the vote , it be carry against she by all the rest in the coach ; parson Adam contende for it with the utmost vehemence . Horatio to . " how vain , most adorable creature , be the pursuit of pleasure in the absence of a object to which the mind be entirely devoted , unless it have some relation to that object ! I be last night condemne to the society of man of wit and learn , which , however agreeable it might have formerly been to I , now only give I a suspicion that they impute my absence in conversation to the true cause . for which reason , when you engagement forbid I the ecstatic happiness of see you , I be always desirous to be alone ; since my sentiment for be so delicate , that I can not bear the apprehension of another 's pry into those delightful endearment with which the warm imagination of a lover will sometimes indulge he , and which I suspect my eye then betray . to fear this discovery of we thought may perhaps appear too ridiculous a nicety to mind not susceptible of all the tenderness of this delicate passion . and surely we shall suspect there be few such , when we consider that it require every human virtue to exert itself in it be full extent ; since the beloved , whose happiness it ultimately respect , may give we charme opportunity of be brave in she defence , generous to she want , compassionate to she affliction , grateful to she kindness ; and in the same manner , of exercise every other virtue , which he who would not do to any degree , and that with the utmost rapture , can never deserve the name of a lover . it be , therefore , with a view to the delicate modesty of you mind that I cultivate it so purely in my own ; and it be that which will sufficiently suggest to you the uneasiness I bear from those libertie , which man to whom the world allow politeness will sometimes give themselves on these occasion . " can I tell you with what eagerness I expect the arrival of that blest day , when I shall experience the falsehood of a common assertion , that the greatest human happiness consist in hope ? a doctrine which no person have ever stronger reason to believe than myself at present , since none ever taste such bliss as fire my bosom with the thought of spend my future day with such a companion , and that every action of my life will have the glorious satisfaction of conducing to you happiness . " to . ] [ ] this letter be write by a young lady on read the former . " the refinement of you mind have be so evidently prove by every word and action ever since i have the first pleasure of know you , that I think it impossible my good opinion of could have be heighten to any additional proof of merit . this very thought be my amusement when I receive you last letter , which , when I open , I confess I be surprized to find the delicate sentiment express there so far exceed what I think could come even from you ( although I know all the generous principles human nature be capable of be cent in you breast ) , that word can not paint what I feel on the reflection that my happiness shall be the ultimate end of all you action . " oh , ! what a life must that be , where the meanest domestic care be sweeten by the pleasing consideration that the man on earth who best deserve , and to whom you be most inclin to give you affections , be to reap either profit or pleasure from all you do ! in such a case toil must be turn into diversion , and nothing but the unavoidable inconvenience of life can make we remember that we be mortal . " if the solitary turn of you thought , and the desire of keep they undiscovered , make even the conversation of man of wit and learn tedious to you , what anxious hour must I spend , who be condemn by custom to the conversation of woman , whose natural curiosity lead they to pry into all my thought , and whose envy can never suffer 's heart to be possess by any one , without force they into malicious design against the person who be so happy as to possess it ! but , indeed , if ever envy can possibly have any excuse , or even alleviation , it be in this case , where the good be so great , and it must be equally natural to all to wish it for themselves ; nor be I asham to own it : and to you merit , , I be oblige , that prevent my be in that most uneasy of all the situation I can figure in my imagination , of be lead by inclination to love the person whom my own judgment force I to condemn . " matters
matters be in so great forwardness between this fond couple , that the day be fix for they marriage , and be now within a fortnight , when the session chance to be hold for that county in a town about twenty mile ' distance from that which be the scene of we story . it seem , it be usual for the young gentleman of the bar to repair to these session , not so much for the sake of profit as to show they part and learn the law of the justex of peace ; for which purpose one of the wisest and gravest of all the justice be appoint speaker , or chairman , as they modestly call it , and he read they a lecture , and instruct they in the true knowledge of the law . " you be here guilty of a little mistake , " say Adams , " which , if you please , I will correct : I have attend at one of these quarter - session , where I observe the counsel teach the justice , instead of learn anything of they . " it be not very material , say the lady . repair , who , as he hope by he profession to advance he fortune , which be not at present very large , for the sake of he dear , he resolve to spare no pain , nor lose any opportunity of improve or advance himself in it . the same afternoon in which he leave the town , as stand at she window , a coach and six pass by , which she declare to be the completest , genteelest , prettiest equipage she ever see ; add these remarkable word , " oh , I be in love with that equipage ! " which , though she friend at that time do not greatly regard , she hath since remember . in the evening a assembly be hold , which honoure with she company ; but intend to pay she dear Horatio the compliment of refuse to dance in he absence . oh , why have not woman as good resolution to maintain they vow as they have often good inclination in make they ! the gentleman who own the coach and six come to the assembly . he clothes be as remarkably fine as he equipage could be . he soon attract the eye of the company ; all the smart , all the silk waistcoat with silver and gold edging , be eclipse in a instant . " madam , " say , " if it be not impertinent , I should be glad to know how this gentleman be drest . " , answer the lady , I have be tell he have on a cut velvet coat of a cinnamon colour , line with a pink satten , embroider all over with gold ; he waistcoat , which be cloth of silver , be embroider with gold likewise . I can not be particular as to the rest of he dress ; but it be all in the french fashion , for ( that be he name ) be just arrive from . this fine figure do not more entirely engage the eye of every lady in the assembly than do he . he have scarce beheld she , but he stand motionless and fix as a statue , or at least would have do so if good breeding have permit he . however , he carry it so far before he have power to correct himself , that every person in the room easily discover where he admiration be settled . the other lady begin to single out they former partner , all perceive who would be 's choice ; which they however endeavoure , by all possible means , to prevent : many of they say to , " o madam ! I suppose we sha not have the pleasure of see you dance to - night ; " and then cry out , in 's hearing , " oh ! will not dance , I assure you : she partner be not here . " one maliciously attempt to prevent she , by send a disagreeable fellow to ask she , that so she might be oblige either to dance with he , or sit down ; but this scheme prove abortive . see herself admire by the fine stranger , and envy by every woman present . she little heart begin to flutter within she , and she head be agitate with a convulsive motion : she seem as if she would speak to several of she acquaintance , but have nothing to say ; for , as she would not mention she present triumph , so she could not disengage she thought one moment from the contemplation of it . she have never taste anything like this happiness . she have before know what it be to torment a single woman ; but to be hate and secretly curse by a whole assembly be a joy reserve for this bless moment . as this vast profusion of ecstasy have confound she understanding , so there be nothing so foolish as she behaviour : she play a thousand childish trick , distort she person into several shape , and she face into several laugh , without any reason . in a word , she carriage be as absurd as she desire , which be to affect a insensibility of the stranger 's admiration , and at the same time a triumph , from that admiration , over every woman in the room . in this temper of mind , , have inquire who she be , advanced to she , and with a low bow beg the honour of dancing with she , which she , with as low a curtesy , immediately grante . she dance
dance with he all night , and enjoy , perhaps , the highest pleasure that she be capable of feel . at these word , fetch a deep groan , which fright the lady , who tell he , " they hope he be not ill . " he answer , " he groan only for the folly of . " retired ( continue the lady ) about six in the morning , but not to rest . she tumble and toss in she bed , with very short interval of sleep , and those entirely fill with dream of the equipage and fine clothes she have see , and the ball , opera , and ridotto , which have be the subject of they conversation . in the afternoon , , in the dear coach and six , come to wait on she . he be indeed charme with she person , and be , on inquiry , so well pleas with the circumstance of she father ( for he himself , notwithstand all he finery , be not quite so rich as a or a Attalus ) .--" , " say : " but pray how come you acquaint with these name ? " the lady smile at the question , and proceed . he be so pleased , I say , that he resolve to make he address to she directly . he do so accordingly , and that with so much warmth and briskness , that he quickly baffle she weak repulse , and oblige the lady to refer he to she father , who , she know , would quickly declare in favour of a coach and six . thus what have by sigh and tear , love and tenderness , be so long obtaining , the french - English Bellarmine with gaiety and gallantry possess himself of in a instant . in other word , what modesty have employ a full year in raising , impudence demolish in twenty - four hour . here groane a second time ; but the lady , who begin to smoke he , take no notice . from the opening of the assembly till the end of 's visit , have scarce once think of ; but he now begin , though a unwelcome guest , to enter into she mind . she wish she have see the and he charme equipage before matter have go so far . " yet why , " say she , " should I wish to have see he before ; or what signify it that I have see he now ? be not Horatio my lover , almost my husband ? be he not as handsome , nay handsomer than ? aye , but be the genteeler , and the finer man ; yes , that he must be allow . yes , yes , he be that certainly . but do not I , no longer ago than yesterday , love Horatio more than all the world ? aye , but yesterday i have not see . but not doat on I , and may he not in despair break he heart if I abandon he ? well , and hath not Bellarmine a heart to break too ? yes , but I promise Horatio first ; but that be poor 's misfortune ; if I have see he first , I should certainly have prefer he . do not the dear creature prefer I to every woman in the assembly , when every she be lay out for he ? when be it in 's power to give I such a instance of affection ? can he give I a equipage , or any of those thing which Bellarmine will make I mistress of ? how vast be the difference between be the wife of a poor counsellor and the wife of one of 's fortune ! if I marry , I shall triumph over no more than one rival ; but by marry , I shall be the envy of all my acquaintance . what happiness ! but can I suffer to die ? for he hath swear he can not survive my loss : but perhaps he may not die : if he should , can I prevent it ? must I sacrifice myself to he ? besides , may be as miserable for I too . " she be thus argue with herself , when some young lady call she to the walk , and a little relieve she anxiety for the present . the next morning breakfaste with she in presence of she aunt , whom he sufficiently inform of he passion for . he be no sooner withdrawn than the old lady begin to advise she niece on this occasion . " you see , child , " say she , " what fortune hath throw in you way ; and I hope you will not withstand you own preferment . " , sigh , beg she not to mention any such thing , when she know she engagement to . " Engagement to a fig ! " cry the aunt ; " you should thank on you knee that you have it yet in you power to break they . will any woman hesitate a moment whether she shall ride in a coach or walk on foot all the day of she life ? but drive six , and not even a pair . " --" yes , but , madam , what will the world say ? " answer : " will not they condemn I ? " --" the world be always on the side of prudence , " cry the aunt , " and would surely condemn you if you sacrifice you interest to any motive whatever . oh ! I know the world very well ; and you show you ignorance , my dear , by you objection . O'
O' my conscience ! the world be wiser . I have liv longer in it than you ; and I assure you there be not anything worth we regard besides money ; nor do I ever know one person who marry from other consideration , who do not afterwards heartily repent it . besides , if we examine the two man , can you prefer a sneaking fellow , who hath be breed at the university , to a fine gentleman just come from he travels . all the world must allow to be a fine gentleman , positively a fine gentleman , and a handsome man . " -- " perhaps , madam , I should not doubt , if I know how to be handsomely off with the other . " -- " oh ! leave that to I , " say the aunt . " you know you father hath not be acquaint with the affair . indeed , for my part I think it might do well enough , not dream of such a offer ; but I will disengage you : leave I to give the fellow a answer . I warrant you shall have no farther trouble . " be at length satisfied with she aunt 's reasoning ; and supp with she that evening , it be agree he should the next morning go to she father and propose the match , which she consent should be consummate at he return . the aunt retire soon after supper ; and , the lover be leave together , begin in the follow manner : " yes , madam ; this coat , I assure you , be make at , and I defy the best English taylor even to imitate it . there be not one of they can cut , madam ; they can not cut . if you observe how this skirt be turn , and this sleeve : a clumsy English rascal can do nothing like it . pray , how do you like my livery ? " answer , " she think they very pretty . " -- " all french , " say he , " I assure you , except the greatcoat ; I never trust anything more than a greatcoat to a . you know one must encourage we own people what one can , especially as , before I have a place , I be in the country interest , he , he , he ! but for myself , I would see the dirty island at the bottom of the sea , rather than wear a single rag of English work about I : and I be sure , after you have make one tour to , you will be of the same opinion with regard to you own clothes . you can not conceive what a addition a french dress would be to you beauty ; I positively assure you , at the first opera I see since I come over , I mistake the english lady for chambermaid , he , he , he ! " with such sort of polite discourse do the gay Bellarmine entertain he belov , when the door open on a sudden , and enter the room . here ' tis impossible to express the surprize of . " poor woman ! " say , " what a terrible quandary she must be in ! " -- " not at all , " say grave - air ; " such slut can never be confounded . " --" she must have then more than Corinthian assurance , " say ; " aye , more than herself . " a long silence , continue the lady , prevail in the whole company . if the familiar entrance of struck the greatest astonishment into , the unexpected presence of no less surprized . at length , collect all the spirit she be mistress of , address herself to the latter , and pretend to wonder at the reason of so late a visit . " I should indeed , " answer he , " have make some apology for disturb you at this hour , have not my find you in company assure I I do not break in upon you repose . " rise from he chair , traverse the room in a minuet step , and hum a opera tune , while , advanc to , ask she in a whisper if that gentleman be not a relation of hers ; to which she answer with a smile , or rather sneer , " no , he be no relation of mine yet ; " add , " she could not guess the meaning of he question . " tell she softly , " it do not arise from jealousy . " --" ! I assure you , it would be very strange in a common acquaintance to give himself any of those air . " these word a little surprized ; but , before he have time to answer , Bellarmine dance up to the lady and tell she , " he fear he interrupt some business between she and the gentleman . " --" I can have no business , " say she , " with the gentleman , nor any other , which need be any secret to you . " " you will pardon I , " say , " if I desire to know who this gentleman be who be to be entrust with all we secret . " -- " you will know soon enough , " cry ; " but I can not guess what secret can ever pass between we of such mighty consequence . " -- " no , madam ! " cry ; " I be sure you would not have I understand you in earnest . " --" t'Tis indifferent to I , " say she , "
" how you understand I ; but I think so unseasonable a visit be difficult to be understand at all , at least when people find one engage : though one 's servants do not deny one , one may expect a well - breed person should soon take the hint . " " madam , " say , " I do not imagine any engagement with a stranger , as it seem this gentleman be , would have make my visit impertinent , or that any such ceremony be to be preserve between person in we situation . " " sure you be in a dream , " say she , " or would persuade I that I be in one . I know no pretension a common acquaintance can have to lay aside the ceremony of good breeding . " " sure , " say he , " I be in a dream ; for it be impossible I should be really esteem a common acquaintance by , after what have pass between we ? " " pass between we ! do you intend to affro not I before this gentleman ? " " d -- and I , affront the lady , " say , cock he hat , and strutt up to : " do any man dare affront this lady before I , -- and I ? " " Hark 'ee , sir , " say , " I would advise you to lay aside that fierce air ; for I be mightily deceive if this lady have not a violent desire to get you worship a good drubbing . " " , " say , " I have the honour to be she protector ; and , -- and I , if I understand you meaning . " " , " answer , " she be rather you protectress ; but give yourself no more air , for you see I be prepare for you " ( shak he whip at he ) . " oh ! yo_serviteu tre humble , " say : " _Je vous entend parfaitment bien _. " at which time the aunt , who have hear of 's visit , enter the room , and soon satisfi all he doubt . she convince he that he be never more awake in he life , and that nothing more extraordinary have happen in he three day ' absence than a small alteration in the affections of ; who now burst into tear , and wonder what reason she have give he to use she in so barbarous a manner . desire to withdraw with he ; but the lady prevent it by lay violent hand on the latter ; upon which the former took he leave without any great ceremony , and depart , leave the lady with he rival to consult for he safety , which fear she indiscretion might have endanger ; but the aunt comforte she with assurance that would not venture he person against so accomplish a cavalier as , and that , be a lawyer , he would seek revenge in he own way , and the most they have to apprehend from he be a action . they at length therefore agree to permit to retire to he lodging , have first settle all matters relate to the journey which he be to undertake in the morning , and they preparation for the nuptial at he return . but , alas ! as wise man have observ , the seat of valou be not the countenance ; and many a grave and plain man will , on a just provocation , betake himself to that mischievous metal , cold iron ; while man of a fiercer brow , and sometimes with that emblem of courage , a cockade , will more prudently decline it . be wake in the morning , from a visionary coach and six , with the dismal account that be run through the body by ; that he lay languishing at a inn , and the surgeon have declare the wound mortal . she immediately leape out of the bed , dance about the room in a frantic manner , tore she hair and beat she breast in all the agony of despair ; in which sad condition she aunt , who likewise arise at the news , find she . the good old lady apply she utmost art to comfort she niece . she tell she , " while there be life there be hope ; but that if he should die she affliction would be of no service to , and would only expose herself , which might , probably , keep she some time without any future offer ; that , as matter have happen , she wisest way would be to think no more of , but to endeaavor to regain the affections of . " " speak not to I , " cry the disconsolate ; " be it not owe to I that poor have lose he life ? have not these cursed charms ( at which word she look steadfastly in the glass ) be the ruin of the most charming man of this age ? can I ever bear to contemplate my own face again ( with she eye still fix on the glass ) ? be I not the murderess of the finest gentleman ? no other woman in the town could have make any impression on he . " " never think of thing past , " cry the aunt : " think of regain the affections of . " " what reason , " say the niece , " have I to hope he would forgive I ? no , I have lose he as well as the other , and it be you wicked advice which be the occasion of all ; you seduce I , contrary to my
my inclination , to abandon poor ( at which word she burst into tear ) ; you prevail upon I , whether I would or no , to give up my affections for he ; have it not be for you , never would have enter into my thought ; have not he addresses be back by you persuasion , they never would have make any impression on I ; I should have defy all the fortune and equipage in the world ; but it be you , it be you , who get the better of my youth and simplicity , and force I to lose my dear Horatio for ever . " the aunt be almost borne down with this torrent of word ; she , however , rally all the strength she could , and , draw she mouth up in a purse , begin : " I be not surprize , niece , at this ingratitude . those who advise young woman for they interest , must always expect such a return : I be convince my brother will thank I for break off you match with , at any rate . " --" that may not be in you power yet , " answer , " though it be very ungrateful in you to desire or attempt it , after the present you have receive from he . " ( for indeed true it be , that many present , and some pretty valuable one , have pass from to the old lady ; but as true it be , that , when he breakfast with she and she niece , have compliment she with a brilliant from he finger , of much greater value than all she have touch of the other . ) the aunt 's gall be on float to reply , when a servant bring a letter into the room , which , hear it come from , with great eagerness open , and read as follow :-- " must ,-- the wound which I fear you have hear I receive from my rival be not like to be so fatal as those shoot into my heart which have be fire from you eye , _tout brilliant _. those be the only cannon by which I be to fall ; for my surgeon give I hope of be soon able to attend you _ruelle ; till when , unless you would do I a honour which I have scarce the _hardiesse to think of , you absence will be the greatest anguish which can be feel by , " madam , " _Avec toute le respecte_ in the world , " you most obedient , most absolute _Devote , " . " as soon as perceive such hope of 's recovery , and that the gossip fame have , accord to custom , so enlarge he danger , she presently abandon all further thought of , and be soon reconcile to she aunt , who receive she again into favour , with a more Christian forgiveness than we generally meet with . indeed , it be possible she might be a little alarmed at the hints which she niece have give she concern the present . she might apprehend such rumour , should they get abroad , might injure a reputation which , by frequenting church twice a day , and preserve the utmost rigour and strictness in she countenance and behaviour for many year , she have establish . 's passion return now for with greater force , after its small relaxation , than ever . she propose to she aunt to make he a visit in he confinement , which the old lady , with great and commendable prudence , advise she to decline : " , " say she , " should any accident intervene to prevent you intend match , too forward a behaviour with this lover may injure you in the eyes of other . every woman , till she be marry , ink to consider of , and provide against , the possibility of the affair 's breaking off . " say , " she should be indifferent to whatever might happen in such a case ; for she have now so absolutely place she affections on this dear man ( so she call he ) , that , if it be she misfortune to lose he , she should for ever abandon all thought of mankind . " she , therefore , resolve to visit he , notwithstand all the prudent advice of she aunt to the contrary , and that very afternoon execute she resolution . the lady be proceed in she story , when the coach drive into the inn where the company be to dine , sorely to the dissatisfaction of , whose ear be the most hungry part about he ; he be , as the reader may perhaps guess , of a insatiable curiosity , and heartily desirous of hear the end of this amour , though he profess he could scarce wish success to a lady of so inconstant a disposition . dreadful quarrel which happen at the where the company dine , with its bloody consequence to ._ as soon as the passenger have alight from the coach , , as be he custom , make directly to the kitchen , where he find sit by the fire , and the hostess anoint he leg ; for the horse which have borrowed of he clerk have so violent a propensity to knee , that one would have think it have be he trade , as well as he master 's ; nor would he always give any notice of such he intention ; he be often find on he knee when the rider least expect it . this foible , however , be of no great inconvenience to the parson , who be accustom to it ; and
and , as he leg almost touch the ground when he bestrode the beast , have but a little way to fall , and throw himself forward on such occasion with so much dexterity that he never receive any mischief ; the horse and he frequently roll many pace ' distance , and afterwards both get up and meeting as good friend as ever . poor , who have not be use to such kind of cattle , though a excellent horseman , do not so happily disengage himself ; but , fal with he leg under the , receive a violent contusion , to which the good woman be , as we have say , apply a warm hand , with some camphorate spirit , just at the time when the parson enter the kitchen . he have scarce express he concern for 's misfortune before the host likewise enter . he be by no means of - wouse 's gentle disposition ; and be , indeed , perfect master of he house , and everything in it but he guest . this surly fellow , who always proportion he respect to the appearance of a traveller , from " bless you honour , " down to plain " come presently , " observe he wife on she knee to a footman , cry out , without consider he circumstance , " what a pox be the woman about ? why do not you mind the company in the coach ? go and ask they what they will have for dinner . " " my dear , " say she , " you know they can have nothing but what be at the fire , which will be ready presently ; and really the poor young man 's leg be very much bruise . " at which word she fall to chaf more violently than before : the bell then happen to ring , he damn would he wife , and bid she go in to the company , and not stand rub there all day , for he do not believe the young fellow 's leg be so bad as he pretend ; and if it be , within twenty mile he would find a surgeon to cut it off . upon these word , fetch two stride across the room ; and snapp he finger over he head , mutter aloud , he would excommunicate such a wretch for a farthing , for he believe the have more humanity . these word occasion a dialogue between Adams and the host , in which there be two or three sharp reply , till bad the latter know how to behave himself to he betters . at which the host ( have first strictly survey Adams ) scornfully repeat the word " betters , " fly into a rage , and , tell he be as able to walk out of he house as he have be to walk into it , offer to lay violent hand on he ; which perceive , deal he so sound a compliment over he face with he fist , that the blood immediately gush out of he nose in a stream . the host , be unwilling to be outdone in courtesy , especially by a person of 's figure , return the favour with so much gratitude , that the parson 's nostril begin to look a little redder than usual . upon which he again assail he antagonist , and with another stroke lay he sprawl on the floor . the hostess , who be a better wife than so surly a husband deserve , see she husband all bloody and stretch along , hasten presently to he assistance , or rather to revenge the blow , which , to all appearance , be the last he would ever receive ; when , lo ! a pan full of hog 's blood , which unluckily stand on the dresser , present itself first to she hand . she seize it in she fury , and without any reflection , discharge it into the parson 's face ; and with so good a aim , that much the greater part first salute he countenance , and trickle thence in so large a current down to he beard , and over he garment , that a more horrible spectacle be hardly to be see , or even imagine . all which be perceive by , who enter the kitchen at that instant . this good gentlewoman , not be of a temper so extremely cool and patient as perhaps be require to ask many question on this occasion , fly with great impetuosity at the hostess 's cap , which , together with some of she hair , she pluck from she head in a moment , give she , at the same time , several hearty cuff in the face ; which by frequent practice on the inferior servants , she have learn a excellent knack of deliver with a good grace . poor could hardly rise from he chair ; the parson be employ in wip the blood from he eye , which have entirely blind he ; and the landlord be but just begin to stir ; whilst , hold down the landlady 's face with she left hand , make so dexterous a use of she right , that the poor woman begin to roar , in a key which alarme all the company in the inn . there happen to be in the inn , at this time , besides the ladie who arrive in the stage - coach , the two gentleman who be present at - wouse 's when be detain for he horse 's meat , and whom we have before mention to have stopt at the alehouse with Adams . there be likewise a gentleman just return from he travel to ; all whom
whom the horrid outcry of murder presently bring into the kitchen , where the several combatant be find in the posture already describe . it be now no difficulty to put a end to the fray , the conqueror be satisfied with the vengeance they have take , and the conquer have no appetite to renew the fight . the principal figure , and which engage the eye of all , be , who be all over cover with blood , which the whole company conclude to be he own , and consequently imagine he no longer for this world . but the host , who have now recover from he blow , and be risen from the ground , soon deliver they from this apprehension , by damne he wife for waste the hog 's pudding , and tell she all would have be very well if she have not intermeddle , like a benefit -- as she be ; add , he be very glad the gentlewoman have pay she , though not half what she deserv . the poor woman have indeed fared much the worst ; have , besides the unmerciful cuff receive , lose a quantity of hair , which in triumph hold in she left hand . the traveller , address himself to grave - air , desire she not to be frightene ; for here have be only a little boxing , which he say , to they _disgracia_ , the be _accustomata_ to : add , it must be , however , a sight somewhat strange to he , who be just come from ; the not be addict to the _cuffardo_ but _bastonza_ , say he . he then go up to , and tell he he look like the ghost of , bid he not shake he gory lock at he , for he could not say he do it . Adam very innocently answer , " , I be far from accuse you . " he then return to the lady , and cry , " I find the bloody gentleman be _uno insipido del nullo senso _. di I _, if I have see such a _spectaculo_ in my way from . " one of the gentleman have learn from the host the occasion of this bustle , and be assure by he that have strike the first blow , whisper in he ear , " he would warrant he would recover . " -- " recover ! master , " say the host , smile : " yes , yes , I be not afraid of die with a blow or two neither ; I be not such a chicken as that . " -- " ! " say the gentleman , " I mean you will recover damage in that action which , undoubtedly , you intend to bring , as soon as a writ can be return from ; for you look like a man of too much spirit and courage to suffer any one to beat you without bring you action against he : he must be a scandalous fellow indeed who would put up with a drubbing whilst the law be open to revenge it ; besides , he hath draw blood from you , and spoil you coat ; and the jury will give damage for that too . a excellent new coat upon my word ; and now not worth a shilling ! I do not care , " continue he , " to intermeddle in these case ; but you have a right to my evidence ; and if I be swear , I must speak the truth . I see you sprawl on the floor , and blood gushing from you nostril . you may take you own opinion ; but be I in you circumstance , every drop of my blood should convey a ounce of gold into my pocket : remember I do not advise you to go to law ; but if you jury be , they must give swing damage . that be all . " --" master , " cry the host , scratch he head , " I have no stomach to law , I thank you . I have see enough of that in the parish , where two of my neighbour have be at law about a house , till they have both law themselves into a gaol . " at which word he turn about , and begin to inquire again after he hog 's pudding ; nor would it probably have be a sufficient excuse for he wife , that she spild they in he defence , have not some awe of the company , especially of the italian traveller , who be a person of great dignity , withheld he rage . whilst one of the above -mentioned gentleman be employ , as we have see he , on the behalf of the landlord , the other be no less hearty on the side of , whom he advise to bring he action immediately . he say the assault of the wife be in law the assault of the husband , for they be but one person ; and he be liable to pay damage , which he say must be considerable , where so bloody a disposition appear . Adam answer , if it be true that they be but one person , he have assault the wife ; for he be sorry to own he have strike the husband the first blow . " I be sorry you own it too , " cry the gentleman ; " for it could not possibly appear to the court ; for here be no evidence present but the lame man in the chair , whom I suppose to be you friend , and would consequently say nothing but what make for you . " --" how , sir ,
, " say , " do you take I for a villain , who would prosecute revenge in cold blood , and use unjustifiable means to obtain it ? if you know I , and my order , I should think you affront both . " at the word order , the gentleman stared ( for he be too bloody to be of any modern order of knights ) ; and , turn hastily about , say , " every man know he own business . " matter be now compose , the company retire to they several apartment ; the two gentleman congratulate each other on the success of they good office in procure a perfect reconciliation between the contende party ; and the traveller go to he repast , cry , " as the italian poet say -- voi_ very well _que tutta e pace , so send up dinner , good Boniface . ' " the coachman begin now to grow importunate with he passenger , whose entrance into the coach be retarde by grave -airs insist , against the remonstrance of all the rest , that she would not admit a footman into the coach ; for poor be too lame to mount a horse . a young lady , who be , as it seem , a earl 's grand - daughter , beg it with almost tear in she eye . pray , and scold ; but all to no purpose . she say , " she would not demean herself to ride with a footman : that there be waggon on the road : that if the master of the coach desire it , she would pay for two place ; but would suffer no such fellow to come in . " -- " madam , " say , " I be sure no one can refuse another come into a stage - coach . " --" I do not know , madam , " say the lady ; " I be not much use to stage - coach ; I seldom travel in they . " -- " that may be , madam , " reply ; " very good people do ; and some people 's better , for atch I know . " miss grave -air say , " some folk might sometimes give they tongue a liberty , to some people that be they better , which do not become they ; for she part , she be not use to converse with servants . " return , " some people keep no servants to converse with ; for she part , she thank she live in a family where there be a great many , and have more under she own command than any paultry little gentlewoman in the kingdom . " miss grave -air cry , " she believe she mistress would not encourage such sauciness to she betters . " --" my betters , " say , " who be my better , pray ? " --" I be you better , " answer grave - air , " and I will acquaint you mistress . " -- at which laugh aloud , and tell she , " she lady be one of the great gentry ; and such little paultry gentlewoman as some folk , who travel in stagecoach , would not easily come at she . " this smart dialogue between some people and some folk be go on at the coach door when a solemn person , ride into the inn , and see grave -air , immediately accost she with " dear child , how do you ? " she presently answer , " of papa , I be glad you have overtake I . " -- " so be I , " answer he ; " for one of we coach be just at hand ; and , there be room for you in it , you shall go no farther in the stage unless you desire it . " --" how can you imagine I should desire it ? " say she ; so , bid Slipslop ride with she fellow , if she please , she take she father by the hand , who be just alight , and walk with he into a room . Adams instantly ask the coachman , in a whisper , " if he know who the gentleman be ? " the coachman answer , " he be now a gentleman , and keep he horse and man ; but time be alte , master , " say be ; " I remember when he be no better bear than myself . " -- " ay ! ay ! " say Adams . " my father drive the squire 's coach , " answer he , " when that very man rode postillion ; but he be now he steward ; and a great gentleman . " Adams then snap he finger , and cry , " he think she be some such trollop . " Adam make haste to acquaint with this good news , as he imagine it ; but it find a reception different from what he expect . the prudent gentlewoman , who despise the anger of grave - air whilst she conceive she the daughter of a gentleman of small fortune , now she hear she alliance with the upper servants of a great family in she neighbourhood , begin to fear she interest with the mistress . she wish she have not carry the dispute so far , and begin to think of endeavouring to reconcile herself to the young lady before she leave the inn ; when , luckily , the scene at , which the reader can scarce have forget , present itself to she mind , and comforte she with such assurance , that she no longer apprehend any enemy with she mistress . everything be
be now adjust , the company enter the coach , which be just on its departure , when one lady recollect she have leave she fan , a second she glove , a third a snuff - box , and a fourth a smell - botle behind she ; to find all which occasion some delay and much swear to the coachman . as soon as the coach have leave the inn , the woman all together fell to the character of grave - air ; whom one of they declare she have suspect to be some low creature , from the beginning of they journey , and another affir she have not even the look of a gentlewoman : a third warrant she be no better than she should be ; and , turn to the lady who have relate the story in the coach , say , " do you ever hear , madam , anything so prudish as she remark ? well , deliver I from the censoriousness of such a prude . " the fourth add , " of madam ! all these creature be censorious ; but for my part , I wonder where the wretch be breed ; indeed , I must own I have seldom converse with these mean kind of people , so that it may appear stranger to I ; but to refuse the general desire of a whole company have something in it so astonishing , that , for my part , I own I should hardly believe it if my own ears have not be witness to it . " --" yes , and so handsome a young fellow , " cry ; " the woman must have no compulsion in she : I believe she be more of a than a ; I be certain , if she have any Christian woman 's blood in she vein , the sight of such a young fellow must have warm it . indeed , there be some wretch , miserable old object , that turn one 's stomach ; I should not wonder if she have refuse such a one ; I be as nice as herself , and should have car no more than herself for the company of stink old fellow ; but , hold up thy head , , thout art none of those ; and she who hath not compulsion for thee be a Myhummetman , and I will maintain it . " this conversation make uneasy as well as the ladie ; who , perceive the spirits which be in ( for indeed she be not a cup too low ) , begin to fear the consequence ; one of they therefore desire the lady to conclude the story . " aye , madam , " say , " I beg you ladyship to give we that story you commensate in the morning ; " which request that well - breed woman immediately comply with . . _Conclusion of the unfortunate jilt ._ , have once break through the bounds which custom and modesty impose on she sex , soon give a unbridled indulgence to she passion . she visit to be more constant , as well as longer , than he surgeon 's : in a word , she become absolutely he nurse ; make he water - gruel , administer he he medicine ; and , notwithstand the prudent advice of she aunt to the contrary , almost intirely reside in she wounded lover 's apartment . the lady of the town begin to take she conduct under consideration : it be the chief topic of discourse at they tea - table , and be very severely censure by the most part ; especially by , a lady whose discreet and starch carriage , together with a constant attendance at church three time a day , have utterly defeat many malicious attack on she own reputation ; for such be the envy that 's virtue have attract , that , notwithstand she own strict behaviour and strict enquiry into the life of other , she have not be able to escape be the mark of some arrow herself , which , however , do she no injury ; a blessing , perhaps , owed by she to the clergy , who be she chief male companion , and with two or three of whom she have be barbarously and unjustly calumniate . " not so unjustly neither , perhaps , " say ; " for the clergy be man , as well as other folk . " the extreme delicacy of 's virtue be cruelly hurt by those freedom which allow herself : she say , " it be a affront to she sex ; that she do not imagine it consistent with any woman 's honour to speak to the creature , or to be see in she company ; and that , for she part , she should always refuse to dance at a assembly with she , for fear of contamination by take she by the hand . " but to return to my story : as soon as be recover , which be somewhat within a month from he receive the wound , he set out , accord to agreement , for 's father 's , in order to propose the match , and settle all matters with he touch settlement , and the like . a little before he arrival the old gentleman have receive a intimation of the affair by the follow letter , which I can repeat verbatim , and which , they say , be write neither by nor she aunt , though it be in a woman 's hand . the letter be in these word :-- " sir ,-- I be sorry to acquaint you that you daughter , , hath act one of the basest as well as most simple part with a
a young gentleman to whom she have engage herself , and whom she hath ( pardon the word ) jilt for another of inferior fortune , notwithstand he superior figure . you may take what measure you please on this occasion ; I have perform what I think my duty ; as I have , though unknown to you , a very great respect for you family . " the old gentleman do not give himself the trouble to answer this kind epistle ; nor do he take any notice of it , after he have read it , till he see . he be , to say the truth , one of those father who look on child as a unhappy consequence of they youthful pleasur ; which , as he would have be deligh not to have have attend they , so be he no less pleased with any opportunity to ry himself of the incumbrance . he pass , in the world 's language , as a exceed good father ; be not only so rapacious as to rob and plunder all mankind to the utmost of he power , but even to deny himself the conveniency , and almost necessary , of life ; which he neighbour attribute to a desire of raise immense fortune for he child : but in fact it be not so ; he heape up money for its own sake only , and look on he child as he rival , who be to enjoy he belove mistress when he be incapable of possesse she , and which he would have be much more charme with the power of carry along with he ; nor have he child any other security of be he heir than that the law would constitute they such without a will , and that he have not affection enough for any one live to take the trouble of writing one . to this gentleman come , on the errand I have mention . he person , he equipage , he family , and he estate , seem to the father to make he a advantageous match for he daughter : he therefore very readily accept he proposal : but when imagine the principal affair conclude , and begin to open the incidental matter of fortune , the old gentleman presently change he countenance , say , " he resolve never to marry he daughter on a match ; that whoever have love for she to take she would , when he die , find she share of he fortune in he coffer ; but he have see such example of undutifulness happen from the too early generosity of parent , that he have make a vow never to part with a shilling whilst he liv . " he commend the saying of , " he that spareth the rod spoileth the child ; " but add , " he might have likewise asserted , that he that spareth the purse saveth the child . " he then run into a discourse on the extravagance of the youth of the age ; whence he launch into a dissertation on horse ; and come at length to commend those drive . that fine gentleman , who at another season would have be well enough pleased to dwell a little on that subject , be now very eager to resume the circumstance of fortune . he say , " he have a very high value for the young lady , and would receive she with less than he would any other whatever ; but that even he love to she make some regard to worldly matter necessary ; for it would be a most distracting sight for he to see she , when he have the honour to be she husband , in less than a coach and six . " the old gentleman answer , " Fou will do , four will do ; " and then take a turn from horse to extravagance and from extravagance to horse , till he come round to the equipage again ; whither he be no sooner arrive than bring he back to the point ; but all to no purpose ; he make he escape from that subject in a minute ; till at last the lover declare , " that in the present situation of he affair it be impossible for he , though he love more than _tout le monde , to marry she without any fortune . " to which the father answer , " he be sorry that he daughter must lose so valuable a match ; that , if he have a inclination , at present it be not in he power to advance a shilling : that he have have great loss , and be at great expense on project ; which , though he have great expectation from they , have yet produce he nothing : that he do not know what might happen hereafter , as on the birth of a son , or such accident ; but he would make no promise , or enter into any article , for he would not break he vow for all the daughter in the world . " in short , lady , to keep you no longer in suspense , , have try every argument and persuasion which he could invent , and find they all ineffectual , at length take he leave , but not in order to return to ; he proceed directly to he own seat , whence , after a few day ' stay , he return to , to the great delight of the french and the honour of the english nation . but as soon as he arrive at he home he presently despatch a messenger with the follow epistle to :-- " adorable and Charmante ,-- I be sorry to have the honour to tell you I
I be not the _heureux_ person destin for you divine arm . you papa hath tell I so with a _politesse not often see on this side . you may perhaps guess he manner of refuse I . _Ah , mon !_ you will certainly believe I , madam , incapable myself of deliver this _triste_ message , which I intend to try the french air to cure the consequence of . _A jamais ! ! ! diable !_ if you papa oblige you to a marriage , I hope we shall see you at ; till when , the wind that flow from thence will be the warmest _dan le monde , for it will consist almost entirely of my sigh . , ma princesse ! ah , l'amour !_ " . " I shall not attempt , lady , to describe 's condition when she receive this letter . it be a picture of horror , which I should have as little pleasure in draw as you in beholding . she immediately leave the place where she be the subject of conversation and ridicule , and retire to that house I show you when I begin the story ; where she hath ever since lead a disconsolate life , and deserve , perhaps , pity for she misfortune , more than we censure for a behaviour to which the artifice of she aunt very probably contribute , and to which very young woman be often render too liable by that blameable levity in the education of we sex . " if I be inclin to pity she , " say a young lady in the coach , " it would be for the loss of ; for I can not discern any misfortune in she missing such a husband as . " " why , I must own , " say , " the gentleman be a little false - hear ; but howsumever , it be hard to have two lover , and get never a husband at all . but pray , madam , what become of - asho_ ? " he remain , say the lady , still unmarried , and hath apply himself so strictly to he business , that he hath raise , I hear , a very considerable fortune . and what be remarkable , they say he never hear the name of without a sigh , nor hath ever uttere one syllable to charge she with she ill - conduct towards he . . _a very short chapter , in which parson go a great way ._ the lady , have finish she story , receive the thanks of the company ; and now , put he head out of the coach , cry out , " never believe I if yonder be not we parson walk along without he horse ! " -- " on my word , and so he be , " say : " and as sure as twopence he hath leave he behind at the inn . " indeed , true it be , the parson have exhibit a fresh instance of he absence of mind ; for he be so pleased with have get into the coach , that he never once think of the beast in the stable ; and , finde he leg as nimble as he desire , he sally out , brandish a crabstick , and have keep on before the coach , mende and slacken he pace occasionally , so that he have never be much more or less than a quarter of a mile distant from it . desire the coachman to overtake he , which he attempt , but in vain ; for the faster he drive the faster run the parson , often cry out , " aye , aye , catch I if you can ; " till at length the coachman swore he would as soon attempt to drive after a greyhound , and , give the parson two or three hearty curse , he cry' , " Softly , softly , boy , " to he horse , which the civil beasts immediately obey . but we will be more courteous to we reader than he be to ; and , leave the coach and its company to pursue they journey , we will carry we reader on after parson Adam , who stretch forwards without once look behind he , till , have leave the coach full three mile in he rear , he come to a place where , by keep the extremest track to the right , it be just barely possible for a human creature to miss he way . this track , however , do he keep , as indeed he have a wonderful capacity at these kind of bare possibility , and , travel in it about three mile over the plain , he arrive at the summit of a hill , whence look a great way backward , and perceive no coach in sight , he sit himself down on the turf , and , pull out he , determine to wait here for its arrival . he have not sit long here before a gun go off very near , a little start he ; he look up and see a gentleman within a hundred pace take up a partridge which he have just shot . Adams stand up and present a figure to the gentleman which would have move laughter in many ; for he cassock have just again fallen down below he greatcoat , that be to say , it reach he knee , whereas the skirt of he greatcoat descende no lower than half - way down he thigh ; but the gentleman 's mirth give way to he surprize at beholding such a personage in such a place . Adam , advanc to the gentleman , tell he he hope he have good
good sport , to which the other answer , " very little . " --" I see , sir , " say Adams , " you have smote one partridge ; " to which the sportsman make no reply , but proceed to charge he piece . whilst the gun be charge , remain in silence , which he at last broke by observe that it be a delightful evening . the gentleman , who have at first sight conceive a very distasteful opinion of the parson , begin , on perceive a book in he hand and smoak likewise the information of the cassock , to change he thought , and make a small advance to conversation on he side by say , " Sir , I suppose you be not one of these part ? " Adams immediately tell he , " no ; that he be a traveller , and invite by the beauty of the evening and the place to repose a little and amuse himself with reading . " --" I may as well repose myself too , " say the sportsman , " for I have be out this whole afternoon , and the devil a bird have I see till I come hither . " " perhaps than the game be not very pleny hereabout ? " cry Adams . " no , sir , " say the gentleman : " the soldier , who be quarter in the neighbourhood , have kill it all . " --" it be very probable , " cry Adam , " for shooting be they profession . " -- " ay , shoot the game , " answer the other ; " but I do not see they be so forward to shoot we enemy . I do not like that affair of ; if I have be there , I believe I should have do other - guess thing , -- and I : what be a man 's life when he country demand it ? a man who will not sacrifice he life for he country deserve to be hang , -- and I . " which word he speak with so violent a gesture , so loud a voice , so strong a accent , and so fierce a countenance , that he might have frightene a captain of train band at the head of he company ; but be not greatly subject to fear ; he tell he intrepidly that he very much approve he virtue , but dislike he swear , and beg he not to addict himself to so bad a custom , without which he say he might fight as bravely as do . indeed he be charme with this discourse ; he tell the gentleman he would willingly have go many mile to have meet a man of he generous way of think ; that , if he pleas to sit down , he should be greatly delighted to commune with he ; for , though he be a clergyman , he would himself be ready , if theretoo call , to lay down he life for he country . the gentleman sit down , and by he ; and then the latter began , as in the follow chapter , a discourse which we have place by itself , as it be not only the most curious in this but perhaps in any other book . . _a notable dissertation by ; wherein that gentleman appear in a political light ._ " I do assure you , sir " ( say he , take the gentleman by the hand ) , " I be heartily glad to meet with a man of you kidney ; for , though I be a poor parson , I will be bold to say I be a honest man , and would not do a ill thing to be make a bishop ; nay , though it hath not fall in my way to offer so noble a sacrifice , I have not be without opportunity of suffering for the sake of my conscience , I thank heaven for they ; for I have have relation , though I say it , who make some figure in the world ; particularly a nephew , who be a shopkeeper and a alderman of a corporation . he be a good lad , and be under my care when a boy ; and I believe would do what I bade he to he die day . indeed , it look like extreme vanity in I to affect be a man of such consequence as to have so great a interest in a alderman ; but other have think so too , as manifestly appear by the rector , whose curate I formerly be , send for I on the approach of a election , and tell I , if I expect to continue in he cure , that I must bring my nephew to vote for one , a gentleman whom I have never hear tiding of till that instant . I tell the rector I have no power over my nephew 's vote ( forgive I for such prevarication ! ) ; that I suppose he would give it accord to he conscience ; that I would by no means endeavour to influence he to give it otherwise . he tell I it be in vain to equivocate ; that he know I have already speak to he in favour of esquire , my neighbour ; and , indeed , it be true I have ; for it be at a season when the church be in danger , and when all good man expect they know not what would happen to we all . I then answer boldly , if he think I have give my promise , he affront I in propose any breach of it . not to be too
too prolix ; I persever , and so do my nephew , in the esquire 's interest , who be choose chiefly through he means ; and so I lose my curacy , well , sir , but do you think the esquire ever mention a word of the church ? _Ne verbum quidem , ut it a dicam : within two year he get a place , and hath ever since live in ; where I have be inform ( but forbid I should believe that , ) that he never so much as goeth to church . I remain , sir , a considerable time without any cure , and live a full month on one funeral sermon , which I preach on the indisposition of a clergyman ; but this by the bye . at last , when get he place , stand again ; and who should make interest for he but himself ! that very identical , who have formerly tell I the colonel be a enemy to both the church and state , have the confidence to sollicit my nephew for he ; and the colonel himself offer I to make I chaplain to he regiment , which I refuse in favour of , who tell we he would sacrifice everything to he country ; and I believe he would , except he hunting , which he stick so close to , that in five year together he go but twice up to parliament ; and one of those time , I have be tell , never be within sight of the house . however , he be a worthy man , and the best friend I ever have ; for , by he interest with a bishop , he get I replace into my curacy , and give I eight pound out of he own pocket to buy I a gown and cassock , and furnish my house . he have we interest while he liv , which be not many year . on he death I have fresh application make to I ; for all the world know the interest I have with my good nephew , who now be a leading man in the corporation ; and , buy the estate which have be 's , propose himself a candidate . he be then a young gentleman just come from he travels ; and it do I good to hear he discourse on affair which , for my part , I know nothing of . if I have be master of a thousand vote he should have have they all . I engage my nephew in he interest , and he be elect ; and a very fine parliament- man he be . they tell I he make speech of a hour long , and , I have be tell , very fine one ; but he could never persuade the parliament to be of he opinion . non omnia possumus omne _. he promise I a living , poor man ! and I believe I should have have it , but a accident happen , which be , that my lady have promise it before , unknown to he . this , indeed , I never hear till afterwards ; for my nephew , who die about a month before the incumbent , always tell I I might be assure of it . since that time , , poor man , have always so much business , that he never could find leisure to see I . I believe it be partly my lady 's fault too , who do not think my dress good enough for the gentry at she table . however , I must do he the justice to say he never be ungrateful ; and I have always find he kitchen , and he cellar too , open to I : many a time , after service on a -- for I preach at four church -- have I recruit my spirits with a glass of he ale . since my nephew 's death , the corporation be in other hand ; and I be not a man of that consequence I be formerly . I have now no longer any talents to lay out in the service of my country ; and to whom nothing be give , of he can nothing be require . however , on all proper season , such as the approach of a election , I throw a suitable dash or two into my sermon ; which I have the pleasure to hear be not disagreeable to and the other honest gentleman my neighbour , who have all promise I these five year to procure a ordination for a son of mine , who be now near thirty , hath a infinite stock of learning , and be , I thank Heaven , of a unexceptionable life ; though , as he be never at a university , the bishop refuse to ordain he . too much care can not indeed be take in admit any to the sacred office ; though I hope he will never act so as to be a disgrace to any order , but will serve he and he country to the utmost of he power , as I have endeavoure to do before he ; nay , and will lay down he life whenever call to that purpose . I be sure I have educate he in those principle ; so that I have acquit my duty , and shall have nothing to answer for on that account . but I do not distrust he , for he be a good boy ; and if Providence should throw it in he way to be of as much consequence in a public light as he father once be , I can answer for he he will use he talents as honestly as I have do .
. " chapter Ix . in which the gentleman discant on bravery and heroic virtue , till a unlucky accident put a end to the discourse ._ the gentleman highly commend for he good resolutions , and tell he , " he hope he son would tread in he step ; " add , " that if he would not die for he country , he would not be worthy to live in it . I would make no more of shoot a man that would not die for he country , than -- " , " say he , " I have disinherit a nephew , who be in the army , because he would not exchange he commission and go to the West Indies . I believe the rascal be a coward , though he pretend to be in love forsooth . I would have all such fellow hang , sir ; I would have they hang . " Adam answer , " that would be too severe ; that man do not make themselves ; and if fear have too much ascendance in the mind , the man be rather to be pitied than abhor ; that reason and time might teach he to subdue it . " he say , " a man might be a coward at one time , and brave at another . Homer , " say he , " who so well understand and copy nature , hath teach we this lesson ; for fight and Hector run away . Nay , we have a mighty instance of this in the history of later age , no longer ago than the 705th year of , when the great Pompey , who have win so many battle and be honoure with so many triumph , and of whose valour several author , especially and , have form such elogium ; this very Pompey leave the battle of before he have lose it , and retreat to he tent , where he sit like the most pusillanimous rascal in a fit of despair , and yield a victory , which be to determine the empire of the world , to . I be not much travel in the history of modern time , that be to say , these last thousand year ; but those who be can , I make no question , furnish you with parallel instance . " he conclude , therefore , that , have he take any such hasty resolution against he nephew , he hope he would consider better , and retract they . the gentleman answer with great warmth , and talk much of courage and he country , till , perceive it grow late , he ask , " what place he intend for that night ? " he tell he , " he wait there for the stage - coach . " --" the stage - coach , sir ! " say the gentleman ; " they be all pass by long ago . you may see the last yourself almost three mile before we . " --" I protest and so they be , " cry Adam ; " then I must make haste and follow they . " the gentleman tell he , " he would hardly be able to overtake they ; and that , if he do not know he way , he would be in danger of lose himself on the downs , for it would be presently dark ; and he might ramble about all night , and perhaps find himself farther from he journey 's end in the morning than he be now . " he advise he , therefore , " to accompany he to he house , which be very little out of he way , " assure he " that he would find some country fellow in he parish who would conduct he for sixpence to the city where he be go . " Adams accept this proposal , and on they travel , the gentleman renew he discourse on courage , and the infamy of not be ready , at all time , to sacrifice we life to we country . night overtake they much about the same time as they arrive near some bushes ; whence , on a sudden , they hear the most violent shriek imaginable in a female voice . Adam offer to snatch the gun out of he companion 's hand . " what be you do ? " say he . " do ! " say ; " I be hasten to the assistance of the poor creature whom some villain be murder . " " you be not mad enough , I hope , " say the gentleman , trembl : " do you consider this gun be only charge with shot , and that the robber be most probably furnish with pistol load with bullet ? this be no business of ours ; let we make as much haste as possible out of the way , or we may fall into they hand ourselves . " the shriek now increase , make no answer , but snapt he finger , and , brandish he crabstick , make directly to the place whence the voice issue ; and the man of courage make as much expedition towards he own home , whither he escape in a very short time without once look behind he ; where we will leave he , to contemplate he own bravery , and to censure the want of it in other , and return to the good Adam , who , on come up to the place whence the noise proceed , find a woman struggle with a man , who have throw she on the ground , and have almost overpower she . the great abilitie of be not necessary to have form a right judgment of this affair on the first
first sight . he do not , therefore , want the entreaty of the poor wretch to assist she ; but , lift up he crabstick , he immediately level a blow at that part of the ravisher 's head where , accord to the opinion of the ancient , the brain of some person be deposite , and which he have undoubtedly let forth , have not ( who , as wise man have observe , equip all creature with what be most expedient for they ) take a provident care ( as she always doth with those she intend for encounter ) to make this part of the head three time as thick as those of ordinary man who be design to exercise talents which be vulgarly call rational , and for whom , as brain be necessary , she be obliged to leave some room for they in the cavity of the skull ; whereas , those ingredient be entirely useless to person of the heroic call , she hath a opportunity of thicken the bone , so as to make it less subject to any impression , or liable to be crack or break : and indeed , in some who be predestin to the command of armie and empire , she be suppose sometimes to make that part perfectly solid . as a game cock , when engage in amorous toying with a hen , if perchance he espy another cock at hand , immediately quit he female , and oppose himself to he rival , so do the ravisher , on the information of the crabstick , immediately leap from the woman and hasten to assail the man . he have no weapon but what have furnish he with . however , he clench he fist , and presently dart it at that part of 's breast where the heart be lod . Adam stagger at the violence of the blow , when , throw away he staff , he likewise clench that fist which we have before commemorate , and would have discharge it full in the breast of he antagonist , have he not dexterously catch it with he left hand , at the same time dart he head ( which some modern heroe of the lower class use , like the battering - ram of the ancient , for a weapon of offence ; another reason to admire the cunningness of , in compose it of those impenetrable material ) ; dash he head , I say , into the stomach of Adams , he tumble he on he back ; and , not have any regard to the law of heroism , which would have restrain he from any farther attack on he enemy till he be again on he leg , he throw himself upon he , and , lay hold on the ground with he left hand , he with he right belaboure the body of Adams till he be weary , and indeed till he conclude ( to use the language of fighting ) " that he have do he business ; " or , in the language of poetry , " that he have send he to the shade below ; " in plain , " that he be dead . " but , who be no chicken , and could bear a drubbing as well as any boxing champion in the universe , lay still only to watch he opportunity ; and now , perceive he antagonist to pant with he labour , he exert he utmost force at once , and with such success that he overturn he , and become he superior ; when , fix one of he knee in he breast , he cry out in a exulting voice , " it be my turn now ; " and , after a few minute ' constant application , he give he so dexterous a blow just under he ching that the fellow no longer retain any motion , and begin to fear he have strike he once too often ; for he often assert " he should be concerned to have the blood of even the wicked upon he . " Adams get up and call aloud to the young woman . " be of good cheer , damsel , " say he , " you be no longer in danger of you ravisher , who , I be terribly afraid , lie dead at my foot ; but forgive I what I have do in defence of innocence ! " the poor wretch , who have be some time in recovering strength enough to rise , and have afterwards , during the engagement , stood trembling , be disable by fear even from run away , hear she champion be victorious , come up to he , but not without apprehension even of she deliverer ; which , however , she be soon relieve from by he courteous behaviour and gentle word . they be both stand by the body , which lay motionless on the ground , and which wish to see stir much more than the woman do , when he earnestly beg she to tell he " by what misfortune she come , at such a time of night , into so lonely a place . " she acquaint he , " she be travel towards , and have accidentally meet with the person from whom he have deliver she , who tell she he be likewise on he journey to the same place , and would keep she company ; a offer which , suspect no harm , she have accept ; that he tell she they be at a small distance from a inn where she might take up she lod that evening , and he would show she a nearer way to it than by follow the road ; that if she have suspect he
he ( which she do not , he speak so kindly to she ) , be alone on these down in the dark , she have no human means to avoid he ; that , therefore , she put she whole trust in , and walk on , expect every moment to arrive at the inn ; when on a sudden , be come to those bushes , he desire she to stop , and after some rude kiss , which she resist , and some entreaty , which she reject , he laid violent hand on she , and be attempt to execute he wick will , when , she thank g --, he timely come up and prevent he . " Adam encourage she for say she have put she whole trust in , and tell she , " he doubt not but have send he to she deliverance , as a reward for that trust . he wish indeed he have not deprive the wicked wretch of life , but -- 's will be do ; " say , " he hope the goodness of he intention would excuse he in the next world , and he trust in she evidence to acquit he in this . " he be then silent , and begin to consider with himself whether it would be properer to make he escape , or to deliver himself into the hand of justice ; which meditation end as the reader will see in the next chapter . . _Give a account of the strange catastrophe of the preceding adventure , which draw poor Adam into fresh calamity ; and who the woman be who owe the preservation of she chastity to he victorious arm ._ the silence of , add to the darkness of the night and loneliness of the place , strike dreadful apprehension into the poor woman 's mind ; she begin to fear as great a enemy in she deliverer as he have deliver she from ; and as she have not light enough to discover the age of Adams , and the benevolence visible in he countenance , she suspect he have use she as some very honest man have use they country ; and have rescue she out of the hand of one rifler in order to rifle she himself . such be the suspicions she draw from he silence ; but indeed they be ill - grounde . he stand over he vanquished enemy , wisely weighing in he mind the objection which might be make to either of the two methods of proceeding mention in the last chapter , he judgment sometimes inclin to the one , and sometimes to the other ; for both see to he so equally advisable and so equally dangerous , that probably he would have end he day , at least two or three of they , on that very spot , before he have take any resolution ; at length he lifte up he eye , and spy a light at a distance , to which he instantly address himself with tu , traveller , heus tu !_ he presently hear several voice , and perceive the light approach toward he . the person who attend the light begin some to laugh , other to s , and other to hollow , at which the woman testify some fear ( for she have conceal she suspicions of the parson himself ) ; but Adams say , " be of good cheer , damsel , and repose thy trust in the same Providence which hath hithertoo protect thee , and never will forsake the innocent . " these people , who now approach , be no other , reader , than a set of young fellows , who come to these bushes in pursuit of a diversion which they call bird - batting . this , if you be ignorant of it ( as perhaps if thou hast never travel beyond , , , or the Borough , thou mayst be ) , I will inform thee , be perform by hold a large clap - net before a lanthorn , and at the same time beat the bushes ; for the bird , when they be disturb from they place of rest , or roost , immediately make to the light , and so be intice within the net . Adams immediately tell they what happen , and desire they to hold the lanthorn to the face of the man on the ground , for he fear he have smote he fatally . but indeed he fear be frivolous ; for the fellow , though he have be stun by the last blow he receive , have long since recover he sense , and , finde himself quit of , have listen attentively to the discourse between he and the young woman ; for whose departure he have patiently wait , that he might likewise withdraw himself , have no longer hope of succeed in he desire , which be moreover almost as well cool by as they could have be by the young woman herself have he obtain he utmost wish . this fellow , who have a readiness at improve any accident , think he might now play a better part than that of a dead man ; and , accordingly , the moment the candle be hold to he face he leapt up , and , lay hold on Adams , cry out , " no , villain , I be not dead , though you and you wick whore might well think I so , after the barbarous crueltie you have exercise on I . , " say he , " you be luckily come to the assistance of a poor traveller , who would otherwise have be rob and murder by this vile man and woman , who lead I hither out of my
my way from the high - road , and both falling on I have use I as you see . " Adam be go to answer , when one of the young fellow cry , " d -- and they , let 's carry they both before the justice . " the poor woman begin to tremble , and lift up he voice , but in vain . three or four of they laid hand on he ; and one hold the lanthorn to he face , they all agree he have the most villainous countenance they ever beheld ; and a attorney 's clerk , who be of the company , declare he be sure he have remember he at the bar . as to the woman , she hair be dishevell in the struggle , and she nose have b ; so that they could not perceive whether she be handsome or ugly , but they say she fright plainly discover she guilt . and search she pocket , as they do those of , for money , which the fellow say he have lose , they find in she pocket a purse with some gold in it , which abundantly convince they , especially as the fellow offer to swear to it . be find to have no more than one halfpenny about he . this the clerk say " be a great presumption that he be a old offender , by cunningly give all the booty to the woman . " to which all the rest readily assent . this accident promise they better sport than what they have propose , they quit they intention of catching bird , and unanimously resolve to proceed to the justice with the offender . be inform what a desperate fellow Adam be , they tie he hand behind he ; and , have hide they net among the bushes , and the lanthorn be carry before they , they place the two prisoner in they front , and then begin they march ; Adams not only submit patiently to he own fate , but comforte and encourage he companion under she suffering . whilst they be on they way the clerk inform the rest that this adventure would prove a very beneficial one ; for that they would all be entitle to they proportion of for apprehend the robber . this occasion a contention concern the part which they have severally borne in take they ; one insisting he ought to have the greatest share , for he have first laid he hand on Adams ; another claim a superior part for have first hold the lanthorn to the man 's face on the ground , by which , he say , " the whole be discover . " the clerk claim four -fifth of the reward for have propose to search the prisoner , and likewise the carry they before the justice : he say , " indeed , in strict justice , he ought to have the whole . " these claim , however , they at last consent to refer to a future decision , but see all to agree that the clerk be entitle to a moiety . they then debate what money should be allot to the young fellow who have be employ only in hold the net . he very modestly say , " that he do not apprehend any large proportion would fall to he share , but hope they would allow he something ; he desire they to consider that they have assign they net to he care , which prevent he from be as forward as any in laying hold of the robber " ( for so those innocent people be call ) ; " that if he have not occupy the nets , some other must ; " conclude , however , " that he should be contente with the smallest share imaginable , and should think that rather they bounty than he merit . " but they be all unanimous in exclude he from any part whatever , the clerk particularly swear , " if they give he a shilling they might do what they pleas with the rest ; for he would not concern himself with the affair . " this contention be so hot , and so totally engage the attention of all the party , that a dexterous nimble thief , have he be in 's situation , would have take care to have give the justice no trouble that evening . indeed , it require not the art of a to escape , especially as the darkness of the night would have so much befriend he ; but trust rather to he innocence than he heel , and , without think of flight , which be easy , or resistance ( which be impossible , as there be six lusty young fellow , besides the villain himself , present ) , he walk with perfect resignation the way they think proper to conduct he . Adams frequently vent himself in ejaculation during they journey ; at last , poor occur to he mind , he could not refrain sigh forth he name , which be hear by he companion in affliction , she cry with some vehemence , " sure I should know that voice ; you can not certainly , sir , be ? " --" indeed , damsel , " say he , " that be my name ; there be something also in you voice which persuade I I have hear it before . " -- " La ! sir , " say she , " do not you remember poor Fanny ? " --" how , Fanny ! " answer : " indeed I very well remember you ; what can have bring you hither ? " --" I have tell you , sir , " reply she , " I
I be travel towards ; but I think you mention ; pray what be become of he ? " --" I leave he , child , this afternoon , " say , " in the stage - coach , in he way towards we parish , whither he be go to see you . " --" to see I ! , sir , " answer , " sure you jeer I ; what should he be go to see I for ? " --" can you ask that ? " reply . " I hope , , you be not inconstant ; I assure you he deserve much better of you . " -- " la ! , " say she , " what be to I ? I be sure I never have anything to say to he , but as one fellow - servant might to another . " --" I be sorry to hear this , " say ; " a virtuous passion for a young man be what no woman need be asham of . you either do not tell I truth , or you be false to a very worthy man . " Adams then tell she what have happene at the inn , to which she listen very attentively ; and a sigh often escape from she , notwithstand she utmost endeavour to the contrary ; nor could she prevent herself from ask a thousand question , which would have assure any one but Adams , who never see farther into people than they desire to let he , of the truth of a passion she endeavoure to conceal . indeed , the fact be , that this poor girl , have heard of 's misfortune , by some of the servants belong to the coach which we have formerly mention to have stopt at the inn while the poor youth be confine to he bed , that instant abandon the cow she be milk , and , take with she a little bundle of clothes under she arm , and all the money she be worth in she own purse , without consult any one , immediately set forward in pursuit of one whom , notwithstand she shyness to the parson , she love with inexpressible violence , though with the purest and most delicate passion . this shyness , therefore , as we trust it will recommend she character to all we female reader , and not greatly surprize such of we males as be well acquaint with the younger part of the other sex , we shall not give ourselves any trouble to vindicate . . what happen to they while before the justice . a chapter very full of learning ._ they fellow - traveller be so engage in the hot dispute concern the division of the reward for apprehend these innocent people , that they attend very little to they discourse . they be now arrive at the justice 's house , and have send one of he servants in to acquaint he worship that they have take two robber and bring they before he . the justice , who be just return from a fox - chase , and have not yet finish he dinner , order they to carry the prisoner into the stable , whither they be attend by all the servants in the house , and all the people in the neighbourhood , who flock together to see they with as much curiosity as if there be something uncommon to be see , or that a rogue do not look like other people . the justice , now be in the height of he mirth and he cup , bethotch himself of the prisoner ; and , tell he company he believe they should have good sport in they examination , he order they into he presence . they have no sooner enter the room than he begin to revile they , say , " that robbery on the highway be now grow so frequent , that people could not sleep safely in they bed , and assure they they both should be make example of at the ensuing assize . " after he have go on some time in this manner , he be remind by he clerk , " that it would be proper to take the depositions of the witness against they . " which he bid he do , and he would light he pipe in the meantime . whilst the clerk be employ in writing down the deposition of the fellow who have pretend to be rob , the justice employ himself in cracking jest on poor , in which he be seconde by all the company at table . one ask , " whether she be to be indict for a highwayman ? " another whisper in she ear , " if she have not provide herself a great belly , he be at she service . " a third say , " he warrant she be a relation of . " to which one of the company , a great wit , shak he head , and then he side , answer , " he believe she be nearer related to ; " at which there be a universal laugh . they be proceed thus with the poor girl , when somebody , smoke the cassock pee forth from under the greatcoat of Adams , cry out , " what have we here , a parson ? " " how , sirrah , " say the justice , " do you go rob in the dress of a clergyman ? let I tell you you habit will not entitle you to the benefit of the clergy . " " yes , " say the witty fellow , " he will have one benefit of clergy , he will be exalt above the head of the people ; " at
at which there be a second laugh . and now the witty spark , see he joke take , begin to rise in spirits ; and , turn to , challenge he to cap verse , and , provoke he by give the first blow , he repeat -- " Molle meum levibus cord est vilebile telis . " upon which , with a look full of ineffable contempt , tell he , " he deserv scourging for he pronunciation . " the witty fellow answer , " what do you deserve , doctor , for not be able to answer the first time ? why , I will give one , you blockhead , with a " 'Si licet , ut fulvum spectatur in ignibus haurum . '_ " what , canst not with a m neither ? thou be a pretty fellow for a parson ! why didst not steal some of the parson 's latin as well as he gown ? " another at the table then answer , " if he have , you would have be too hard for he ; I remember you at the college a very devil at this sport ; I have see you catch a freshman , for nobody that know you would engage with you . " " I have forget those thing now , " cry the wit . " I believe I could have do pretty well formerly . let 's see , what do I end with ? -- a m again -- aye -- _" ' , , , . '_ I could have do it once . " " ah ! evil betide you , and so you can now , " say the other : " nobody in this country will undertake you . " Adam could hold no longer : " , " say he , " I have a boy not above eight year old who would instruct thee that the last verse run thus :-- _" ' ut sunt , , , , virorum .' " " I will hold thee a guinea of that , " say the wit , throw the money on the table . " and I will go you halve , " cry the other . " do , " answer Adams ; but upon apply to he pocket he be force to retract , and own he have no money about he ; which set they all a - laughing , and confirm the triumph of he adversary , which be not moderate , any more than the approbation he meet with from the whole company , who tell he must go a little longer to school before he attempt to attack that gentleman in . the clerk , have finish the deposition , as well of the fellow himself , as of those who apprehend the prisoner , deliver they to the justice ; who , have swear the several witness without read a syllable , order he clerk to make the mittimus . Adams then say , " he hope he should not be condemn unheard . " " no , no , " cry the justice , " you will be ask what you have to say for yourself when you come on you trial : we be not try you now ; I shall only commit you to gaol : if you can prove you innocence at size , you will be find ignoramus , and so no harm do . " " be it no punishment , sir , for a innocent man to lie several month in gaol ? " cry Adam : " I beg you would at least hear I before you sign the mittimus . " " what signify all you can say ? " say the justice : " be it not here in black and white against you ? I must tell you you be a very impertinent fellow to take up so much of my time . so make haste with he mittimus . " the clerk now acquaint the justice that among other suspicious thing , as a penknife , & c. , find in 's pocket , they have discover a book write , as he apprehend , in cypher ; for no one could read a word in it . " ay , " say the justice , " the fellow may be more than a common robber , he may be in a plot against the government . produce the book . " upon which the poor manuscript of , which have transcribe with he own hand , be bring forth ; and the justice , look at it , shook he head , and , turn to the prisoner , ask the meaning of those cypher . " Cypher ? " answer , " it be a manuscript of . " " who ? who ? " say the justice . Adam repeat , " . " " that be a outlandish name , " cry the clerk . " a fictitious name rather , I believe , " say the justice . one of the company declare it look very much like . " ? " say the justice ; " why , ' ti all writing . " " no , " say the other , " I do not positively say it be so ; for it be a very long time since I have see any . " " there be one , " say he , turn to the parson of the parish , who be present , " will tell we immediately . " the parson , take up the book , and put on he spectacle and gravity together , mutter some word to himself , and then pronounce aloud -- " ay , indeed , it be a manuscript ; a very fine piece of antiquity . I make no
no doubt but it be steal from the same clergyman from whom the rogue take the cassock . " " what do the rascal mean by he Aeschylus ? " say the justice . " Pooh ! " answer the doctor , with a contemptuous grin , " do you think that fellow know anything of this book ? ! ho ! ho ! I see now what it be - - a manuscript of one of the father . I know a nobleman who would give a great deal of money for such a piece of antiquity . ay , ay , question and answer . the beginning be the catechism in . ay , ay , toi _: what be you name ? " --" ay , what be you name ? " say the justice to Adams ; who answer , " it be , and I will maintain it . " -- " oh ! it be , " say the justice : " make Aeschylus he mittimus . I will teach you to banter I with a false name . " one of the company , have look steadfastly at , ask he , " if he do not know ? " upon which , presently call he to mind , answer in a rapture , " of squire ! be you there ? I believe you will inform he worship I be innocent . " --" I can indeed say , " reply the squire , " that I be very much surprized to see you in this situation : " and then , address himself to the justice , he say , " , I assure you be a clergyman , as he appear , and a gentleman of a very good character . I wish you would enquire a little farther into this affair ; for I be convince of he innocence . " -- " Nay , " say the justice , " if he be a gentleman , and you be sure he be innocent , I do not desire to commit he , not I : I will commit the woman by herself , and take you bail for the gentleman : look into the book , clerk , and see how it be to take bail -- come -- and make the mittimus for the woman as fast as you can . " --" , " cry Adams , " I assure you she be as innocent as myself . " -- " perhaps , " say the squire , " there may be some mistake ! pray let we hear 's relation . " -- " with all my heart , " answer the justice ; " and give the gentleman a glass to wet he whistle before he begin . I know how to behave myself to gentleman as well as another . nobody can say I have commit a gentleman since I have be in the commission . " Adams then begin the narrative , in which , though he be very prolix , he be uninterrupted , unless by several hum and hah of the justice , and he desire to repeat those part which seem to he most material . when he have finish , the justice , who , on what the squire have say , believ every syllable of he story on he bare affirmation , notwithstand the depositions on oath to the contrary , begin to let loose several rogue and rascal against the witness , whom he order to stand forth , but in vain ; the say witness , long since find what turn matter be likely to take , have privily withdrawn , without attend the issue . the justice now flew into a violent passion , and be hardly prevailed with not to commit the innocent fellow who have be impos on as well as himself . he swore , " they have best find out the fellow who be guilty of perjury , and bring he before he within two day , or he would bind they all over to they good behaviour . " they all promise to use they best endeavour to that purpose , and be dismiss . then the justice insist that should sit down and take a glass with he ; and the parson of the parish deliver he back the manuscript without say a word ; nor would , who plainly discern he ignorance , expose it . as for , she be , at she own request , recommend to the care of a maid - servant of the house , who help she to new dress and clean herself . the company in the parlour have not be long seat before they be alarme with a horrible uproar from without , where the person who have apprehend and have be regal , accord to the custom of the house , with the justice 's strong beer . these be all fall together by the ear , and be cuff each other without any mercy . the justice himself sally out , and with the dignity of he presence soon put a end to the fray . on he return into the parlour , he report , " that the occasion of the quarrel be no other than a dispute to whom , if Adams have be convict , the greater share of the reward for apprehend he have belong . " all the company laugh at this , except , who , take he pipe from he mouth , fetch a deep groan , and say , " he be concerned to see so litigious a temper in man . that he remembe a story something like it in one of the parish where he cure lay :-- there be , " continue he , " a competition between three young fellow for the place of the clerk
clerk , which I dispose of , to the best of my ability , accord to merit ; that be , I give it to he who have the happiest knack at set a psalm . the clerk be no sooner establish in he place than a contention begin between the two disappointed candidate concern they excellence ; each contending on whom , have they two be the only competitor , my election would have fall . this dispute frequently disturb the congregation , and introduce a discord into the psalmody , till I be force to silence they both . but , alas ! the litigious spirit could not be stifle ; and , be no longer able to vent itself in singing , it now break forth in fighting . it produce many battle ( for they be very near a match ) , and I believe would have end fatally , have not the death of the clerk give I a opportunity to promote one of they to he place ; which presently put a end to the dispute , and entirely reconcile the contending party . " Adams then proceed to make some philosophical observation on the folly of grow warm in dispute in which neither party be interested . he then apply himself vigorously to smoak ; and a long silence ensue , which be at length break by the justice , who begin to s forth he own praise , and to value himself exceedingly on he nice discernment in the cause which have lately be before he . he be quickly interrupt by , between whom and he worship a dispute now arise , whether he ought not , in strictness of law , to have commit he , the say Adams ; in which the latter maintain he ought to have be commit , and the justice as vehemently hold he ought not . this have most probably produce a quarrel ( for both be very violent and positive in they opinion ) , have not Fanny accidentally hear that a young fellow be go from the justice 's house to the very inn where the stage - coach in which be , put up . upon this news , she immediately send for the parson out of the parlour . Adams , when he find she resolute to go ( though she would not own the reason , but pretend she could not bear to see the face of those who have suspect she of such a crime ) , be as fully determined to go with she ; he accordingly take leave of the justice and company : and so end a dispute in which the law seem shamefully to intend to set a magistrate and a divine together by the ear . . _a very delightful adventure , as well to the person concerned as to the good - natured reader ._ Adams , , and the guide , set out together about one in the morning , the moon be then just risen . they have not go above a mile before a most violent storm of rain oblige they to take shelter in a inn , or rather alehouse , where immediately procure himself a good fire , a toast and ale , and a pipe , and begin to smoke with great content , utterly forget everything that have happen . sit likewise down by the fire ; but be much more impatient at the storm . she presently engage the eye of the host , he wife , the maid of the house , and the young fellow who be they guide ; they all conceive they have never see anything half so handsome ; and indeed , reader , if thou be of a amorous hue , I advise thee to skip over the next paragraph ; which , to render we history perfect , we be oblige to set down , humbly hope that we may escape the fate of Pygmalion ; for if it should happen to we , or to thee , to be strike with this picture , we should be perhaps in as helpless a condition as , and might say to ourselves , petis est nusquam_ . or , if the finest feature in it should set ---- 's image before we eye , we should be still in as bad a situation , and might say to we desire , ipsum petimus stultitia_ . be now in the nineteenth year of she age ; she be tall and delicately shap ; but not one of those slender young woman who seem rather intend to hang up in the hall of a anatomist than for any other purpose . on the contrary , she be so plump that she see burst through she tight stay , especially in the part which confin she swell breasts . do she hip want the assistance of a hoop to extend they . the exact shape of she arm denote the form of those limb which she conceal ; and though they be a little redden by she labour , yet , if she sleeve slip above she elbow , or she handkerchief discover any part of she neck , a whiteness appear which the finest italian paint would be unable to reach . she hair be of a chesnut brown , and nature have be extremely lavish to she of it , which she have cut , and on use to curl down she neck , in the modern fashion . she forehead be high , she eyebrow arch , and rather full than otherwise . she eyes black and sparkl ; she nose just inclin to the ; she lip red and moist , and she underlip , accord to the opinion of the ladie , too pout . she tooth be white , but not exactly even . the small
small - pox have leave one only mark on she ching , which be so large , it might have be mistaken for a dimple , have not she left cheek produce one so near a neighbour to it , that the former serve only for a foil to the latter . she complexion be fair , a little injured by the sun , but overspread with such a bloom that the finest lady would have exchange all they white for it : add to these a countenance in which , though she be extremely bashful , a sensibility appear almost incredible ; and a sweetness , whenever she smile , beyond either imitation or description . to conclude all , she have a natural gentility , superior to the acquisition of art , and which surprize all who beheld she . this lovely creature be sit by the fire with , when she attention be suddenly engage by a voice from a inner room , which sung the follow song :-- the song . , , where must the swain stray who be by thy beautie undone ? to wash they remembrance away , to what distant Lethey must run ? the wretch who be sentenc to die escape , and leave justice behind ; from he country perhaps he may fly , but oh ! can he fly from he mind ? of rapture ! unthotch of before , to be thus of possess ' ; she , nor no tyrant 's hard power , she image can tear from my breast . but feel not Narcissus more joy , with he eye he beheld he love charms ? yet what he beheld the fond boy more eagerly wish would in he arms . how can it thy dear image be which fill thus my bosom with woe ? can atch bear resemblance to thee which grief and not joy can bestow ? this counterfeit snatch from my heart , pow 'r , tho ' with torment I rave , ' mortal will prove the fell smart : I then shall find rest in my grave . ah , see the dear nymph of 'er the plain come smile and trip along ! a thousand love dance in she train , the Graces around she all throng . to meet she soft fly , and waft all the sweet from the flower , ah , rogue I whilst he kiss she eye , more sweet from she breath he devour . my soul , whilst I gaze , be on fire : but she look be so tender and kind , my hope almost reach would my desire , and leave lame despair far behind . transport with madness , I fly , and eagerly seize on my bliss ; she bosom but half she withdraw , but half she refuse my fond kiss . advance like these make I bold ; I whisper would she -- Love , we be alone .-- the rest let immortal unfold ; no language can tell but they own . ah , , expire , I cry , how long I thy cruelty bore ! ah , , she blush reply , you ne 'er be so pressing before . Adam have be ruminat all this time on a passage in , without attend in the least to the voice , though one of the most melodious that ever be hear , when , cast he eye on , he cry out , " bless we , you look extremely pale ! " -- " ! , " say she ; " o ! " and fall backward in she chair . Adams jump up , flng he into the fire , and fall a - roaring to the people of the house for help . he soon summon every one into the room , and the songster among the rest ; but , of reader ! when this nightingale , who be no other than himself , see he beloved Fanny in the situation we have describe she , canst thou conceive the agitation of he mind ? if thou canst not , waive that meditation to behold he happiness , when , clasp she in he arm , he find life and blood return into she cheek : when he see she open she beloved eye , and hear she with the softest accent whisper , " be you ? " --" thout my Fanny ? " he answer eagerly : and , pull she to he heart , he imprint numberless kiss on she lip , without consider who be present . if prude be offend at the lusciousness of this picture , they may take they eye off from it , and survey parson Adams dance about the room in a rapture of joy . some philosopher may perhaps doubt whether he be not the happiest of the three : for the goodness of he heart enjoy the blessing which be exult in the breast of both the other two , together with he own . but we shall leave such disquisition , as too deep for we , to those who be build some favourite hypothesis , which they will refuse no metaphysical rubbish to erect and support : for we part , we give it clearly on the side of , whose happiness be not only greater than the parson 's , but of longer duration : for as soon as the first tumult of 's rapture be over he cast he eye towards the fire , where lay expire ; and immediately rescue the poor remain , to wit , the sheepskin cover , of he dear friend , which be the work of he own hand , and have be he inseparable companion for upward of thirty year . have no sooner perfectly recover herself than she begin to restrain the impetuosity of she
she transport ; and , reflec on what she have do and suffer in the presence of so many , she be immediately cover with confusion ; and , push gently from she , she beg he to be quiet , nor would admit of either kiss or embrace any longer . then , see , she curtsy , and offer to advance to she ; but that high woman would not return she curtsy ; but , cast she eye another way , immediately withdraw into another room , muttering , as she go , she wonder who the creature be . chapter XIII . _a dissertation concern high people and low people , with 's departure in no very good temper of mind , and the evil plight in which she leave and he company ._ it will doubtless seem extremely odd to many reader , that , who have liv several year in the same house with , should , in a short separation , utterly forget she . and indeed the truth be , that she remember she very well . as we would not willingly , therefore , that anything should appear unnatural in this we history , we will endeaavor to explain the reason of she conduct ; nor do we doubt be able to satisfy the most curious reader that do not in the least deviate from the common road in this behaviour ; and , indeed , have she do otherwise , she must have descende below herself , and would have very justly be liable to censure . be it know then , that the human species be divide into two sort of people , to wit , high people and low people . as by high people I would not be understand to mean person literally bear higher in they dimension than the rest of the species , nor metaphorically those of exalted character or ability ; so by low people I can not be construe to intend the reverse . high people signify no other than people of fashion , and low people those of no fashion . now , this word fashion hath by long use lose its original meaning , from which at present it give we a very different idea ; for I be deceive if by person of fashion we do not generally include a conception of birth and accomplishment superior to the herd of mankind ; whereas , in reality , nothing more be originally mean by a person of fashion than a person who drest himself in the fashion of the time ; and the word really and truly signify no more at this day . now , the world be thus divide into people of fashion and people of no fashion , a fierce contention arise between they ; nor would those of one party , to avoid suspicion , be see publicly to speak to those of the other , though they often hold a very good correspondence in private . in this contention it be difficult to say which party succeed ; for , whilst the people of fashion seize several place to they own use , such as court , assemblie , operas , ball , & c. , the people of no fashion , besides one royal place , call he 's - , have be in constant possession of all hops , fair , revel , &c . two place have be agree to be divide between they , namely , the church and the playhouse , where they segregate themselves from each other in a remarkable manner ; for , as the people of fashion exal themselves at church over the head of the people of no fashion , so in the playhouse they abase themselves in the same degree under they foot . this distinction I have never meet with any one able to account for : it be sufficient that , so far from look on each other as breth in the language , they seem scarce to regard each other as of the same species . this , the term " strange person , people one do not know , the creature , wretch , beasts , brute , " and many other appellation evidently demonstrate ; which , have often hear she mistress use , think she have also a right to use in she turn ; and perhaps she be not mistake ; for these two party , especially those border nearly on each other , to wit , the lowest of the high , and the highest of the low , often change they party accord to place and time ; for those who be people of fashion in one place be often people of no fashion in another . and with regard to time , it may not be unpleasant to survey the picture of dependance like a kind of ladder ; as , for instance ; early in the morning arise the postillion , or some other boy , which great family , no more than great ship , be without , and fall to brush the clothes and clean the shoe of the footman ; who , be drest himself , apply he hand to the same labour for - hand , the squire 's gentleman ; the gentleman in the like manner , a little later in the day , attend the squire ; the squire be no sooner equip than he attend the levee of my lord ; which be no sooner over than my lord himself be see at the levee of the favourite , who , after the hour of homage be at a end , appear himself to pay homage to the levee of he sovereign . be there , perhaps , in this whole ladder of dependance , any one step at a greater distance from the other than the first from
from the second ; so that to a philosopher the question might only seem , whether you would chuse to be a great man at six in the morning , or at two in the afternoon . and yet there be scarce two of these who do not think the least familiarity with the persons below they a condescension , and , if they be to go one step farther , a degradation . and now , reader , I hope thou will pardon this long digression , which seem to I necessary to vindicate the great character of from what low people , who have never see high people , might think a absurdity ; but we who know they must have daily find very high person know we in one place and not in another , to - day and not to - morrow ; all which it be difficult to account for otherwise than I have here endeavoure ; and perhaps , if the gods , accord to the opinion of some , make man only to laugh at they , there be no part of we behaviour which answer the end of we creation better than this . but to return to we history : Adams , who know no more of this than the cat which sit on the table , imagine 's memory have be much worse than it really be , follow she into the next room , cry out , " , here be one of you old acquaintance ; do but see what a fine woman she be grow since she leave 's service . " --" I think I reflect something of she , " answer she , with great dignity , " but I can not remember all the inferior servants in we family . " she then proceed to satisfy 's curiosity , by tell he , " when she arrive at the inn , she find a chaise ready for she ; that , she lady be expect very shortly in the country , she be obliged to make the utmost haste ; and , in commensuration of 's lameness , she have take he with she ; " and lastly , " that the excessive virulence of the storm have drive they into the house where he find they . " after which , she acquaint with he have leave he horse , and exprest some wonder at he have stray so far out of he way , and at meet he , as she say , " in the company of that wench , who she fear be no better than she should be . " the horse be no sooner put into 's head but he be immediately drive out by this reflection on the character of . he protest , " he believe there be not a chaster damsel in the universe . I heartily wish , I heartily wish , " cry he ( snapp he finger ) , " that all she better be as good . " he then proceed to inform she of the accident of they meeting ; but when he come to mention the circumstance of deliver she from the rape , she say , " she think he properer for the army than the clergy ; that it do not become a clergyman to lay violent hand on any one ; that he should have rather pray that she might be strengthen . " Adam say , " he be very far from be asham of what he have do :" she reply , " want of shame be not the currycuristic of a clergyman . " this dialogue might have probably grow warmer , have not opportunely enter the room , to ask leave of to introduce Fanny : but she positively refuse to admit any such trollop , and tell he , " she would have be bur not before she would have suffer he to get into a chaise with she , if she have once respecte he of have he slut waylay on the road for he ; " add , " that act a very pretty part , and she do not doubt but to see he a bishop . " he make the best bow he could , and cry out , " I thank you , madam , for that right -reverend appellation , which I shall take all honest means to deserve . " -" very honest mean , " return she , with a sneer , " to bring people together . " at these word take two or three stride across the room , when the coachman come to inform , " that the storm be over , and the moon shone very bright . " she then send for , who be sit without with he Fanny , and would have have he gone with she ; but he peremptorily refuse to leave , which throw the good woman into a violent rage . she say , " she would inform she lady what doings be carry on , and do not doubt but she would ry the parish of all such people ; " and conclude a long speech , full of bitterness and very hard word , with some reflection on the clergy not decent to repeat ; at last , find unmoveable , she fling herself into the chaise , cast a look at Fanny as she go , not unlike that which give in the play . to say the truth , she be most disagreeably disappoint by the presence of : she have , from she first see at the inn , conceive hope of something which might have be accomplish at a alehouse as well as a palace . indeed , it be probable have rescue more than from the clanger of a rape that even . when the chaise
chaise have carry off the enraged , , , and Fanny assemble over the fire , where they have a great deal of innocent chat , pretty enough ; but , as possibly it would not be very entertaining to the reader , we shall hasten to the morning ; only observe that none of they go to be that night . Adams , when he have smoak three pipe , take a comfortable nap in a great chair , and leave the lover , whose eye be too well employ to permit any desire of shutt they , to enjoy by themselves , during some hour , a happiness which none of my reader who have never be in love be capable of the least conception of , though we have as many tongue as Homer desire , to describe it with , and which all true lover will represent to they own mind without the least assistance from we . let it suffice then to say , that Fanny , after a thousand entreaty , at last give up she whole soul to ; and , almost faint in he arm , with a sigh infinitely softer and sweeter too than any Arabian breeze , she whisper to he lip , which be then close to hers , " o , you have win I : I will be yours for ever . " , have thanke she on he knee , and embrace she with a eagerness which she now almost return , leapt up in a rapture , and awaken the parson , earnestly begge he " that he would that instant join they hand together . " Adams rebuk he for he request , and tell he " he would by no means consent to anything contrary to the form of the Church ; that he have no licence , nor indeed would he advise he to obtain one ; that the Church have prescribe a form -- namely , the publication of banns -- with which all good ought to comply , and to the omission of which he attribute the many misery which befell great folk in marriage ; " conclude , " as many as be join together otherwise than -- 's word doth allow be not join together by g --, neither be they matrimony lawful . " agree with the parson , say to , with a blush , " she assure he she would not consent to any such thing , and that she wonder at he offer it . " in which resolution she be comforte and commend by ; and be oblige to wait patiently till after the third publication of the banns , which , however , he obtain the consent of , in the presence of , to put in at they arrival . the sun have be now risen some hour , when , finde he leg surprizingly recover , propose to walk forwards ; but when they be all ready to set out , a accident a little retarde they . this be no other than the reckoning , which amount to seven shilling ; no great sum if we consider the immense quantity of ale which pour in . indeed , they have no objection to the reasonableness of the bill , but many to the probability of pay it ; for the fellow who have take poor Fanny 's purse have unluckily forget to return it . so that the account stood thus :-- and company , 0 7 0 in 's pocket 0 0 6 1/2 in 's 0 0 0 in 's 0 0 0 balance 0 6 5 1/2 they stand silent some few minute , stare at each other , when Adams whipt out on he toe , and ask the hostess , " if there be no clergyman in that parish ? " she answer , " there be . " -- " be he wealthy ? " reply he ; to which she likewise answer in the affirmative . Adams then snapp he finger return overjoy to he companion , cry out , " , ; " which not be understand , he tell they in plain , " they need give themselves no trouble , for he have a brother in the parish who would defray the reckoning , and that he would just step to he house and fetch the money , and return to they instantly . " end of . I . ii . .--continued . . _An interview between parson Adam and parson Trulliber ._ . _An adventure , the consequence of a new instance which give of he forgetfulness ._ . _a very curious adventure , in which give a much greater instance of the honest simplicity of he heart , than of he experience in the way of this world ._ . _a dialogue between and he host , which , by the disagreement in they opinion , seem to threat a unlucky catastrophe , have it not be timely prevent by the return of the lover ._ . chapter I . matter prefatory in praise of biography ._ chapter ii . _a night scene , wherein several wonderful adventure befel Adams and he fellow - traveller ._ chapter III . in which the gentleman relate the history of he life ._ description of 's way of live . the tragical adventure of the dog , and other grave matter ._ disputation on school hold on the road between and ; and a discovery not unwelcome to they both ._ . _Moral reflection by ; with the hunting adventure , and 's miraculous escape ._ . _a scene of roasting , very nicly adapt to the present taste and time ._ . which some reader will think too short and other too long ._ . _Contain as surprizing and bloody adventur as can be find in this or perhaps
perhaps any other authentic history ._ . _A discourse between the poet and the player ; of no other use in this history but to divert the reader ._ . _Contain the exhortation of parson Adam to he friend in affliction ; calculate for the instruction and improvement of the reader ._ . more adventure , which we hope will as much please as surprize the reader ._ chapter XIII . _a curious dialogue which pass between and , better worth read than all the work of and many other ._ . chapter I . the arrival of and the rest at - hall ._ chapter ii . _a dialogue between and the ._ chapter III . what pass between the lady and lawyer Scout ._ _A short chapter , but very full of matter ; particularly the arrival of and he lady ._ . _Contain justice business ; curiious precedent of deposition , and other matter necessary to be peruse by all justex of the peace and they clerk ._ . of which you be desire to read no more than you like ._ . Philosophical reflection , the like not to be find in any light french romance . 's grave advice to , and 's encounter with a beau ._ . _a discourse which happen between , , , and , with some behaviour of which will be call by some few reader very low , absurd , and unnatural ._ visit which the polite and she polite friend pay to the parson ._ . the history of two friend , which may afford a useful lesson to all those person who happen to take up they residence in married family ._ . in which the history be continue ._ . where the good - natured reader will see something which will give he no great pleasure ._ chapter xiii the history , return to the , give some account of the terrible conflict in she breast between love and pride , with what happen on the present discovery ._ . _Contain several curiious night - adventure , in which fell into many hair - breadth scape , partly owe to he goodness , and partly to he inadvertency ._ . the arrival of and with another person not much expect , and a perfect solution of the difficulty raise by the pedlar ._ . be the last . in which this true history be brotch to a happy conclusion ._ list of iLLUSTRATIONs . he .--continue . . _An interview between parson Adam and parson Trulliber ._ come to the house of parson Trulliber , whom he find stript into he waistcoat , with a apron on , and a pail in he hand , just come from serve he hog ; for be a parson on , but all the other six might more properly be call a farmer . he occupy a small piece of land of he own , besides which he rent a considerable deal more . he wife milk he cow , manage he dairy , and follow the market with butter and egg . the hog fall chiefly to he care , which he carefully wait on at home , and attend to fair ; on which occasion he be liable to many joke , he own size be , with much ale , render little inferior to that of the beasts he sell . he be indeed one of the largest man you should see , and could have act the part of Falstaff without stuff . add to this that the rotundity of he belly be considerably increase by the shortness of he stature , he shadow ascend very near as far in height , when he lay on he back , as when he stand on he leg . he voice be loud and hoarse , and he accents extremely broad . to complete the whole , he have a stateliness in he gait , when he walk , not unlike that of a goose , only he stalk slower . , be inform that somebody want to speak with he , immediately slipt off he apron and clothed himself in a old night - gown , be the dress in which he always see he company at home . he wife , who inform he of 's arrival , have make a small mistake ; for she have tell she husband , " she believe there be a man come for some of he hog . " this supposition make hasten with the utmost expedition to attend he guest . he no sooner see Adams than , not in the least doubt the cause of he errand to be what he wife have imagine , he tell he , " he be come in very good time ; that he expect a dealer that very afternoon ; " and add , " they be all pure and fat , and upward of twenty score a - piece . " Adam answer , " he believe he do not know he . " " yes , yes , " cry , " I have see you often at fair ; why , we have deal before now , mun , I warrant you . yes , yes , " cry he , " I remember thy face very well , but will not mention a word more till you have see they , though I have never sell thee a flitch of such bacon as be now in the stye . " upon which he laid violent hand on , and drag he into the hog - stye , which be indeed but two step from he parlour window . they be no sooner arrive there than he cry would out , " do but handle they ! step in , friend ! be welcome to handle they , whether dost buy or no . " at which
which word , open the gate , he push into the pig - stye , insist on it that he should handle they before he would talk one word with he . Adam , whose natural complacence be beyond any artificial , be oblige to comply before he be suffer to explain himself ; and , lay hold on one of they tail , the unruly beast give such a sudden spring , that he throw poor Adam all along in the mire . , instead of assist he to get up , burst into a laughter , and , enter the stye , say to , with some contempt , " why , dost not know how to handle a hog ? " and be go to lay hold of one himself , but , who think he have carry he complacence far enough , be no sooner on he leg than he escape out of the reach of the animal , and cry out , " _Nihil habeo cum porcis _: I be a clergyman , sir , and be not come to buy hog . " answer , " he be sorry for the mistake , but that he must blame he wife , " add , " she be a fool , and always commit blunder . " he then desire he to walk in and clean himself , that he would only fasten up the stye and follow he . Adam desire leave to dry he greatcoat , wig , and hat by the fire , which grant . would have bring he a basin of water to wash he face , but she husband bid she be quiet like a fool as she be , or she would commit more blunder , and then direct Adam to the pump . while be thus employ , , conceive no great respect for the appearance of he guest , fasten the parlour door , and now conduct he into the kitchen , tell he he believe a cup of drink would do he no harm , and whisper he wife to draw a little of the worst ale . after a short silence Adam say , " I fancy , sir , you already perceive I to be a clergyman . " -- " ay , ay , " cry Trulliber , grinn , " I perceive you have some cassock ; I will not venture to caale it a whole one . " Adam answer , " it be indeed none of the best , but he have the misfortune to tear it about ten year ago in passing over a stile . " , return with the drink , tell she husband , " she fancie the gentleman be a traveller , and that he would be glad to eat a bit . " bid she hold she impertinent tongue , and ask she , " if parson use to travel without horse ? " add , " he suppose the gentleman have none by he have no boot on . " --" yes , sir , yes , " say Adam ; " I have a horse , but I have leave he behind I . " --" I be glad to hear you have one , " say ; " for I assure you I do not love to see clergyman on foot ; it be not seemly nor sui the dignity of the cloth . " here make a long oration on the dignity of the cloth ( or rather gown ) not much worth relating , till he wife have spread the table and set a mess of porridge on it for he breakfast . he then say to , " I do not know , friend , how you come to caale on I ; however , as you be here , if you think proper to eat a morsel , you may . " Adams accept the invitation , and the two parson sit down together ; wait behind she husband 's chair , as be , it seem , she custom . eat heartily , but scarce put anything in he mouth without find fault with he wife 's cookery . all which the poor woman bear patiently . indeed , she be so absolute a admirer of she husband 's greatness and importance , of which she have frequent hint from he own mouth , that she almost carry she adoration to a opinion of he infallibility . to say the truth , the parson have exercise she more way than one ; and the pious woman have so well edify by she husband 's sermon , that she have resolve to receive the bad thing of this world together with the good . she have indeed be at first a little contentious ; but he have long since get the better ; partly by she love for this , partly by she fear of that , partly by she religion , partly by the respect he pay himself , and partly by that which he receive from the parish . she have , in short , absolutely submit , and now worship she husband , as do , call he ( not lord , but ) master . whilst they be at table she husband give she a fresh example of he greatness ; for , as she have just deliver a cup of ale to Adams , he snatch it out of he hand , and , cry out , " I caal would vurst , " swallow down the ale . Adams deny it ; it be refer to the wife , who , though she conscience be on the side of , durst not give it against she husband ; upon which he say , " no , sir , no ; I should not have be so rude to have take it
it from you if you have caal have vurst , but I would have you know I be a better man than to suffer the best he in the kingdom to drink before I in my own house when I caale vurst . " as soon as they breakfast be end , begin in the follow manner : " I think , sir , it be high time to inform you of the business of my embassy . I be a traveller , and be pass this way in company with two young people , a lad and a damsel , my parishioner , towards my own cure ; we stopt at a house of hospitality in the parish , where they direct I to you as have the cure . " --" though I be but a curate , " say , " I believe I be as warm as the vicar himself , or perhaps the rector of the next parish too ; I believe I could buy they both . " --" , " cry Adams , " I rejoice thereat . now , sir , my business be , that we be by various accident stript of we money , and be not able to pay we reckoning , be seven shilling . I therefore request you to assist I with the loan of those seven shilling , and also seven shilling more , which , peradventure , I shall return to you ; but if not , I be convince you will joyfully embrace such a opportunity of lay up a treasure in a better place than any this world affords . " suppose a stranger , who enter the chamber of a lawyer , be imagine a client , when the lawyer be prepare he palm for the fee , should pull out a writ against he . suppose a apothecary , at the door of a chariot contain some great doctor of eminent skill , should , instead of direction to a patient , present he with a potion for himself . suppose a minister should , instead of a good round sum , treat my lord ----, or sir ----, or esq. ---- with a good broomstick . suppose a civil companion , or a lead captain , should , instead of virtue , and honour , and beauty , and part , and admiration , thunder vice , and infamy , and ugliness , and folly , and contempt , in he patron 's ear . suppose , when a tradesman first carry in he bill , the man of fashion should pay it ; or suppose , if he do so , the tradesman should abate what he have overcharge , on the supposition of waiting . in short -- suppose what you will , you never can nor will suppose anything equal to the astonishment which seize on , as soon as have end he speech . a while he roll he eye in silence ; sometimes survey , then he wife ; then caste they on the ground , then lift they up to heaven . at last he burst forth in the follow accent : " Sir , I believe I know where to lay up my little treasure as well as another . I thank g --, if I be not so warm as some , I be content ; that be a blessing greater than riche ; and he to whom that be give need ask no more . to be content with a little be greater than to possess the world ; which a man may possess without be so . lay up my treasure ! what matter where a man 's treasure be whose heart be in the Scripture ? there be the treasure of a . " at these word the water run from 's eye ; and , catch by the hand in a rapture , " , " say he , " heaven bless the accident by which I come to see you ! I would have walk many a mile to have commune with you ; and , believe I , I will shortly pay you a second visit ; but my friend , I fancy , by this time , wonder at my stay ; so let I have the money immediately . " then put on a stern look , and cry out , " thou dost not intend to rob I ? " at which the wife , burst into tear , fall on she knee and roar out , " of dear sir ! for 's sake do not rob my master ; we be but poor people . " " get up , for a fool as thou art , and go about thy business , " say ; " dost think the man will venture he life ? he be a beggar , and no robber . " " very true , indeed , " answer . " I wish , with all my heart , the tithing - man be here , " cry ; " I would have thee punish as a vagabond for thy impudence . Fourteen shilling indeed ! I will not give thee a farthing . I believe thou be no more a clergyman than the woman there " ( point to he wife ) ; " but if thou art , dost deserve to have thy gow stript over thy shoulders for run about the country in such a manner . " " I forgive you suspicions , " say Adam ; " but suppose I be not a clergyman , I be nevertheless thy brother ; and thou , as a , much more as a clergyman , art oblige to relieve my distress . " " Dost preach to I ? " reply ; " dost pretend to instruct I in my duty ? " "
" Ifacks , a good story , " cry , " to preach to my master . " " Silence , woman , " cry . " I would have thee know , friend " ( address himself to Adams ) , " I shall not learn my duty from such as thee . I know what charity be , better than to give to vagabonds . " " , if we be inclin , the poor 's rate oblige we to give so much charity , " cry the wife . " ! thou be a fool . 's reate ! hold thy nonsense , " answer ; and then , turn to , he tell he , " he would give he nothing . " " I be sorry , " answer , " that you do know what charity be , since you practise it no better : I must tell you , if you trust to you knowledge for you justification , you will find yourself deceive , though you should add faith to it , without good work . " " fellow , " cry , " dost thou speak against faith in my house ? get out of my door : I will no longer remain under the same roof with a wretch who speak wantonly of faith and the Scripture . " " name not the Scripture , " say Adams . " how ! not name the Scripture ! do you disbelieve the Scripture ? " cry . " no ; but you do , " answer , " if I may reason from you practice ; for they command be so explicit , and they reward and punishment so immense , that it be impossible a man should stedfastly believe without obey . now , there be no command more express , no duty more frequently enjoin , than charity . whoever , therefore , be void of charity , I make no scruple of pronouncing that he be no christian . " " I would not advise thee , " say , " to say that I be no : I will not take it of you ; for I believe I be as good a man as thyself " ( and indeed , though he be now rather too corpulent for athletic exercise , he have , in he youth , be one of the best boxers and cudgel - player in the county ) . he wife , see he clench he fist , interpose , and beg he not to fight , but show himself a true , and take the law of he . as nothing could provoke Adams to strike , but a absolute assault on himself or he friend , he smile at the angry look and gesture of ; and , tell he he be sorry to see such man in order , depart without further ceremony . . _An adventure , the consequence of a new instance which give of he forgetfulness ._ when he come back to the inn he find and sit together . they be so far from think he absence long , as he have fear they would , that they never once miss or think of he . indeed , I have be often assu by both , that they spend these hour in a most delightful conversation ; but , as I never could prevail on either to relate it , so I can not communicate it to the reader . Adams acquaint the lover with the ill success of he enterprize . they be all greatly confound , none be able to propose any method of departing , till at last advise call in the hostess , and desire she to trust they ; which say she despair of she do , as she be one of the sourest - faced woman she have ever beheld . but she be agreeably disappointed ; for the hostess be no sooner ask the question than she readily agree ; and , with a curtsy and smile , wish they a good journey . however , lest Fanny 's skill in physiognomy should be call in question , we will venture to assign one reason which might probably incline she to this confidence and good - humour . when say he be go to visit he brother , he have unwittingly impos on and , who both believe he have mean he natural brother , and not he brother in divinity , and have so inform the hostess , on she enquiry after he . now have , by he profession of piety , by he gravity , austerity , reserve , and the opinion of he great wealth , so great a authority in he parish , that they all live in the utmost fear and apprehension of he . it be therefore no wonder that the hostess , who know it be in he option whether she should ever sell another mug of drink , do not dare to affro not he suppose brother by deny he credit . they be now just on they departure when recollect he have leave he greatcoat and hat at 's . as he be not desirous of renew he visit , the hostess herself , have no servant at home , offer to fetch it . this be a unfortunate expedient ; for the hostess be soon undeceived in the opinion she have entertain of , whom abuse in the grossest term , especially when he hear he have have the assurance to pretend to be he near relation . at she return , therefore , she entirely change she note . she say , " folk might be asham of travel about , and pretend to be what they be not . that tax be high , and for she part she be oblige to pay for what she
she have ; she could not therefore possibly , nor would she , trust anybody ; no , not she own father . that money be never scarcer , and she want to make up a sum . that she expect , therefore , they should pay they reckoning before they leave the house . " be now greatly perplex ; but , as he know that he could easily have borrowed such a sum in he own parish , and as he know he would have lent it himself to any mortal in distress , so he take fresh courage , and sally out all round the parish , but to no purpose ; he return as pennyless as he go , groan and lament that it be possible , in a country professe , for a wretch to starve in the midst of he fellow - creature who abound . whilst he be gone , the hostess , who stay as a sort of guard with and , entertaine they with the goodness of parson Trulliber . and , indeed , he have not only a very good character as to other quality in the neighbourhood , but be repute a man of great charity ; for , though he never give a farthing , he have always that word in he mouth . be no sooner return the second time than the storm grow exceedingly high , the hostess declare , among other thing , that , if they offer to stir without pay she , she would soon overtake they with a warrant . and , or somebody else , hath say , _that when the most exquisite cunning fail , chance often hit the mark , and that by mean the least expect _. express this very boldly :-- , quod optanti divum promittere nemo , die , en! attulit ultro ._ I would quote more great man if I could ; but my memory not permit I , I will proceed to exemplify these observation by the follow instance :-- there chance ( for Adams have not cunn enough to contrive it ) to be at that time in the alehouse a fellow who have be formerly a drummer in a irish regiment , and now travel the country as a pedlar . this man , have attentively listen to the discourse of the hostess , at last took Adam aside , and ask he what the sum be for which they be detain . as soon as he be inform , he sigh , and say , " he be sorry it be so much ; for that he have no more than six shilling and sixpence in he pocket , which he would lend they with all he heart . " give a caper , and cry would out , " it would do ; for that he have sixpence himself . " and thus these poor people , who could not engage the compassion of riche and piety , be at length deliver out of they distress by the charity of a poor pedlar . I shall refer it to my reader to make what observation he please on this incident : it be sufficient for I to inform he that , after Adams and he companion have return he a thousand thanks , and tell he where he might call to be repay , they all sally out of the house without any compliment from they hostess , or indeed without pay she any ; declare he would take particular care never to call there again ; and she on she side assure they she want no such guest . . _a very curious adventure , in which give a much greater instance of the honest simplicity of he heart , than of he experience in the way of this world ._ we traveller have walk about two mile from that inn , which they have more reason to have mistaken for a castle than ever have any of those in which he sojourn , see they have meet with such difficulty in escape out of its wall , when they come to a parish , and beheld a sign of invitation hang out . a gentleman sit smoak a pipe at the door , of whom Adams inquire the road , and receive so courteous and oblige a answer , accompany with so smile a countenance , that the good parson , whose heart be naturally dispose to love and affection , begin to ask several other question ; particularly the name of the parish , and who be the owner of a large house whose frond they then have in prospect . the gentleman answer as obligingly as before ; and as to the house , acquaint he it be he own . he then proceed in the follow manner : " Sir , I presume by you habit you be a clergyman ; and as you be travel on foot I suppose a glass of good beer will not be disagreeable to you ; and I can recommend my landlord 's withing as some of the best in all this country . what say you , will you hal a little and let we take a pipe together ? there be no better tobacco in the kingdom . " this proposal be not displease to , who have allay he thirst that day with no better liquor than what 's cellar have produce ; and which be indeed little superior , either in richness or flavour , to that which distill from those grain she generous husband bestow on he hog . have , therefore , abundantly thanke the gentleman for he kind invitation , and bid and follow he , he enter the alehouse , where a large loaf and cheese and a pitcher of beer , which truly answer the character give of it , be
be set before they , the three traveller fell to eat , with appetite infinitely more voracious than be to be find at the most exquisite eating - house in the parish of 's . the gentleman express great delight in the hearty and cheerful behaviour of Adams ; and particularly in the familiarity with which he converse with and , whom he often call he child ; a term he explain to mean no more than he parishioner ; say , " he look on all those whom have intrust to he care to stand to he in that relation . " the gentleman , shak he by the hand , highly applaude those sentiment . " they be , indeed , " say he , " the true principles of a divine ; and I heartily wish they be universal ; but , on the contrary , I be sorry to say the parson of we parish , instead of esteem he poor parishioners as a part of he family , seem rather to consider they as not of the same species with himself . he seldom speak to any , unless some few of the richest of we ; nay , indeed , he will not move he hat to the other . I often laugh when I behold he on strutt along the churchyard like a turkey - cock through row of he parishioner , who bow to he with as much submission , and be as unregarded , as a set of servile courtier by the proudest prince in . but if such temporal pride be ridiculous , surely the spiritual be odious and detestable ; if such a puffe -- up empty human bladder , strutt in princely rob , justly move one 's derision , surely in the habit of a priest it must raise we scorn . " " doubtless , " answer , " you opinion be right ; but I hope such example be rare . the clergy whom I have the honour to know maintain a different behaviour ; and you will allow I , sir , that the readiness which too many of the laity show to contemn the order may be one reason of they avoiding too much humility . " " very true , indeed , " say the gentleman ; " I find , sir , you be a man of excellent sense , and be happy in this opportunity of know you ; perhaps we accidental meeting may not be disadvantageous to you neither . at present I shall only say to you that the incumbent of this living be old and infirm , and that it be in my gift . Doctor , give I you hand ; and assure yourself of it at he decease . " Adams tell he , " he be never more confound in he life than at he utter incapacity to make any return to such noble and unmerited generosity . " " a mere trifle , sir , " cry the gentleman , " scarce worth you acceptance ; a little more than three hundred a year . I wish it be double the value for you sake . " Adam bow , and cry from the emotion of he gratitude ; when the other ask he , " if he be marry , or have any child , besides those in the spiritual sense he have mention . " " , " reply the parson , " I have a wife and six at you service . " " that be unlucky , " say the gentleman ; " for I would otherwise have take you into my own house as my chaplain ; however , I have another in the parish ( for the parsonage - house be not good enough ) , which I will furnish for you . , do you wife understand a dairy ? " " I can not profess she do , " say Adams . " I be sorry for it , " quoth the gentleman ; " I would have give you half - a - dozen cow , and very good grounds to have maintain they . " " , " say , in a ecstasy , " you be too liberal ; indeed you be . " " not at all , " cry the gentleman : " I esteem riche only as they give I a opportunity of do good ; and I never see one whom I have a greater inclination to serve . " at which word he shook he heartily by the hand , and tell he he have sufficient room in he house to entertain he and he friend . Adams beg he might give he no such trouble ; that they could be very well accommodate in the house where they be ; forget they have not a sixpenny piece among they . the gentleman would not be deny ; and , inform himself how far they be travel , he say it be too long a journey to take on foot , and beg that they would favour he by suffer he to lend they a servant and horse ; add , withal , that , if they would do he the pleasure of they company only two day , he would furnish they with he coach and six . Adam , turn to , say , " how lucky be this gentleman 's goodness to you , who I be afraid would be scarce able to hold out on you lame leg ! " and then , address the person who make he these liberal promise , after much bowing , he cry out , " bless be the hour which first introduce I to a man of you charity ! you be indeed a of the true primitive kind , and a honour to the country wherein
wherein you live . I would willingly have take a pilgrimage to the to have beheld you ; for the advantages which we draw from you goodness give I little pleasure , in comparison of what I enjoy for you own sake when I consider the treasure you be by these means lay up for yourself in a country that passeth not away . we will therefore , most generous sir , accept you goodness , as well the entertainment you have so kindly offer we at you house this evening , as the accommodation of you horse to - morrow morning . " he then begin to search for he hat , as do for he ; and both they and be in order of departure , when the gentleman , stop short , and seem to meditate by himself for the space of about a minute , exclaim thus : " sure never anything be so unlucky ; I have forgot that my house - keeper be go abroad , and hath lock up all my room ; indeed , I would break they open for you , but shall not be able to furnish you with a bed ; for she have likewise put away all my linen . I be glad it enter into my head before I have give you the trouble of walk there ; beside , I believe you will find better accommodation here than you expect .-- landlord , you can provide good bed for these people , can not you ? " " yes , and please you worship , " cry the host , " and such as no lord or justice of the peace in the kingdom need be asham to lie in . " " I be heartily sorry , " say the gentleman , " for this disappointment . I be resolve I will never suffer she to carry away the key again . " " pray , sir , let it not make you uneasy , " cry Adam ; " we shall do very well here ; and the loan of you horse be a favour we shall be incapable of make any return to . " " ay ! " say the squire , " the horse shall attend you here at what hour in the morning you please ; " and now , after many civility too tedious to enumerate , many squeeze by the hand , with most affectionate look and smile at each other , and after appoint the horse at seven the next morning , the gentleman take he leave of they , and depart to he own house . Adams and he companion return to the table , where the parson smoak another pipe , and then they all retire to rest . rise very early , and call out of he bed , between whom a very fierce dispute ensue , whether should ride behind , or behind the gentleman 's servant ; insist on it that he be perfectly recover , and be as capable of take care of as any other person could be . but would not agree to it , and declare he would not trust she behind he ; for that he be weaker than he imagine himself to be . this dispute continue a long time , and have begin to be very hot , when a servant arrive from they good friend , to acquaint they that he be unfortunately prevent from lend they any horse ; for that he groom have , unknown to he , put he whole stable under a course of physic . this advice presently struck the two disputant dumb : Adam cry out , " ever anything so unlucky as this poor gentleman ? I protest I be more sorry on he account than my own . you see , , how this good - natured man be treat by he servants ; one lock up he linen , another physic he horse , and I suppose , by he be at this house last night , the butler have lock up he cellar . bless we ! how good - nature be use in this world ! I protest I be more concerned on he account than my own . " " so be not I , " cry ; " not that I be much trouble about walking on foot ; all my concern be , how we shall get out of the house , unless send another pedlar to redeem we . but certainly this gentleman have such a affection for you , that he would lend you a larger sum than we owe here , which be not above four or five shilling . " " very true , child , " answer Adam ; " I will write a letter to he , and will even venture to solicit he for three half - crown ; there will be no harm in have two or three shilling in we pocket ; as we have full forty mile to travel , we may possibly have occasion for they . " Fanny be now risen , pay she a visit , and leave Adams to write he letter , which have finish , he despatch a boy with it to the gentleman , and then seat himself by the door , light he pipe , and betake himself to meditation . the boy stay longer than seem to be necessary , , who with be now return to the parson , express some apprehension that the gentleman 's steward have lock up he purse too . to which answer , " it might very possibly be , and he should wonder at no libertie which the devil might put into the head of a wicked servant to take with so worthy a master ; " but add , " that , as the
the sum be so small , so noble a gentleman would be easily able to procure it in the parish , though he have it not in he own pocket . indeed , " say he , " if it be four or five guinea , or any such large quantity of money , it might be a different matter . " they be now sit down to breakfast over some toast and ale , when the boy return and inform they that the gentleman be not at home . " very well ! " cry Adam ; " but why , child , do you not stay till he return ? go back again , my good boy , and wait for he come home ; he can not be go far , as he horse be all sick ; and besides , he have no intention to go abroad , for he invite we to spend this day and tomorrow at he house . therefore go back , child , and tarry till he return home . " the messenger depart , and be back again with great expedition , bring a account that the gentleman be go a long journey , and would not be at home again this month . at these word seem greatly confound , say , " this must be a sudden accident , as the sickness or death of a relation or some such unforeseen misfortune ; " and then , turn to , cry , " I wish you have remind I to have borrowed this money last night . " , smile , answer , " he be very much deceive if the gentleman would not have find some excuse to avoid lend it .-- I own , " say he , " I be never much pleased with he professing so much kindness for you at first sight ; for I have hear the gentleman of we cloth in tell many such story of they master . but when the boy bring the message back of he not be at home , I presently know what would follow ; for , whenever a man of fashion doth not care to fulfil he promise , the custom be to order he servants that he will never be at home to the person so promise . in they call it deny he . I have myself deny above a hundred time , and when the man hath dance attendance for about a month or sometimes longer , he be acquaint in the end that the gentleman be go out of town and could do nothing in the business . " --" ! " say Adams , " what wickedness be there in the Christian world ! I profess almost equal to what I have read of the heathen . but surely , , you suspicion of this gentleman must be unjust , for what a silly fellow must he be who would do the devil 's work for nothing ! and canst thou tell I any interest he could possibly propose to himself by deceive we in he profession ? " --" it be not for I , " answer , " to give reason for what man do , to a gentleman of you learning . " --" you say right , " quoth Adam ; " knowledge of man be only to be learn from book ; and for that ; and those be author , I be afraid , child , you never read . " -- " not I , sir , truly , " answer ; " all I know is , it be a maxim among the gentleman of we cloth , that those master who promise the most perform the least ; and I have often hear they say they have find the largest vail in those family where they be not promise any . but , sir , instead of consider any farther these matters , it would be we wisest way to contrive some method of get out of this house ; for the generous gentleman , instead of do we any service , hath leave we the whole reckon to pay . " Adam be go to answer , when they host come in , and , with a kind of jeering smile , say , " well , master ! the squire hath not send he horse for you yet . Lauld help I ! how easily some folk make promise ! " -- " how ! " say Adam ; " have you ever know he do anything of this kind before ? " --" ay ! marry have I , " answer the host : " it be no business of mine , you know , sir , to say anything to a gentleman to he face ; but now he be not here , I will assure you , he hath not he fellow within the three next market - town . I own I could not help laugh when I hear he offer you the living , for thereby hang a good jest . I think he would have offer you my house next , for one be no more he to dispose of than the other . " at these word Adams , bless himself , declare , " he have never read of such a monster . but what vex I most , " say he , " be , that he hath decoy we into run up a long debt with you , which we be not able to pay , for we have no money about we , and , what be worse , live at such a distance , that if you should trust we , I be afraid you would lose you money for want of we find any conveniency of send it . " --" trust you , master !
! " say the host , " that I will with all my heart . I honour the clergy too much to deny trust one of they for such a trifle ; beside , I like you fear of never pay I . I have lose many a debt in my lifetime , but be promise to be pay they all in a very short time . I will score this reckoning for the novelty of it . it be the first , I do assure you , of its kind . but what say you , master , shall we have t'other pot before we part ? it will waste but a little chalk more , and if you never pay I a shill the loss will not ruin I . " Adam like the invitation very well , especially as it be deliver with so hearty a accent . he shook he host by the hand , and thanke he , say , " he would tarry another pot rather for the pleasure of such worthy company than for the liquor ; " add , " he be glad to find some leave in the kingdom , for that he almost begin to suspect that he be sojourn in a country inhabit only by and . " the kind host produce the liquor , and with retire into the garden , where , while they solace themselves with amorous discourse , sit down with he host ; and , both fill they glass , and light they pipe , they begin that dialogue which the reader will find in the next chapter . . _a dialogue between and he host , which , by the disagreement in they opinion , seem to threat a unlucky catastrophe , have it not be timely prevent by the return of the lover ._ " , " say the host , " I assure you you be not the first to whom we squire hath promise more than he hath perform . he be so famous for this practice , that he word will not be take for much by those who know he . I remember a young fellow whom he promise he parent to make a exciseman . the poor people , who could ill afford it , breed they son to write and account , and other learn to qualify he for the place ; and the boy hold up he head above he condition with these hope ; nor would he go to plough , nor to any other kind of work , and go constantly drest as fine as could be , with two clean shirt a week , and this for several year ; till at last he follow the squire up to , think there to mind he of he promise ; but he could never get sight of he . so that , be out of money and business , he fall into evil company and wick course ; and in the end come to a sentence of transportation , the news of which break the mother 's heart .-- I will tell you another true story of he . there be a neighbour of mine , a farmer , who have two son whom he breed up to the business . pretty lads they be . nothing would serve the squire but that the youngest must be make a parson . upon which he persuade the father to send he to school , promise that he would afterwards maintain he at the university , and , when he be of a proper age , give he a living . but after the lad have be seven year at school , and he father bring he to the squire , with a letter from he master that he be fit for the university , the squire , instead of minding he promise , or send he thither at he expense , only tell he father that the young man be a fine scholar , and it be pity he could not afford to keep he at for four or five year more , by which time , if he could get he a curacy , he might have he ordain . the farmer say , ' he be not a man sufficient to do any such thing . '--' why , then ,' answer the squire , 'I be very sorry you have give he so much learn ; for , if he can not get he live by that , it will rather spoil he for anything else ; and you other son , who can hardly write he name , will do more at ploughing and sowing , and be in a better condition , than he . ' and indeed so it prove ; for the poor lad , not find friend to maintain he in he learning , as he have expect , and be unwilling to work , fall to drink , though he be a very sober lad before ; and in a short time , partly with grief , and partly with good liquor , fall into a consumption , and die . -- Nay , I can tell you more still : there be another , a young woman , and the handsomest in all this neighbourhood , whom he entice up to , promise to make she a gentlewoman to one of you woman of quality ; but , instead of keep he word , we have since hear , after have a child by she himself , she become a common whore ; then keep a coffeehouse in ; and a little after die of the french distemper in a gaol .-- I could tell you many more story ; but how do you imagine he serve I myself ? you must know , sir , I be breed a seafaring man , and have
have be many voyage ; till at last I come to be master of a ship myself , and be in a fair way of make a fortune , when I be attack by one of those curse guarda - costa who take we ship before the beginning of the war ; and after a fight , wherein I lose the greater part of my crew , my rigging be all demolish , and two shot receive between wind and water , I be force to strike . the villain carry off my ship , a brigantine of 150 ton -- a pretty creature she be -- and put I , a man , and a boy , into a little bad pink , in which , with much ado , we at last make Falmouth ; though I believe the do not imagine she could possibly live a day at sea . upon my return hither , where my wife , who be of this country , then live , the squire tell I he be so pleased with the defence I have make against the enemy , that he do not fear get I promote to a lieutenancy of a man - of - war , if I would accept of it ; which I thankfully assure he I would . well , sir , two or three year pass , during which i have many repeated promise , not only from the squire , but ( as he tell I ) from the lord of the admiralty . he never return from but I be assure I might be satisfied now , for I be certain of the first vacancy ; and , what surprize I still , when I reflect on it , these assurance be give I with no less confidence , after so many disappointment , than at first . at last , sir , grow weary , and somewhat suspicious , after so much delay , I write to a friend in , who I know have some acquaintance at the best house in the admiralty , and desire he to back the squire 's interest ; for indeed I fear he have solicite the affair with more coldness than he pretend . and what answer do you think my friend send I ? truly , sir , he acquaint I that the squire have never mention my name at the admiralty in he life ; and , unless I have much faithfuller interest , advise I to give over my pretension ; which I immediately do , and , with the concurrence of my wife , resolve to set up a alehouse , where you be heartily welcome ; and so my service to you ; and may the squire , and all such sneaking rascal , go to the together . " --" of fie ! " say , " of fie ! he be indeed a wicked man ; but g -- will , I hope , turn he heart to repentance . Nay , if he could but once see the meanness of this detestable vice ; would he but once reflect that he be one of the most scandalous as well as pernicious lyar ; sure he must despise himself to so intolerable a degree , that it would be impossible for he to continue a moment in such a course . and to confess the truth , notwithstand the baseness of this character , which he hath too well deserve , he hath in he countenance sufficient symptom of that _bona indole , that sweetness of disposition , which furnish out a good . " -- " ah , master ! master ! " say the host , " if you have travel as far as I have , and converse with the many nation where I have trade , you would not give any credit to a man 's countenance . symptom in he countenance , quotha ! I would look there , perhaps , to see whether a man have the small - pox , but for nothing else . " he speak this with so little regard to the parson 's observation , that it a good deal nettle he ; and , take the pipe hastily from he mouth , he thus answer : " master of mine , perhaps I have travel a great deal farther than you without the assistance of a ship . do you imagine sail by different city or country be travell ? no . " Caelum non animum mutant qui tran mare currunt . " I can go farther in a afternoon than you in a twelvemonth . what , I suppose you have see the pillars of Hercules , and perhaps the wall of . Nay , you may have hear , and see Charybdis ; you may have enter the closet where be find at the taking of . I suppose you have sail among the Cyclade , and pass the famous strait which take they name from the unfortunate , whose fate be sweetly describe by ; you have pass the very spot , I conceive , where fall into that sea , he waxen wing be melt by the sun ; you have traverse the sea , I make no doubt ; nay , you may have be on the bank of the , and call at , to see if there be ever another golden fleece . " " not I , truly , master , " answer the host : " I never touch at any of these place . " --" but I have be at all these , " reply . " then , I suppose , " cry the host , " you have be at the ; for there be no such , I will be swear , either in the or the . " -- " pray
pray where be the ? " quoth Adam ; " that should be in the by right . " " Oho ! you be a pretty traveller , " cry the host , " and not know the ! my service to you , master ; you must not talk of these thing with I ! you must not tip we the traveller ; it will not go here . " " since thou be so dull to misunderstand I still , " quoth Adams , " I will inform thee ; the travelling I mean be in book , the only way of travel by which any knowledge be to be acquire . from they I learn what I assert just now , that nature generally imprint such a portraiture of the mind in the countenance , that a skilful physiognomist will rarely be deceive . I presume you have never read the story of to this purpose , and therefore I will tell it you . a certain physiognomist assert of , that he plainly discover by he feature that he be a rogue in he nature . a character so contrary to the tenour of all this great man 's action , and the generally receive opinion concern he , incense the boy of so that they throw stone at the physiognomist , and would have demolish he for he ignorance , have not himself prevent they by confess the truth of he observation , and acknowledge that , though he correcte he disposition by philosophy , he be indeed naturally as inclin to vice as have be predicate of he . now , pray resolve I -- how should a man know this story if he have not read it ? " " well , master , " say the host , " and what signify it whether a man know it or no ? he who go abroad , as I have do , will always have opportunity enough of knowe the world without trouble he head with , or any such fellow . " " friend , " cry Adams , " if a man should sail round the world , and anchor in every harbour of it , without learn , he would return home as ignorant as he go out . " " help you ! " answer the host ; " there be my boatswain , poor fellow ! he could scarce either write or read , and yet he would navigate a ship with any master of a man - of - war ; and a very pretty knowledge of trade he have too . " " trade , " answer , " as Aristotle prove in he first chapter of politics , be below a philosopher , and unnatural as it be manage now . " the host look stedfastly at , and after a minute 's silence ask he , " if he be one of the writer of the Gazetteer ? for I have hear , " say he , " they be writ by parson . " " Gazetteer ! " answer , " what be that ? " " it be a dirty newspaper , " reply the host , " which hath be give away all over the nation for these many year , to abuse trade and honest man , which I would not suffer to lye on my table , though it hath be offer I for nothing . " " not I truly , " say ; " I never write anything but sermon ; and I assure you I be no enemy to trade , whilst it be consistent with honesty ; nay , I have always look on the tradesman as a very valuable member of society , and , perhaps , inferior to none but the man of learning . " " no , I believe he be not , nor to he neither , " answer the host . " of what use would learn be in a country without trade ? what would all you parson do to clothe you back and feed you belly ? who fetch you you silk , and you linen , and you wine , and all the other necessary of life ? I speak chiefly with regard to the sailor . " " you should say the extravagancy of life , " reply the parson ; " but admit they be the necessary , there be something more necessary than life itself , which be provide by learn ; I mean the learning of the clergy . who cloth you with piety , meekness , humility , charity , patience , and all the other christian virtue ? who feed you soul with the milk of brotherly love , and diet they with all the dainty food of holiness , which at once cleanse they of all impure carnal affections , and fatten they with the truly rich spirit of ? who doth this ? " " ay , who , indeed ? " cry the host ; " for I do not remember ever to have see any such clothing or such feeding . and so , in the mean time , master , my service to you . " Adam be go to answer with some severity , when and return and press he departure so eagerly that he would not refuse they ; and so , grasp he crabstick , he take leave of he host ( neither of they be so well pleas with each other as they have be at they first sit down together ) , and with and , who both express much impatience , depart , and now all together renew they journey . . chapter I . matter prefatory in praise of biography ._ Notwithstand the preference which may be vulgarly give to the authority of those romance writer who entitle they
they book " the History of , the History of , of , & c. , " it be most certain that truth be to be find only in the work of those who celebrate the life of great man , and be commonly call biographer , as the other should indeed be term topographer , or chorographer ; word which might well mark the distinction between they ; it be the business of the latter chiefly to describe country and city , which , with the assistance of map , they do pretty justly , and may be depend upon ; but as to the action and character of man , they writing be not quite so authentic , of which there need no other proof than those eternal contradiction occur between two topographer who undertake the history of the same country : for instance , between my and , between and , and many other ; where , fact be set forth in a different light , every reader believe as he please ; and , indeed , the more judicious and suspicious very justly esteem the whole as no other than a romance , in which the writer hath indulge a happy and fertile invention . but though these widely differ in the narrative of fact ; some ascrib victory to the one , and other to the other party ; some represent the same man as a rogue , while other give he a great and honest character ; yet all agree in the scene where the fact be suppose to have happen , and where the person , who be both a rogue and a honest man , liv . now with we biographer the case be different ; the facts we deliver may be rely on , though we often mistake the age and country wherein they happen : for , though it may be worth the examination of critic , whether the shepherd , who , as inform we , die for love of the fair , who hate he , be ever in , will any one doubt but that such a silly fellow hath really exist ? be there in the world such a sceptic as to disbelieve the madness of , the perfidy of , the impertinent curiosity of , the weakness of , the irresolute friendship of ? though perhaps , as to the time and place where those several person live , that good historian may be deplorably deficient . but the most known instance of this kind be in the true history of , where the inimitable biographer hath make a notorious blunder in the country of , who use he patient as a vintner doth he wine - vessel , by let out they blood , and fill they up with water . Doth not every one , who be the least verse in physical history , know that be not the country in which this doctor liv ? the same writer hath likewise er in the country of he archbishop , as well as that of those great personage whose understanding be too sublime to taste anything but tragedy , and in many other . the same mistake may likewise be observ in , the Arabian night , the History of and le , and perhaps some few other writer of this class , whom I have not read , or do not at present recollect ; for I would by no means be think to comprehend those person of surprizing genius , the author of immense romance , or the modern novel and tAtalantis writer ; who , without any assistance from nature or history , record person who never be , or will be , and fact which never do , nor possibly can , happen ; whose heroe be of they own creation , and they brain the chaos whence all they material be select . not that such writers deserve no honour ; so far otherwise , that perhaps they merit the highest ; for what can be nobler than to be as a example of the wonderful extent of human genius ? one may apply to they what say of , that they be a second nature ( for they have no communication with the first ; by which , author of a inferior class , who can not stand alone , be obliged to support themselves as with crutch ) ; but these of whom I be now speak seem to be possess of those stilt , which the excellent Voltaire tell we , in he letter , " carry the genius far off , but with a regular pace . " indeed , far out of the sight of the reader , beyond the realm of and old night . but to return to the former class , who be contente to copy nature , instead of form original from the confused heap of matter in they own brain , be not such a book as that which record the achievement of the renowne more worthy the name of a history than even 's : for , whereas the latter be confine to a particular period of time , and to a particular nation , the former be the history of the world in general , at least that part which be polish by law , art , and sciences ; and of that from the time it be first polish to this day ; nay , and forwards as long as it shall so remain ? I shall now proceed to apply these observation to the work before we ; for indeed I have set they down principally to obviate some construction which the good nature of mankind , who be always forward to see they friend 's virtue record , may put to particular part . I question not but several of my reader will know the
the lawyer in the stage - coach the moment they hear he voice . it be likewise odd but the wit and the prude meet with some of they acquaintance , as well as all the rest of my characters . to prevent , therefore , any such malicious application , I declare here , once for all , I describe not man , but manners ; not a individual , but a species . perhaps it will be answer , be not the character then take from life ? to which I answer in the affirmative ; nay , I believe I might aver that I have writ little more than I have see . the lawyer be not only alive , but hath be so these four thousand year ; and I hope g -- will indulge he life as many yet to come . he hath not indeed confin himself to one profession , one religion , or one country ; but when the first mean selfish creature appear on the human stage , who make self the centre of the whole creation , would give himself no pain , yoincu no danger , advance no money , to assist or preserve he fellow - creature ; then be we lawyer bear ; and , whilst such a person as I have describe exist on earth , so long shall he remain upon it . it be , therefore , do he little honour to imagine he endeavour to mimick some little obscure fellow , because he happen to resemble he in one particular feature , or perhaps in he profession ; whereas he appearance in the world be calculate for much more general and noble purpose ; not to expose one pitiful wretch to the small and contemptible circle of he acquaintance ; but to hold the glass to thousand in they closet , that they may contemplate they deformity , and endeavou to reduce it , and thus by suffer private mortification may avoid public shame . this place the boundary between , and distinguish the satirist from the libeller : for the former privately correct the fault for the benefit of the person , like a parent ; the latter publickly expose the person himself , as a example to other , like a executioner . there be besides little circumstance to be consider ; as the drapery of a picture , which though fashion varies at different time , the resemblance of the countenance be not by those mean diminished . thus I believe we may venture to say - wouse be coeval with we lawyer : and , though perhaps , during the change which so long a existence must have pass through , she may in she turn have stand behind the bar at a inn , I will not scruple to affirm she hath likewise in the revolution of ag sit on a throne . in short , where extreme turbulency of temper , avarice , and a insensibility of human misery , with a degree of hypocrisy , have unit in a female composition , - wouse be that woman ; and where a good inclination , eclipse by a poverty of spirit and understanding , hath glimmer forth in a man , that man hath be no other than she sneaking husband . I shall detain my reader no longer than to give he one caution more of a opposite kind : for , as in most of we particular character we mean not to lash individual , but all of the like sort , so , in we general description , we mean not universals , but would be understand with many exception : for instance , in we description of high people , we can not be intend to include such as , whilst they be a honour to they high rank , by a well - guided condescension make they superiority as easy as possible to those whom fortune chiefly hath place below they . of this number I could name a peer no less elevate by nature than by fortune ; who , whilst he wear the noblest ensign of honour on he person , bear the truest stamp of dignity on he mind , adorn with greatness , enrich with knowledge , and embellish with genius . I have see this man relieve with generosity , while he hath converse with freedom , and be to the same person a patron and a companion . I could name a commoner , raise higher above the multitude by superior talents than be in the power of he prince to exal he , whose behaviour to those he hath oblige be more amiable than the obligation itself ; and who be so great a master of affability , that , if he could divest himself of a inherent greatness in he manner , would often make the lowest of he acquaintance forget who be the master of that palace in which they be so courteously entertaine . these be picture which must be , I believe , know : I declare they be take from the life , and not intend to exceed it . by those high people , therefore , whom I have describe , I mean a set of wretch , who , while they be a disgrace to they ancestor , whose honour and fortune they inherit ( or perhaps a greater to they mother , for such degeneracy be scarce credible ) , have the insolence to treat those with disregard who be at least equal to the founder of they own splendor . it be , I fancy , impossible to conceive a spectacle more worthy of we indignation , than that of a fellow , who be not only a blot in the escutcheon of a great family , but a scandal to the human species , maintain a
a supercilious behaviour to man who be a honour to they nature and a disgrace to they fortune . and now , reader , take these hint along with you , you may , if you please , proceed to the sequel of this we true history . chapter ii . _a night scene , wherein several wonderful adventure befel Adams and he fellow-traveller ._ it be so late when we traveller leave the inn or alehouse ( for it might be call either ) , that they have not travel many mile before night overtake they , or meet they , which you please . the reader must excuse I if I be not particular as to the way they take ; for , as we be now draw near the seat of the Booby , and as that be a ticklish name , which malicious person may apply , accord to they evil inclination , to several worthy country squire , a race of man whom we look upon as entirely inoffensive , and for whom we have a adequate regard , we shall lend no assistance to any such malicious purpose . darkness have now overspread the hemisphere , when whisper " that she beg to rest herself a little ; for that she be so tired she could walk no farther . " immediately prevail with parson Adam , who be as brisk as a bee , to stop . he have no sooner seate himself than he lament the loss of he dear ; but be a little comforted when remind that , if he have it in he possession , he could not see to read . the sky be so clouded , that not a star appear . it be indeed , accord to , darkness visible . this be a circumstance , however , very favourable to ; for , not suspicious of be oversee by , give a loose to she passion which she have never do before , and , recline she head on he bosom , throw she arm carelessly round he , and suffer he to lay he cheek close to hers . all this infused such happiness into , that he would not have change he turf for the finest down in the finest palace in the universe . Adam sit at some distance from the lover , and , be unwilling to disturb they , apply himself to meditation ; in which he have not spend much time before he discover a light at some distance that seem approach towards he . he immediately hail it ; but , to he sorrow and surprize , it stop for a moment , and then disappear . he then call to , ask he , " if he have not see the light ? " answer , " he have . " -- " and do you not mark how it vanish ? " return he : " though I be not afraid of ghost , I do not absolutely disbelieve they . " he then enter into a meditation on those unsubstantial being ; which be soon interrupt by several voice , which he think almost at he elbow , though in fact they be not so extremely near . however , he could distinctly hear they agree on the murder of any one they meet ; and a little after hear one of they say , " he have kill a dozen since that day fortnight . " Adams now fall on he knee , and commit himself to the care of Providence ; and poor Fanny , who likewise hear those terrible word , embrace so closely , that have not he , whose ear be also open , be apprehensive on she account , he would have think no danger which threaten only himself too dear a price for such embrace . now draw forth he penknife , and , have finish he ejaculation , grasp he crab - stick , he only weapon , and , come up to , would have have he quit , and place she in the rear ; but he advice be fruitless ; she cling closer to he , not at all regard the presence of Adams , and in a soothing voice declare , " she would die in he arm . " , clasp she with inexpressible eagerness , whisper she , " that he prefer death in hers to life out of they . " Adam , brandish he crabstick , say , " he despise death as much as any man , " and then repeat aloud -- " est hic , est animus lucis contemptor et illum , bene credat emi quo tendi , honorem . " upon this the voice cease for a moment , and then one of they call out , " d -- and you , who be there ? " to which be prudent enough to make no reply ; and of a sudden he observe half - a - dozen light , which seem to rise all at once from the ground and advance briskly towards he . this he immediately conclude to be a apparition ; and now , begin to conceive that the voice be of the same kind , he call out , " in the name of the -- , what wouldst thou have ? " he have no sooner spoke than he hear one of the voice cry out , " d -- and they , here they come ; " and soon after hear several hearty blow , as if a number of man have be engage at quarterstaff . he be just advanc towards the place of combat , when , catch he by the skirt , beg he that they might take the opportunity of the dark to convey away Fanny from the danger which threaten she . he
he presently comply , and , lift up , they all three make the best of they way ; and without look behind they , or be overtaken , they have travel full two mile , poor Fanny not once complain of be tired , when they see afar off several light scatter at a small distance from each other , and at the same time find themselves on the descent of a very steep hill . Adams 's foot slip , he instantly disappear , which greatly frightene both and Fanny : indeed , if the light have permit they to see it , they would scarce have refrain laugh to see the parson roll down the hill ; which he do from top to bottom , without receive any harm . he then hollow as loud as he could , to inform they of he safety , and relieve they from the fear which they have conceive for he . and halt some time , consider what to do ; at last they advanc a few pace , where the declivity seem least steep ; and then , take he in he arm , walk firmly down the hill , without make a false step , and at length lande she at the bottom , where soon come to they . learn hence , my fair countrywoman , to consider you own weakness , and the many occasion on which the strength of a man may be useful to you ; and , duly weigh this , take care that you match not yourselve with the spindle - shank beaus and _petit -maitre of the age , who , instead of be able , like , to carry you in lusty arm through the rugged way and downhill steep of life , will rather want to support they feeble limb with you strength and assistance . we traveller now move forwards where the nearest light present itself ; and , have cross a common field , they come to a meadow , where they seem to be at a very little distance from the light , when , to they grief , they arrive at the bank of a river . Adams here make a full stop , and declare he could swim , but doubt how it be possible to get Fanny over : to which answer , " if they walk along it be banks , they might be certain of soon find a bridge , especially as by the number of light they might be assure a parish be near . " " Odso , that be true indeed , " say ; " I do not think of that . " accordingly , 's advice be take , they pass over two meadow , and come to a little orchard , which lead they to a house . begge of to knock at the door , assure he " she be so weary that she could hardly stand on she foot . " Adams , who be foremost , perform this ceremony ; and , the door be immediately open , a plain kind of man appear at it : Adams acquaint he " that they have a young woman with they who be so tired with she journey that he should be much obliged to he if he would suffer she to come in and rest herself . " the man , who see by the light of the candle which he hold in he hand , perceive she innocent and modest look , and have no apprehension from the civil behaviour of , presently answer , " that the young woman be very welcome to rest herself in he house , and so be she company . " he then usher they into a very decent room , where he wife be sit at a table : she immediately rise up , and assist they in set forth chair , and desire they to sit down ; which they have no sooner done than the man of the house ask they if they would have anything to refresh themselves with ? Adams thank he , and answer he should be oblige to he for a cup of he ale , which be likewise choose by and . whilst he be go to fill a very large jug with this liquor , he wife tell she see greatly fatigue , and desire she to take something stronger than ale ; but she refuse with many thanks , say it be true she be very much tired , but a little rest she hope would restore she . as soon as the company be all seat , , who have fill himself with ale , and by public permission have light he pipe , turn to the master of the house , ask he , " if evil spirits do not use to walk in that neighbourhood ? " to which receive no answer , he begin to inform he of the adventure which they meet with on the downs ; nor have he proceed far in the story when somebody knock very hard at the door . the company express some amazement , and and the good woman turn pale : she husband go forth , and whilst he be absent , which be some time , they all remain silent , look at one another , and hear several voice discourse pretty loudly . be fully persuade that spirits be abroad , and begin to meditate some exorcism ; a little inclin to the same opinion ; be more afraid of man ; and the good woman herself begin to suspect she guest , and imagine those without be rogue belong to they gang . at length the master of the house return , and , laugh , tell Adams he have discover he apparition ; that the murderer be sheep - stealer
stealer , and the twelve person murder be no other than twelve sheep ; add , that the shepherd have get the better of they , have secure two , and be proceed with they to a justice of peace . this account greatly relieve the fear of the whole company ; but mutter to himself , " he be convince of the truth of apparition for all that . " they now sit chearfully round the fire , till the master of the house , have survey he guest , and conceive that the cassock , which , have fall down , appear under 's greatcoat , and the shabby livery on , do not well suit with the familiarity between they , begin to entertain some suspicions not much to they advantage : address himself therefore to , he say , " he perceive he be a clergyman by he dress , and suppose that honest man be he footman . " " , " answer , " I be a clergyman at you service ; but as to that young man , whom you have rightly term honest , he be at present in nobody 's service ; he never live in any other family than that of , from whence he be discharge , I assure you , for no crime . " say , " he do not wonder the gentleman be surprized to see one of 's character condescmend to so much goodness with a poor man . " -- " child , " say , " I should be asham of my cloth if I think a poor man , who be honest , below my notice or my familiarity . I know not how those who think otherwise can profess themselves follower and servants of who make no distinction , unless , peradventure , by prefer the poor to the rich .-- , " say he , address himself to the gentleman , " these two poor young people be my parishioner , and I look on they and love they as my child . there be something singular enough in they history , but I have not now time to recound it . " the master of the house , notwithstand the simplicity which discover itself in , know too much of the world to give a hasty belief to profession . he be not yet quite certain that have any more of the clergyman in he than he cassock . to try he therefore further , he ask he , " if have lately publish anything new ? " Adam answer , " he have hear great commendation of that poet , but that he have never read nor know any of he work . " --" ! ho ! " say the gentleman to himself , " have I catch you ? what ! " say he , " have you never see he Homer ? " Adam answer , " he have never read any translation of the classick . " " why , truly , " reply would the gentleman , " there be a dignity in the language which I think no modern tongue can reach . " --" do you understand , sir ? " say hastily . " a little , sir , " answer the gentleman . " do you know , sir , " cry' , " where I can buy a ? a unlucky misfortune lately happen to mine . " Aeschylus be beyond the gentleman , though he know he very well by name ; he therefore , return back to , ask , " what part of the he think most excellent ? " Adam return , " he question would be properer , what kind of beauty be the chief in poetry ? for that Homer be equally excellent in they all . and , indeed , " continue he , " what say of a complete orator may well be apply to a great poet : ' he ought to comprehend all perfection . ' do this in the most excellent degree ; it be not without reason , therefore , that the philosopher , in the twenty - second chapter of he Poetick , mention he by no other appellation than that of the poet . he be the father of the drama as well as the epic ; not of tragedy only , but of comedy also ; for he , which be deplorably lost , bore , say , the same analogy to comedy as he and to tragedy . to he , therefore , we owe as well as , , and my poor Aeschylus . but if you please we will confine ourselves ( at least for the present ) to the , he noblest work ; though neither nor give it the preference , as I remember , to the Odyssey . first , then , as to he subject , can anything be more simple , and at the same time more noble ? he be rightly praise by the first of those judicious critic for not chuse the whole war , which , though he say it hath a complete beginning and end , would have be too great for the understanding to comprehend at one view . I have , therefore , often wonder why so correct a writer as should , in he epistle to , call he the . secondly , he action , term by , ; be it possible for the mind of man to conceive a idea of such perfect unity , and at the same time so replete with greatness ? and here I must observe , what I do not remember to have see note by any , the , that agreement of he action to he subject : for , as the subject be anger , how agreeable be he action
action , which be war ; from which every incident arise and to which every episode immediately relate . thirdly , he manners , which Aristotle place second in he description of the several part of tragedy , and which he say be include in the action ; I be at a loss whether I should rather admire the exactness of he judgment in the nice distinction or the immensity of he imagination in they variety . for , as to the former of these , how accuritely be the sedate , injured resentment of Achilles , distinguished from the hot , insulting passion of ! how widely doth the brutal courage of differ from the amiable bravery of Diomedes ; and the wisdom of , which be the result of long reflection and experience , from the cunning of Ulyss , the effect of art and subtlety only ! if we consider they variety , we may cry out , with in he 24th chapter , that no part of this divine poem be destitute of manners . indeed , I might affirm that there be scarce a character in human nature untouched in some part or other . and , as there be no passion which he be not able to describe , so be there none in he reader which he can not raise . if he hath any superior excellence to the rest , I have be inclin to fancy it be in the pathetic . I be sure I never read with dry eye the two episodes where Andromache be introduce in the former lament the danger , and in the latter the death , of Hector . the image be so extremely tender in these , that I be convince the poet have the worthiest and best heart imaginable . can I help observe how fall short of the beauty of the original , in that imitation of the dissuasive speech of Andromache which he hath put into the mouth of . and yet be the greatest genius who ever write tragedy ; nor have any of he successor in that art , that be to say , neither nor the tragedian , be able to come near he . as to he sentiment and diction , I need say nothing ; the former be particularly remarkable for the utmost perfection on that head , namely , propriety ; and as to the latter , , whom doubtless you have read over and over , be very diffuse . I shall mention but one thing more , which that great critic in he division of tragedy call , or the scenery ; and which be as proper to the epic as to the drama , with this difference , that in the former it fall to the share of the poet , and in the latter to that of the painter . but do ever painter imagine a scene like that in the 13th and 14th Iliad ? where the reader see at one view the prospect of , with the army draw up before it ; the Grecian army , camp , and fleet ; sit on , with he head wrapt in a cloud , and a thunderbolt in he hand , look towards ; drive through the sea , which divide on each side to permit he passage , and then seat himself on ; the heaven open , and the deity all seat on they throne . this be sublime ! this be poetry ! " Adams then rapt out a hundred greek verse , and with such a voice , emphasis , and action , that he almost frighten the woman ; and as for the gentleman , he be so far from entertaine any further suspicion of Adams , that he now doubt whether he have not a bishop in he house . he run into the most extravagant encomium on he learning ; and the goodness of he heart begin to dilate to all the stranger . he say he have great compassion for the poor young woman , who look pale and faint with she journey ; and in truth he conceive a much higher opinion of she quality than it deserv . he say he be sorry he could not accommodate they all ; but if they be contente with he fireside , he would sit up with the man ; and the young woman might , if she please , partake he wife 's bed , which he advise she to ; for that they must walk upward of a mile to any house of entertainment , and that not very good neither . Adams , who like he seat , he ale , he tobacco , and he company , persuade to accept this kind proposal , in which sollicitation he be seconde by . be she very difficultly prevail on ; for she have sleep little the last night and not at all the preceding ; so that love itself be scarce able to keep she eye open any longer . the offer , therefore , be kindly accept , the good woman produce everything eatable in she house on the table , and the guest , be heartily invite , as heartily regal themselves , especially parson Adam . as to the other two , they be example of the truth of that physical observation , that love , like other sweet thing , be no whetter of the stomach . be no sooner end , than at she own request retire , and the good woman bear she company . the man of the house , Adams , and , who would modestly have withdrawn , have not the gentleman insist on the contrary , draw round the fireside , where ( to use he own word ) replenish he pipe , and the gentleman produce a bottle of excellent beer
beer , be the best liquor in he house . the modest behaviour of , with the gracefulness of he person , the character which give of he , and the friendship he seem to entertain for he , begin to work on the gentleman 's affection , and raise in he a curiosity to know the singularity which have mention in he history . this curiosity be no sooner inform of than , with 's consent , he agree to gratify it ; and accordingly relate all he know , with as much tenderness as be possible for the character of ; and conclude with the long , faithful , and mutual passion between he and Fanny , not conceal the meanness of she birth and education . these latter circumstance entirely cure a jealousy which have lately risen in the gentleman 's mind , that be the daughter of some person of fashion , and that have run away with she , and be concerned in the plot . he be now enamoure of he guest , drank they healt with great chearfulness , and return many thanks to , who have spend much breath , for he be a circumstantial teller of a story . Adams tell he it be now in he power to return that favour ; for he extraordinary goodness , as well as that fund of literature he be master of , ] which he do not expect to find under such a roof , have raise in he more curiosity than he have ever kny . " therefore , " say he , " if it be not too troublesome , sir , you history , if you please . " [ ] the author hath by some be represent to have make a blunder here : for Adams have indeed show some learning ( say they ) , perhaps all the author have ; but the gentleman hath show none , unless he approbation of be such : but surely it would be preposterous in he to call it so . I have , however , notwithstand this criticism , which I be tell come from the mouth of a great orator in a public coffee - house , leave this blunder as it stand in the first edition . I will not have the vanity to apply to anything in this work the observation which make in she preface to she Aristophane : _Je tien pour une maxime constante , qu'une beaute mediocre plait plus generalement qu'une beaute san defaut ._ hath make such another blunder in he love for , where tell , " she should admire he as much for the beauty he commend in she as if he himself be possess of it . " the gentleman answer , he could not refuse he what he have so much right to insist on ; and after some of the common apology , which be the usual preface to a story , he thus begin . chapter III . in which the gentleman relate the history of he life ._ , I be descend of a good family , and be bear a gentleman . my education be liberal , and at a public school , in which I proceed so far as to become master of the , and to be tolerably verse in the language . my father die when I be sixteen , and leave I master of myself . he bequeath I a moderate fortune , which he intend I should not receive till I attaine the age of twenty - five : for he constantly assert that be full early enough to give up any man entirely to the guidance of he own discretion . however , as this intention be so obscurely word in he will that the lawyer advise I to contest the point with my trustee , I own I pay so little regard to the inclination of my dead father , which be sufficiently certain to I , that I follow they advice , and soon succeed , for the trustee do not contest the matter very obstinately on they side . " , " say , " may I crave the favour of you name ? " the gentleman answer he name be , and then proceed . I stay a very little while at school after he death ; for , be a forward youth , I be extremely impatient to be in the world , for which I think my part , knowledge , and manhood thoroughly qualifie I . and to this early introduction into life , without a guide , I impute all my future misfortune ; for , besides the obvious mischief which attend this , there be one which hath not be so generally observe : the first impression which mankind receive of you will be very difficult to eradicate . how unhappy , therefore , must it be to fix you character in life , before you can possibly know it be value , or weigh the consequence of those action which be to establish you future reputation ! a little under seventeen I leave my school , and go to with no more than six pound in my pocket ; a great sum , as I then conceive ; and which I be afterwards surprized to find so soon consum . the character I be ambitious of attaining be than of a fine gentleman ; the first requisite to which I apprehend be to be supply by a taylor , a periwig - maker , and some few more tradesman , who deal in furnishing out the human body . Notwithstand the lowness of my purse , I find credit with they more easily than I expect , and be soon equip to my wish . this I own then agreeably surprize I ; but I have since learn that it
it be a maxim among many tradesman at the polite end of the town to deal as largely as they can , reckon as high as they can , and arrest as soon as they can . the next qualification , namely , dance , fence , ride the great horse , and music , come into my head : but , as they require expense and time , I comforte myself , with regard to dancing , that I have learn a little in my youth , and could walk a minuet genteelly enough ; as to fence , I think my good - humwe would preserve I from the danger of a quarrel ; as to the horse , I hope it would not be think of ; and for music , I imagine I could easily acquire the reputation of it ; for I have hear some of my schoolfellow pretend to knowledge in operas , without be able to s or play on the fiddle . of the town seem another ingredient ; this I think I should arrive at by frequenting public place . accordingly I pay constant attendance to they all ; by which mean I be soon master of the fashionable phrasis , learn to cry up the fashionable diversion , and know the name and face of the most fashionable man and woman . nothing now seem to remain but a intrigue , which I be resolve to have immediately ; I mean the reputation of it ; and indeed I be so successful , that in a very short time I have half - a - dozen with the finest woman in town . at these word fetch a deep groan , and then , bless himself , cry out , " ! what wick time these be ! " not so wick as you imagine , continue the gentleman ; for I assure you they be all vestal virgin for anything which I know to the contrary . the reputation of intriguing with they be all I seek , and be what I arrive at : and perhaps I only flatter myself even in that ; for very probably the person to whom I show they billet knew as well as I that they be counterfeit , and that I have write they to myself . " write letter to yourself ! " say , stare . of sir , answer the gentleman , it be the very error of the time . half we modern play have one of these character in they . it be incredible the pain I have take , and the absurd method I employ , to traduce the character of woman of distinction . when another have speak in rapture of any one , I have answer , " d - - and she , she ! we shall have she at ---- 's very soon . " when he hath reply , " he think she virtuous , " I have answer , " ay , thou will always think a woman virtuous , till she be in the street ; but you and I , or ( turn to another in company ) , know better . " at which I have draw a paper out of my pocket , perhaps a taylor 's bill , and kiss it , cry at the same time , " by I be once fond of she . " " proceed , if you please , but do not swear any more , " say . , say the gentleman , I ask you pardon . well , sir , in this course of life I continue full three year .-- " what course of life ? " answer ; " I do not remember you have mention any . " -- you remark be just , say the gentleman , smile ; I should rather have say , in this course of do nothing . I remember some time afterwards I write the journal of one day , which would serve , I believe , as well for any other during the whole time . I will endeaavor to repeat it to you . in the morning I arise , take my great stick , and walk out in my green frock , with my hair in papers ( a groan from ) , and saunter about till ten . go to the auction ; tell lady ---- she have a dirty face ; laugh heartily at something ---- say , I can not remember what , for I do not very well hear it ; whisper lord ---- ; bow to the duke of ---- ; and be go to bid for a snuff - box , but do not , for fear I should have have it . from 2 to 4 , drest myself . _a groan ._ 4 to 6 , dine . _a groan ._ 6 to 8 , coffee - house . 8 to 9 , Drury - lane playhouse . 9 to 10 , 's . 10 to 12 , Drawing - room . _a great groan ._ at all which place nothing happen worth remark . at which say , with some vehemence , " , this be below the life of a animal , hardly above vegetation : and I be surprize what could lead a man of you sense into it . " what lead we into more folly than you imagine , doctor , answer the gentleman -- vanity ; for as contemptible a creature as I be , and I assure you , yourself can not have more contempt for such a wretch than I now have , I then admire myself , and should have despise a person of you present appearance ( you will pardon I ) , with all you learning and those excellent quality which I have remark in
in you . Adam bow , and beg he to proceed . after I have continue two year in this course of life , say the gentleman , a accident happen which oblige I to change the scene . as I be one day at 's coffee - house , make very free with the character of a young lady of quality , a officer of the guard , who be present , think proper to give I the lye . I answer I might possibly be mistaken , but I intend to tell no more than the truth . to which he make no reply but by a scornful sneer . after this I observ a strange coldness in all my acquaintance ; none of they speak to I first , and very few return I even the civility of a bow . the company I use to dine with leave I out , and within a week I find myself in as much solitude at 's as if I have be in a desart . a honest elderly man , with a great hat and long sword , at last tell I he have a compassion for my youth , and therefore advise I to show the world I be not such a rascal as they think I to be . I do not at first understand he ; but he explain himself , and end with tell I , if I would write a challenge to the captain , he would , out of pure charity , go to he with it . " a very charitable person , truly ! " cry . I desire till the next day , continue the gentleman , to consider on it , and , retire to my lodging , I weigh the consequence on both side as fairly as I could . on the one , I see the risk of this alternative , either lose my own life , or haive on my hand the blood of a man with whom I be not in the least angry . I soon determine that the good which appear on the other be not worth this hazard . I therefore resolve to quit the scene , and presently retire to the Temple , where I take chamber . here I soon get a fresh set of acquaintance , who know nothing of what have happene to I . indeed , they be not greatly to my approbation ; for the beaus of the be only the shadow of the other . they be the affectation of affectation . the vanity of these be still more ridiculous , if possible , than of the other . here I meet with smart fellows who drank with lords they do not know , and intrigue with woman they never see . be now the farthest stretch of my ambition ; where I shine forth in the balcony at the playhouse , visit whore , make love to orange - wench , and damne play . this career be soon put a stop to by my surgeon , who convince I of the necessity of confin myself to my room for a month . at the end of which , have have leisure to reflect , I resolve to quit all farther conversation with beaus and smart of every kind , and to avoid , if possible , any occasion of return to this place of confinement . " I think , " say , " the advice of a month 's retirement and reflection be very proper ; but I should rather have expect it from a divine than a surgeon . " the gentleman smile at 's simplicity , and , without explain himself farther on such a odious subject , go on thus : I be no sooner perfectly restore to health than I find my passion for woman , which I be afraid to satisfy as I have do , make I very uneasy ; I determine , therefore , to keep a mistress . be I long before I fix my choice on a young woman , who have before be keep by two gentleman , and to whom I be recommend by a celebrated bawd . I take she home to my chamber , and make she a settlement during cohabitation . this would , perhaps , have be very ill paid : however , she do not suffer I to be perplex on that account ; for , before quarter - day , I find she at my chamber in too familiar conversation with a young fellow who be drest like a officer , but be indeed a city apprentice . instead of excuse she inconstancy , she rap out half - a - dozen oath , and , snapp she finger at I , swore she scorn to confine herself to the best man in . upon this we parte , and the same bawd presently provide she another keeper . I be not so much concerned at we separation as I find , within a day or two , I have reason to be for we meeting ; for I be oblige to pay a second visit to my surgeon . I be now force to do penance for some week , during which time I contract a acquaintance with a beautiful young girl , the daughter of a gentleman who , after have be forty year in the army , and in all the campaigns under the of , die a lieutenant on half - pay , and have leave a widow , with this only child , in very distrest circumstance : they have only a small pension from the government , with what little the daughter could add to it by she work , for she have great excellence at she needle . this girl be , at my first acquaintance with she
she , solicit in marriage by a young fellow in good circumstance . he be apprentice to a linendraper , and have a little fortune , sufficient to set up he trade . the mother be greatly pleased with this match , as indeed she have sufficient reason . however , I soon prevent it . I represent he in so low a light to he mistress , and make so good a use of flattery , promise , and present , that , not to dwell longer on this subject than be necessary , I prevail with the poor girl , and convey she away from she mother ! in a word , I debauch she .--( at which word start up , fetch three stride across the room , and then replace himself in he chair . ) you be not more affect with this part of my story than myself ; I assure you it will never be sufficiently repent of in my own opinion : but , if you already detest it , how much more will you indignation be raise when you hear the fatal consequence of this barbarous , this villanous action ! if you please , therefore , I will here desist .--" by no means , " cry Adam ; " go on , I beseech you ; and heaven grant you may sincerely repent of this and many other thing you have relate ! " -- I be now , continue the gentleman , as happy as the possession of a fine young creature , who have a good education , and be endue with many agreeable quality , could make I . we live some month with vast fondness together , without any company or conversation , more than we find in one another : but this could not continue always ; and , though I still preserve great affection for she , I begin more and more to want the relief of other company , and consequently to leave she by degree -- at last whole day to herself . she fail not to testify some uneasiness on these occasion , and complain of the melancholy life she lead ; to remedy which , I introduce she into the acquaintance of some other keep mistress , with whom she use to play at card , and frequent play and other diversion . she have not live long in this intimacy before I perceive a visible alteration in she behaviour ; all she modesty and innocence vanish by degree , till she mind become thoroughly tainted . she affec the company of rake , give herself all manner of air , be never easy but abroad , or when she have a party at my chamber . she be rapacious of money , extravagant to excess , loose in she conversation ; and , if ever I demur to any of she demand , oath , tear , and fits be the immediate consequence . as the first rapture of fondness be long since over , this behaviour soon estrange my affections from she ; I begin to reflect with pleasure that she be not my wife , and to conceive a intention of part with she ; of which , have give she a hint , she take care to prevent I the pain of turn she out of door , and accordingly depart herself , have first break open my escrutore , and take with she all she could find , to the amount of about . in the first heat of my resentment I resolve to pursue she with all the vengeance of the law : but , as she have the good luck to escape I during that ferment , my passion afterwards cool ; and , have reflecte that I have be the first aggressor , and have do she a injury for which I could make she no reparation , by rob she of the innocence of she mind ; and hear at the same time that the poor old woman she mother have break she heart on she daughter 's elopement from she , I , conclude myself she murderer ( " as you very well might , " cry Adams , with a groan ) , be pleased that have take this method of punish I , and resolve quietly to submit to the loss . indeed , I could wish I have never hear more of the poor creature , who become in the end a abandon profligate ; and , after be some year a common prostitute , at last end she miserable life in .-- here the gentleman fetch a deep sigh , which echo very loudly ; and both continue silent , look on each other for some minute . at last the gentleman proceed thus : I have be perfectly constant to this girl during the whole time I keep she : but she have scarce depart before I discover more mark of she infidelity to I than the loss of my money . in short , I be force to make a third visit to my surgeon , out of whose hand I do not get a hasty discharge . I now forswore all future dealings with the sex , complain loudly that the pleasure do not compensate the pain , and rail at the beautiful creature in as gross language as himself formerly revil they in . I look on all the town harlot with a detestation not easy to be conceive , they person appear to I as paint palaces , inhabit by Disease and death : nor could they beauty make they more desirable object in my eye than gilding could make I covet a pill , or golden plate a coffin . but though I be no longer the absolute slave , I find some reason to own myself still the subject ,
, of love . my hatre for woman decrease daily ; and I be not positive but time might have betraye I again to some common harlot , have I not be secure by a passion for the , which , have once enter upon , make a violent progress in my heart . be wife to a man of fashion and gallantry , and one who seem , I own , every way worthy of she affections ; which , however , he have not the reputation of have . she be indeed a coquette _achevee . " pray , sir , " say Adams , " what be a coquette ? I have meet with the word in french author , but never could assign any idea to it . I believe it be the same with _une sotte ,_ , a fool . " , answer the gentleman , perhaps you be not much mistaken ; but , as it be a particular kind of folly , I will endeaavor to describe it . be all creature to be rank in the order of creation accord to they usefulness , I know few animal that would not take place of a coquette ; nor indeed hath this creature much pretence to anything beyond instinct ; for , though sometimes we might imagine it be animate by the passion of vanity , yet far the greater part of its action fall beneath even that low motive ; for instance , several absurd gesture and trick , infinitely more foolish than what can be observe in the most ridiculous bird and beasts , and which would persuade the beholder that the silly wretch be aim at we contempt . indeed its characteristic be affectation , and this lead and govern by whim only : for as beauty , wisdom , wit , good - nature , politeness , and health be sometimes affect by this creature , so be ugliness , folly , nonsense , ill - nature , ill - breed , and sickness likewise put on by it in they turn . it be life be one constant lie ; and the only rule by which you can form any judgment of they be , that they be never what they seem . if it be possible for a coquette to love ( as it be not , for if ever it attain this passion the coquette cease instantly ) , it would wear the face of indifference , if not of hatred , to the beloved object ; you may therefore be assure , when they endeaavor to persuade you of they liking , that they be indifferent to you at least . and indeed this be the case of my , who no sooner see I in the number of she admirer than she give I what be commonly call encouragement : she would often look at I , and , when she perceive I meet she eye , would instantly take they off , discover at the same time as much surprize and emotion as possible . these arts fail not of the success she intend ; and , as I grow more particular to she than the rest of she admirer , she advance , in proportion , more directly to I than to the other . she affec the low voice , whisper , lisp , sigh , start , laugh , and many other indication of passion which daily deceive thousand . when I play at whist with she , she would look earnestly at I , and at the same time lose deal or revoke ; then burst into a ridiculous laugh and cry , " ! I can not imagine what I be think of . " to detain you no longer , after I have go through a sufficient course of gallantry , as I think , and be thoroughly convinced I have raise a violent passion in my mistress , I seek a opportunity of come to a eclaircissement with she . she avoid this as much as possible ; however , great assiduity at length present I one . I will not describe all the particular of this interview ; let it suffice that , when she could no longer pretend not to see my drift , she first affect a violent surprize , and immediately after as violend a passion : she wonder what I have see in she conduct which could induce I to affront she in this manner ; and , break from I the first moment she could , tell I I have no other way to escape the consequence of she resentment than by never see , or at least speak to she more . I be not contente with this answer ; I still pursue she , but to no purpose ; and be at length convince that she husband have the sole possession of she person , and that neither he nor any other have make any impression on she heart . I be take off from follow this _ignis fatuus by some advance which be make I by the wife of a citizen , who , though neither very young nor handsome , be yet too agreeable to be reject by my amorous constitution . I accordingly soon satisfie she that she have not cast away she hint on a bar or cold soil : on the contrary , they instantly produce she a eager and desire lover . do she give I any reason to complain ; she meet the warmth she have raise with equal ardour . I have no longer a coquette to deal with , but one who be wiser than to prostitute the noble passion of love to the ridiculous lust of vanity . we presently understand one another ; and , as the pleasure we seek lay in a mutual gratification , we
we soon find and enjoy they . I think myself at first greatly happy in the possession of this new mistress , whose fondness would have quickly surfeit a more sickly appetite ; but it have a different effect on mine : she carry my passion higher by it than youth or beauty have be able . but my happiness could not long continue uninterrupted . the apprehension we lay under from the jealousy of she husband give we great uneasiness . " poor wretch ! I pity he , " cry . he do indeed deserve it , say the gentleman ; for he love he wife with great tenderness ; and , I assure you , it be a great satisfaction to I that I be not the man who first seduce she affections from he . these apprehension appear also too well grounde , for in the end he discover we , and procure witness of we caress . he then prosecute I at law , and recover L3000 damage , which much distress my fortune to pay ; and , what be worse , he wife , be divorce , come upon my hand . I lead a very uneasy life with she ; for , besides that my passion be now much abated , she excessive jealousy be very troublesome . at length death ry I of a inconvenience which the consideration of my have be the author of she misfortunes would never suffer I to take any other method of discarding . I now bad adieu to love , and resolve to pursue other less dangerous and expensive pleasure . I fall into the acquaintance of a set of jolly companion , who sleep all day and drank all night ; fellow who might rather be say to consume time than to live . they best conversation be nothing but noise : singe , hollow , wrangl , drink , toast , sp -- wing , smoaking be the chief ingredient of we entertainment . and yet , bad as these where , they be more tolerable than we graver scene , which be either excessive tedious narrative of dull common matter of fact , or hot dispute about trifling matter , which commonly end in a wager . this way of life the first serious reflection put a period to ; and I become member of a club frequent by young man of great ability . the bottle be now only call in to the assistance of we conversation , which roll on the deepest point of philosophy . these gentleman be engage in a search after truth , in the pursuit of which they throw aside all the prejudice of education , and govern themselves only by the infallible guide of human reason . this great guide , after have show they the falsehood of that very ancient but simple tenet , that there be such a be as a Deity in the universe , help they to establish in he stead a certain rule of right , by adhering to which they all arrive at the utmost purity of moral . reflection make I as much delighte with this society as it have teach I to despise and detest the former . I begin now to esteem myself a being of a higher order than I have ever before conceive ; and be the more charmed with this rule of right , as I really find in my own nature nothing repugnant to it . I hold in utter contempt all person who want any other inducement to virtue besides she intrinsic beauty and excellence ; and have so high a opinion of my present companion , with regard to they morality , that I would have trust they with whatever be nearest and dearest to I . whilst I be engage in this delightful dream , two or three accident happen successively , which at first much surprize I ; -- for one of we greatest philosopher , or rule - of - right man , withdraw himself from we , take with he the wife of one of he most intimate friend . secondly , another of the same society leave the club without remember to take leave of he bail . a third , have borrowed a sum of money of I , for which I receive no security , when I ask he to repay it , absolutely deny the loan . these several practice , so inconsistent with we golden rule , make I begin to suspect its infallibility ; but when I communicate my thought to one of the club , he say , " there be nothing absolutely good or evil in itself ; that action be denominate good or bad by the circumstance of the agent . that possibly the man who run away with he neighbour 's wife might be one of very good inclination , but over-prevail on by the violence of a unruly passion ; and , in other particular , might be a very worthy member of society ; that if the beauty of any woman create in he a uneasiness , he have a right from nature to relieve himself ; " -- with many other thing , which I then detest so much , that I take leave of the society that very evening and never return to it again . be now reduce to a state of solitude which I do not like , I become a great frequenter of the playhouse , which indeed be always my favourite diversion ; and most evening pass away two or three hour behind the scene , where I meet with several poet , with whom i make engagement at the tavern . some of the player be likewise of we party . at these meeting we be generally entertain by the poet with read they performance , and by
by the player with repea they part : upon which occasion , I observe the gentleman who furnish we entertainment be commonly the best pleased of the company ; who , though they be pretty civil to he to he face , seldom fail to take the first opportunity of he absence to ridicule he . now I make some remark which probably be too obvious to be worth relate . " Sir , " say Adams , " you remark if you please . " first then , say he , I conclude that the general observation , that wits be most inclin to vanity , be not true . be equally vain of rich , strength , beauty , honour , &c . but these appear of themselves to the eyes of the beholder , whereas the poor wit be oblige to produce he performance to show you he perfection ; and on he readiness to do this that vulgar opinion I have before mention be grounde ; but doth not the person who expend vast sum in the furniture of he house or the ornament of he person , who consume much time and employ great pain in dressing himself , or who think himself pay for self - denial , labour , or even villany , by a title or a ribbon , sacrifice as much to vanity as the poor wit who be desirous to read you he poem or he play ? my second remark be , that vanity be the worst of passion , and more apt to contaminate the mind than any other : for , as selfishness be much more general than we please to allow it , so it be natural to hate and envy those who stand between we and the good we desire . now , in lust and ambition these be few ; and even in avarice we find many who be no obstacle to we pursuit ; but the vain man seek pre-eminence ; and everything which be excellent or praiseworthy in another render he the mark of he antipathy . Adams now begin to fumble in he pocket , and soon cry out , " o la ! I have it not about I . " upon this , the gentleman ask he what he be search for , he say he search after a sermon , which he think he masterpiece , against vanity . " Fie upon it , fie upon it ! " cry he , " why do I ever leave that sermon out of my pocket ? I wish it be within five mile ; I would willingly fetch it , to read it you . " the gentleman answer that there be no need , for he be cure of the passion . " and for that very reason , " quoth Adams , " I would read it , for I be confident you would admire it : indeed , I have never be a greater enemy to any passion than that silly one of vanity . " the gentleman smile , and proceed -- from this society I easily pass to that of the gamester , where nothing remarkable happen but the finish my fortune , which those gentleman soon help I to the end of . this open scene of life hitherto unknown ; poverty and distress , with they horrid train of dun , attorney , bailiff , haunt I day and night . my clothes grow shabby , my credit bad , my friend and acquaintance of all kind cold . in this situation the strangest thought imaginable come into my head ; and what be this but to write a play ? for I have sufficient leisure : fear of bailiff confin I every day to my room : and , have always have a little inclination and something of a genius that way , I set myself to work , and within a few month produce a piece of five act , which be accept of at the theatre . I remember to have formerly take ticket of other poet for they benefit , long before the appearance of they performance ; and , resolve to follow a precedent which be so well sui to my present circumstance , I immediately provide myself with a large number of little papers . happy indeed would be the state of poetry , would these ticket pass current at the bakehouse , the ale - house , and the chandler 's shop : but alas ! far otherwise ; no taylor will take they in payment for buckram , canva , stay - tape ; nor no bailiff for civility money . they be , indeed , no more than a passport to beg with ; a certificate that the owner want five shilling , which induce well - dispose to charity . I now experience what be worse than poverty , or rather what be the worst consequence of poverty -- I mean attendance and dependance on the great . many a morning have I wait hour in the cold parlour of man of quality ; where , after see the lowest rascal in lace and embroidery , the pimp and buffoon in fashion , admit , I have be sometimes tell , on send in my name , that my lord could not possibly see I this morning ; a sufficient assurance that I should never more get entrance into that house . sometimes I have be at last admit ; and the great man hath think proper to excuse himself , by tell I he be tie up . " tie up , " say Adams , " pray what be that ? " , say the gentleman , the profit which bookseller allow author for the best work be so very small , that certain man of birth and fortune some year
year ago , who be the patron of wit and learn , think fit to encourage they farther by enter into voluntary subscription for they encouragement . thus , , , and some other man of , receive large sum for they labour from the public . this seem so easy a method of get money , that many of the lowest scribbler of the time venture to publish they work in the same way ; and many have the assurance to take in subscription for what be not writ , nor ever intend . Subscriptions in this manner grow infinite , and a kind of tax on the publick , some person , finde it not so easy a task to discern good from bad author , or to know what genius be worthy encouragement and what be not , to prevent the expense of subscrib to so many , invent a method to excuse themselves from all subscription whatever ; and this be to receive a small sum of money in consideration of give a large one if ever they subscribe ; which many have do , and many more have pretend to have do , in order to silence all solicitation . the same method be likewise take with playhouse ticket , which be no less a public grievance ; and this be what they call be tie up from subscribing . " I can not say but the term be apt enough , and somewhat typical , " say ; " for a man of large fortune , who ty himself up , as you call it , from the encouragement of man of merit , ought to be tie up in reality . " well , sir , say the gentleman , to return to my story . sometimes I have receive a guinea from a man of quality , give with as ill a grace as alm be generally to the meanest beggar ; and purchase too with as much time spend in attendance as , if it have be spend in honest industry , might have bring I more profit with infinitely more satisfaction . after about two month spend in this disagreeable way , with the utmost mortification , when I be plum my hope on the prospect of a plentiful harvest from my play , upon apply to the prompter to know when it come into rehearsal , he inform I he have receive order from the manager to return I the play again , for that they could not possibly act it that season ; but , if I would take it and revise it against the next , they would be glad to see it again . I snatch it from he with great indignation , and retire to my room , where I throw myself on the bed in a fit of despair . " you should rather have throw yourself on you knee , " say Adams , " for despair be sinful . " as soon , continue the gentleman , as I have indulge the first tumult of my passion , I begin to consider coolly what course I should take , in a situation without friend , money , credit , or reputation of any kind . after revolve many thing in my mind , I could see no other possibility of furnish myself with the miserable necessary of life than to retire to a garret near the Temple , and commence hackney - writer to the lawyer , for which I be well qualified , be a excellent penman . this purpose I resolve on , and immediately put it in execution . I have a acquaintance with a attorney who have formerly transact affair for I , and to he I apply ; but , instead of furnish I with any business , he laugh at my undertaking , and tell I , " he be afraid I should turn he deed into play , and he should expect to see they on the stage . " not to tire you with instance of this kind from other , I find that himself do not hold poet in greater abhorrence than these man of business do . whenever I durst venture to a coffeehouse , which be on only , a whisper run round the room , which be constantly attend with a sneer -- that be poet ; for I know not whether you have observe it , but there be a malignity in the nature of man , which , when not weed out , or at least cover by a good education and politeness , delight in make another uneasy or dissatisfie with himself . this abundantly appear in all assemblie , except those which be fill by people of fashion , and especially among the younger people of both sex whose birth and fortune place they just without the polite circle ; I mean the lower class of the gentry , and the higher of the mercantile world , who be , in reality , the worst - breed part of mankind . well , sir , whilst I continue in this miserable state , with scarce sufficient business to keep I from starving , the reputation of a poet be my bane , I accidentally become acquainted with a bookseller , who tell I , " it be a pity a man of my learning and genius should be oblige to such a method of get he livelihood ; that he have a compassion for I , and , if I would engage with he , he would undertake to provide handsomely for I . " a man in my circumstance , as he very well know , have no choice . I accordingly accept he proposal with he condition , which be none of the most favourable , and fall to translat with all my might .
. I have no longer reason to lament the want of business ; for he furnish I with so much , that in half a year I almost writ myself blind . I likewise contract a distemper by my sedentary life , in which no part of my body be exercise but my right arm , which render I incapable of writing for a long time . this unluckily happen to delay the publication of a work , and my last performance not have sell well , the bookseller decline any further engagement , and asperse I to he breth as a careless idle fellow . I have , however , by have half work and half starve myself to death during the time I be in he service , save a few guinea , with which i buy a lottery - ticket , resolve to throw myself into 's lap , and try if she would make I amend for the injury she have do I at the gaming - table . this purchase , be make , leave I almost pennyless ; when , as if I have not be sufficiently miserable , a bailiff in woman 's clothes get admittance to my chamber , whither he be direct by the bookseller . he arrest I at my taylor 's suit for thirty - five pound ; a sum for which i could not procure bail ; and be therefore convey to he house , where I be lock up in a upper chamber . I have now neither health ( for I be scarce recover from my indisposition ) , liberty , money , or friend ; and have abandon all hope , and even the desire , of life . " but this could not last long , " say ; " for doubtless the taylor release you the moment he be truly acquaint with you affair , and know that you circumstance would not permit you to pay he . " " oh , sir , " answer the gentleman , " he know that before he arrest I ; nay , he know that nothing but incapacity could prevent I pay my debt ; for I have be he customer many year , have spend vast sum of money with he , and have always pay most punctually in my prosperous day ; but when I remind he of this , with assurance that , if he would not molest my endeavour , I would pay he all the money I could by my utmost labour and industry procure , reserve only what be sufficient to preserve I alive , he answer , he patience be wear out ; that I have put he off from time to time ; that he want the money ; that he have put it into a lawyer 's hand ; and if I do not pay he immediately , or find security , I must die in gaol and expect no mercy . " " he may expect mercy , " cry Adams , start from he chair , " where he will find none ! how can such a wretch repeat the 's prayer ; where the word , which be translate , I know not for what reason , trespass , be in the original , debt ? and as surely as we do not forgive other they debt , when they be unable to pay they , so surely shall we ourselves be unforgiven when we be in no condition of pay . " he cease , and the gentleman proceed . while I be in this deplorable situation , a former acquaintance , to whom I have communicate my lottery - ticket , find I out , and , make I a visit , with great delight in he countenance , shook I heartily by the hand , and wish I joy of my good fortune : for , say he , you ticket be come up a prize of . Adams snap he finger at these word in a ecstasy of joy ; which , however , do not continue long ; for the gentleman thus proceed :-- ! sir , this be only a trick of to sink I the deeper ; for I have dispose of this lottery - ticket two day before to a relation , who refuse lend I a shilling without it , in order to procure myself bread . as soon as my friend be acquaint with my unfortunate sale he begin to revile I and remind I of all the ill - conduct and miscarriage of my life . he say I be one whom Fortune could not save if she would ; that I be now ruin without any hope of retrieval , nor must expect any pity from my friend ; that it would be extreme weakness to compassionate the misfortunes of a man who run headlong to he own destruction . he then paint to I , in as lively colour as he be able , the happiness I should have now enjoy , have I not foolishly dispose of my ticket . I urge the plea of necessity ; but he make no answer to that , and begin again to revile I , till I could bear it no longer , and desire he to finish he visit . I soon exchange the bailiff 's house for a prison ; where , as I have not money sufficient to procure I a separate apartment , I be croude in with a great number of miserable wretch , in common with whom I be destitute of every convenience of life , even that which all the brute enjoy , wholesome air . in these dreadful circumstance I apply by letter to several of my old acquaintance , and such to whom I have formerly lent money without any great prospect of its
its be return , for they assistance ; but in vain . a excuse , instead of a denial , be the gentlest answer I receive . whilst I languish in a condition too horrible to be describe , and which , in a land of humanity , and , what be much more , , seem a strange punishment for a little inadvertency and indiscretion ; whilst I be in this condition , a fellow come into the prison , and , enquir I out , deliver I the follow letter :-- " sir ,-- my father , to whom you sell you ticket in the last lottery , die the same day in which it come up a prize , as you have possibly hear , and leave I sole heiress of all he fortune . I be so much touche with you present circumstance , and the uneasiness you must feel at have be drive to dispose of what might have make you happy , that I must desire you acceptance of the enclose , and be you humble servant , " . " and what do you think be enclose ? " I do not know , " cry ; " not less than a guinea , I hope . " , it be a bank - note for L200.--" ? " say Adams , in a rapture . no less , I assure you , answer the gentleman ; a sum I be not half so delighted with as with the dear name of the generous girl that send it I ; and who be not only the best but the handsomest creature in the universe , and for whom I have long have a passion which I never durst disclose to she . I kiss she name a thousand time , my eye overflow with tenderness and gratitude ; I repeat -- but not to detain you with these rapture , I immediately acquire my liberty ; and , have pay all my debt , depart , with upward of fifty pound in my pocket , to thank my kind deliverer . she happen to be then out of town , a circumstance which , upon reflection , please I ; for by that mean I have a opportunity to appear before she in a more decent dress . at she return to town , within a day or two , I throw myself at she foot with the most ardent acknowledgment , which she reject with a unfeigned greatness of mind , and tell I I could not oblige she more than by never mention , or if possible think on , a circumstance which must bring to my mind a accident that might be grievous to I to think on . she proceed thus : " what I have do be in my own eye a trifle , and perhaps infinitely less than would have become I to do . and if you think of engage in any business where a larger sum may be serviceable to you , I shall not be over-rigid either as to the security or interest . " I endeavoure to express all the gratitude in my power to this profusion of goodness , though perhaps it be my enemy , and begin to afflict my mind with more agony than all the misery I have underwent ; it affect I with severer reflection than poverty , distress , and prison have be able to make I feel ; for , sir , these act and profession of kindness , which be sufficient to have raise in a good heart the most violent passion of friendship to one of the same , or to age and ugliness in a different sex , come to I from a woman , a young and beautiful woman ; one whose perfection I have long known , and for whom I have long conceive a violent passion , though with a despair which make I endeaavor rather to curb and conceal , than to nourish or acquaint she with it . in short , they come upon I with beauty , softness , and tenderness : such bewitch smile !-- of , in that moment I lose myself , and , forget we different situation , nor consider what return I be make to she goodness by desire she , who have give I so much , to bestow she all , I lay gently hold on she hand , and , convey it to my lip , I prest it with inconceivable ardour ; then , lift up my swimming eye , I see she face and neck overspread with one blush ; she offer to withdraw she hand , yet not so as to deliver it from mine , though I hold it with the gentlest force . we both stood trembl ; she eye cast on the ground , and mine stedfastly fix on she . good g -- , what be then the condition of my soul ! burn with love , desire , admiration , gratitude , and every tender passion , all bent on one charming object . passion at last get the better of both reason and respect , and , softly let go she hand , I offer madly to clasp she in my arm ; when , a little recovering herself , she start from I , ask I , with some show of anger , " if she have any reason to expect this treatment from I . " I then fall prostrate before she , and tell she , if I have offend , my life be absolutely in she power , which I would in any manner lose for she sake . Nay , madam , say I , you shall not be so ready to punish I as I to suffer . I own my guilt . I detest
detest the reflection that I would have sacrifice you happiness to mine . believe I , I sincerely repent my ingratitude ; yet , believe I too , it be my passion , my unbounded passion for you , which hurrie I so far : I have love you long and tenderly , and the goodness you have show I hath innocently weigh down a wretch undone before . Acquit I of all mean , mercenary view ; and , before I take my leave of you for ever , which I be resolve instantly to do , believe I that could have raise I to no height to which i could not have gladly lift you . o , curst be !--" do not , " say she , interrupt I with the sweetest voice , " do not curse , since she hath make I happy ; and , if she hath put you happiness in my power , I have tell you you shall ask nothing in reason which I will refuse . " , say I , you mistake I if you imagine , as you seem , my happiness be in the power of now . you have oblige I too much already ; if I have any wish , it be for some blest accident , by which I may contribute with my life to the least augmentation of you felicity . as for myself , the only happiness I can ever have will be hear of yours ; and if Fortune will make that complete , I will forgive she all she wrongs to I . " you may , indeed , " answer she , smile , " for you own happiness must be include in mine . I have long know you worth ; nay , I must confess , " say she , blush , " I have long discover that passion for I you profess , notwithstand those endeavour , which I be convince be unaffected , to conceal it ; and if all I can give with reason will not suffice , take reason away ; and now I believe you can not ask I what I will deny . " -- she utter these word with a sweetness not to be imagine . I immediately start ; my blood , which lay freezing at my heart , rush tumultuously through every vein . I stand for a moment silent ; then , fly to she , I catch she in my arm , no longer resist , and softly tell she she must give I then herself . o , sir ! can I describe she look ? she remain silent , and almost motionless , several minute . at last , recover herself a little , she insist on my leave she , and in such a manner that I instantly obey : you may imagine , however , I soon see she again .-- but I ask pardon : I fear I have detain you too long in relate the particular of the former interview . " so far otherwise , " say , lick he lip , " that I could willingly hear it over again . " well , sir , continue the gentleman , to be as concise as possible , within a week she consent to make I the happiest of mankind . we be marry shortly after ; and when I come to examine the circumstance of my wife 's fortune ( which , I do assure you , I be not presently at leisure enough to do ) , I find it amount to about six thousand pound , most part of which lay in effect ; for she father have be a wine - merchant , and she seem willing , if I like it , that I should carry on the same trade . I readily , and too inconsiderately , undertake it ; for , not have be breed up to the secret of the business , and endeavour to deal with the utmost honesty and uprightness , I soon find we fortune in a decline way , and my tray decrease by little and little ; for my wine , which I never adulterate after they importation , and be sell as neat as they come over , be universally decry by the vintner , to whom I could not allow they quite as cheap as those who gain double the profit by a less price . I soon begin to despair of improve we fortune by these means ; nor be I at all easy at the visit and familiarity of many who have be my acquaintance in my prosperity , but have deny and shunn I in my adversity , and now very forwardly renew they acquaintance with I . in short , I have sufficientely see that the pleasure of the world be chiefly folly , and the business of it mostly knavery , and both nothing better than vanity ; the man of pleasure tear one another to piece from the emulation of spending money , and the man of business from envy in get it . my happiness consist entirely in my wife , whom I love with a inexpressible fondness , which be perfectly return ; and my prospect be no other than to provide for we grow family ; for she be now big of she second child : I therefore take a opportunity to ask she opinion of enter into a retired life , which , after hear my reason and perceive my affection for it , she readily embrace . we soon put we small fortune , now reduce under three thousand pound , into money , with part of which we purchase this little place , whither we retire soon after she delivery , from a world full of bustle , noise , hatred , envy
envy , and ingratitude , to ease , quiet , and love . we have here live almost twenty year , with little other conversation than we own , most of the neighbourhood take we for very strange people ; the squire of the parish represent I as a madman , and the parson as a presbyterian , because I will not hunt with the one nor drink with the other . " Sir , " say Adams , " hath , I think , pay you all she debt in this sweet retirement . " , reply the gentleman , I be thankful to the great author of all thing for the blessing I here enjoy . I have the best of wife , and three pretty child , for whom I have the true tenderness of a parent . but no blessing be pure in this world : within three year of my arrival here I lose my eldest son . ( here he sigh bitterly . ) " Sir , " say Adams , " we must submit to , and consider death as common to all . " we must submit , indeed , answer the gentleman ; and if he have die I could have borne the loss with patience ; but alas ! sir , he be steal away from my door by some wicked travel people whom they call gipsy ; nor could I ever , with the most diligent search , recover he . poor child ! he have the sweetest look -- the exact picture of he mother ; at which some tear unwittingly dropt from he eye , as do likewise from those of , who always sympathize with he friend on those occasion . thus , sir , say the gentleman , I have finish my story , in which if I have be too particular , I ask you pardon ; and now , if you please , I will fetch you another bottle : which proposal the parson thankfully accept . description of 's way of live . the tragical adventure of the dog , and other grave matter ._ the gentleman return with the bottle ; and and he sit some time silent , when the former start up , and cry , " no , that will not do . " the gentleman inquire into he meaning ; he answer , " he have be consider that it be possible the late famous king Theodore might have be that very son whom he have lose ; " but add , " that he age could not answer that imagination . however , " say he , " g -- dispose all thing for the best ; and very probably he may be some great man , or duke , and may , one day or other , revisit you in that capacity . " the gentleman answer , he should know he amongst ten thousand , for he have a mark on he left breast of a strawberry , which he mother have give he by longing for that fruit . that beautiful young lady the now rise from she bed , and with a countenance bloom with fresh youth and sprightliness , like ---- [ ] , with soft dew hang on she pouting lip , begin to take she early walk over the eastern hill ; and presently after , that gallant person the stole softly from he wife 's chamber to pay he address to she ; when the gentleman ask he guest if he would walk forth and survey he little garden , which he readily agree to , and at the same time awak from a sleep in which he have be two hour bury , go with they . no parterre , no fountain , no statue , embellish this little garden . it be only ornament be a short walk , shade on each side by a filbert - hedge , with a small alcove at one end , whither in hot weather the gentleman and he wife use to retire and divert themselves with they child , who play in the walk before they . but , though vanity have no votary in this little spot , here be variety of fruit and everything useful for the kitchen , which be abundantly sufficient to catch the admiration of , who tell the gentleman he have certainly a good gardener . , answer he , that gardener be now before you : whatever you see here be the work solely of my own hand . whilst I be provide necessary for my table , I likewise procure myself a appetite for they . in fair season I seldom pass less than six hour of the twenty - four in this place , where I be not idle ; and by these mean I have be able to preserve my health ever since my arrival here , without assistance from physic . Hither I generally repair at the dawn , and exercise myself whilst my wife dress she child and prepare we breakfast ; after which we be seldom asunder during the residue of the day , for , when the weather will not permit they to accompany I here , I be usually within with they ; for I be neither asham of conversing with my wife nor of play with my child : to say the truth , I do not perceive that inferiority of understanding which the levity of rake , the dulness of man of business , or the austerity of the learn , would persuade we of in woman . as for my woman , I declare I have find none of my own sex capable of make juster observation on life , or of deliver they more agreeably ; nor do I believe any one possess of a faithfuller or braver friend . and
and sure as this friendship be sweeten with more delicacy and tenderness , so be it confirm by dearer pledge than can attend the closest male alliance ; for what union can be so fast as we common interest in the fruit of we embrace ? perhaps , sir , you be not yourself a father ; if you be not , be assure you can not conceive the delight I have in my little one . would you not despise I if you see I stretch on the ground , and my child play round I ? " I should reverence the sight , " quoth Adam ; " I myself be now the father of six , and have be of eleven , and I can say I never scour a child of my own , unless as he schoolmaster , and then have feel every stroke on my own posterior . and as to what you say concern woman , I have often lament my own wife do not understand . " -- the gentleman smile , and answer , he would not be apprehend to insinuate that he own have a understanding above the care of she family ; on the contrary , say he , my , I assure you , be a notable housewife , and few gentleman 's housekeeper understand cookery or confectionery better ; but these be art which she hath no great occasion for now : however , the wine you commend so much last night at supper be of she own making , as be indeed all the liquor in my house , except my beer , which fall to my province . " and I assure you it be as excellent , " quoth Adam , " as ever I taste . " we formerly keep a maid - servant , but since my girl have be grow up she be unwilling to indulge they in idleness ; for as the fortune I shall give they will be very small , we intend not to breed they above the rank they be likely to fill hereafter , nor to teach they to despise or ruin a plain husband . indeed , I could wish a man of my own temper , and a retire life , might fall to they lot ; for I have experience that calm serene happiness , which be seat in content , be inconsistent with the hurry and bustle of the world . he be proceed thus when the little thing , be just risen , run eagerly towards he and ask he blesse . they be shy to the stranger , but the eldest acquaint she father , that she mother and the young gentlewoman be up , and that breakfast be ready . they all go in , where the gentleman be surprize at the beauty of , who have now recover herself from she fatigue , and be entirely clean drest ; for the rogue who have take away she purse have leave she she bundle . but if he be so much amaze at the beauty of this young creature , he guest be no less charme at the tenderness which appear in the behaviour of the husband and wife to each other , and to they child , and at the dutiful and affectionate behaviour of these to they parent . these instance please the well - dispose mind of equally with the readiness which they exprest to oblige they guest , and they forwardness to offer they the best of everything in they house ; and what delighte he still more be a instance or two of they charity ; for whilst they be at breakfast the good woman be call for to assist she sick neighbour , which she do with some cordial make for the public use , and the good man go into he garden at the same time to supply another with something which he want thence , for they have nothing which those who want it be not welcome to . these good people be in the utmost cheerfulness , when they hear the report of a gun , and immediately afterwards a little dog , the favourite of the eldest daughter , come limpe in all bloody and lay himself at he mistress 's foot : the poor girl , who be about eleven year old , burst into tear at the sight ; and presently one of the neighbour come in and inform they that the young squire , the son of the lord of the manor , have shoot he as he past by , swear at the same time he would prosecute the master of he for keep a spaniel , for that he have give notice he would not suffer one in the parish . the dog , whom he mistress have take into she lap , die in a few minute , lick she hand . she exprest great agony at he loss , and the other child begin to cry for they sister 's misfortune ; nor could Fanny herself refrain . whilst the father and mother attempt to comfort she , grasp he crabstick and would have sally out after the squire have not withheld he . he could not however bridle he tongue -- he pronounce the word rascal with great emphasis ; say he deserv to be hang more than a highwayman , and wish he have the scour he . the mother take she child , lament and carry the dead favourite in she arm , out of the room , when the gentleman say this be the second time this squire have endeavoure to kill the little wretch , and have woun he smartly once before ; add , he could have no motive but ill - nature , for the little thing , which be not near as big as one
one 's fist , have never be twenty yard from the house in the six year he daughter have have it . he say he have do nothing to deserve this usage , but he father have too great a fortune to contend with : that he be as absolute as any tyrant in the universe , and have kill all the dog and take away all the gun in the neighbourhood ; and not only that , but he trample down hedge and ride over corn and garden , with no more regard than if they be the highway . " I wish I could catch he in my garden , " say , " though I would rather forgive he ride through my house than such a ill - natured act as this . " the cheerfulness of they conversation be interrupt by this accident , in which the guest could be of no service to they kind entertainer ; and as the mother be take up in administering consolation to the poor girl , whose disposition be too good hastily to forget the sudden loss of she little favourite , which have be fondl with she a few minute before ; and as and be impatient to get home and begin those previous ceremony to they happiness which have insist on , they now offer to take they leave . the gentleman importune they much to stay dinner ; but when he find they eagerness to depart he summon he wife ; and accordingly , have perform all the usual ceremony of bow and curtsy more pleasant to be see than to be relate , they take they leave , the gentleman and he wife heartily wish they a good journey , and they as heartily thanke they for they kind entertainment . they then depart , declare that this be the manner in which the people have live in the golden age . [ ] whoever the reader pleasis . disputation on school hold on the road between and ; and a discovery not unwelcome to they both ._ we traveller , have well refresh themselves at the gentleman 's house , and Fanny with sleep , and with ale and tobacco , renew they journey with great alacrity ; and pursue the road into which they be direct , travel many mile before they meet with any adventure worth relate . in this interval we shall present we reader with a very curious discourse , as we apprehend it , concern public school , which pass between and . they have not go far before , call to , ask he , " if he have attend to the gentleman 's story ? " he answer , " to all the former part . " --" and do not you think , " say he , " he be a very unhappy man in he youth ? " --" a very unhappy man , indeed , " answer the other . " , " cry Adams , screw up he mouth , " I have find it ; I have discover the cause of all the misfortune which befel he : a public school , , be the cause of all the calamity which he afterwards suffer . public school be the nursery of all vice and immorality . all the wicked fellow whom I remember at the university be breed at they . -- , ! I can remember as well as if it be but yesterday , a knot of they ; they call they 's scholar , I forget why -- very wicked fellow ! Joseph , you may thank the you be not breed at a public school ; you would never have preserve you virtue as you have . the first care I always take be of a boy 's moral ; I have rather he should be a blockhead than a atheist or a presbyterian . what be all the learning in the world compare to he immortal soul ? what shall a man take in exchange for he soul ? but the master of great school trouble themselves about no such thing . I have know a lad of eighteen at the university , who hath not be able to say he catechism ; but for my own part , I always scour a lad sooner for missing that than any other lesson . believe I , child , all that gentleman 's misfortune arise from he be educate at a public school . " " it doth not become I , " answer , " to dispute anything , sir , with you , especially a matter of this kind ; for to be sure you must be allow by all the world to be the best teacher of a school in all we county . " " yes , that , " say , " I believe , be grant I ; that I may without much vanity pretend to -- nay , I believe I may go to the next county too -- but _gloriari non est meum _. " --" however , sir , as you be pleased to bid I speak , " say , " you know my late master , , be breed at a public school , and he be the finest gentleman in all the neighbourhood . and I have often hear he say , if he have a hundred boy he would breed they all at the same place . it be he opinion , and I have often hear he deliver it , that a boy take from a public school and carry into the world , will learn more in one year there than one of a private education will in five . he use to say the school itself initiate he a great way ( I remember that be he very expression ) , for great
great school be little society , where a boy of any observation may see in epitome what he will afterwards find in the world at large . " --" _Hinc illae lachryma : for that very reason , " quoth Adams , " I prefer a private school , where boy may be keep in innocence and ignorance ; for , accord to that fine passage in the play of , the only English tragedy I ever read -- " ' if knowledge of the world must make man villain ever live in ignorance ! ' " who would not rather preserve the purity of he child than wish he to attain the whole circle of art and science ? which , by the bye , he may learn in the class of a private school ; for I would not be vain , but I esteem myself to be second to none , _nulli secundum , in teach these thing ; so that a lad may have as much learning in a private as in a public education . " -- " and , with submission , " answer , " he may get as much vice : witness several country gentleman , who be educate within five mile of they own house , and be as wicked as if they have know the world from they infancy . I remember when I be in the stable , if a young horse be vicious in he nature , no correction would make he otherwise : I take it to be equally the same among man : if a boy be of a mischievous wicked inclination , no school , though ever so private , will ever make he good : on the contrary , if he be of a righteous temper , you may trust he to , or wherever else you please -- he will be in no danger of be corrupt . besides , I have often hear my master say that the discipline practise in public school be much better than that in private . " --" you talk like a jackanape , " say Adams , " and so do you master . Discipline indeed ! because one man scourge twenty or thirty boy more in a morning than another , be he therefore a better disciplinarian ? I do presume to confer in this point with all who have teach from 's time to this day ; and , if I be master of six boy only , I would preserve as good discipline amongst they as the master of the greatest school in the world . I say nothing , young man ; remember I say nothing ; but if himself have be educate nearer home , and under the tuition of somebody -- remember I name nobody -- it might have be better for he :-- but he father must institute he in the knowledge of the world . _Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit_. " , see he run on in this manner , ask pardon many time , assure he he have no intention to offend . " I believe you have not , child , " say he , " and I be not angry with you ; but for maintain good discipline in a school ; for this . " -- and then he run on as before , name all the master who be record in old book , and prefer himself to they all . indeed , if this good man have a enthusiasm , or what the vulgar call a blind side , it be this : he think a schoolmaster the greatest character in the world , and himself the greatest of all schoolmaster : neither of which point he would have give up to the at the head of he army . Adams continue he subject till they come to one of the beautifullest spot of ground in the universe . it be a kind of natural amphitheatre , form by the winding of a small rivulet , which be plan with thick wood , and the tree rise gradually above each other by the natural ascent of the ground they stand on ; which ascent as they hide with they bough , they seem to have be dispose by the design of the most skilful planter . the soil be spread with a verdure which no paint could imitate ; and the whole place might have raise romantic idea in elder minds than those of and , without the assistance of love . here they arrive about noon , and propose to Adam that they should rest awhile in this delightful place , and refresh themselves with some provision which the good - nature of have provide they with . Adam make no objection to the proposal ; so down they sit , and , pull out a cold fowl and a bottle of wine , they make a repast with a cheerfulness which might have attract the envy of more splendid table . I should not omit that they find among they provision a little paper contain a piece of gold , which imagine have be put there by mistake , would have return back to restore it ; but he be at last convince by that have take this handsome way of furnish they with a supply for they journey , on he have relate the distress which they have be in , when they be relieve by the generosity of the pedlar . Adam say he be glad to see such a instance of goodness , not so much for the conveniency which it bring they as for the sake of the doer , whose reward would be great in heaven . he likewise comfort himself with a reflection that he should shortly have a opportunity of return it he ; for the gentleman be within a week to make a
a journey into , to pass through 's parish , and have faithfully promise to call on he ; a circumstance which we think too immaterial to mention before ; but which those who have as great a affection for that gentleman as ourselves will rejoice at , as it may give they hope of see he again . then make a speech on charity , which the reader , if he be so disposed , may see in the next chapter ; for we scorn to betray he into any such reading , without first give he warning . . _Moral reflection by ; with the hunting adventure , and 's miraculous escape ._ " I have often wondered , sir , " say , " to observe so few instance of charity among mankind ; for though the goodness of a man 's heart do not incline he to relieve the distress of he fellow - creature , methink the desire of honou should move he to it . what inspire a man to build fine house , to purchase fine furniture , picture , clothes , and other thing , at a great expense , but a ambition to be respect more than other people ? now , would not one great act of charity , one instance of redeem a poor family from all the misery of poverty , restore a unfortunate tradesman by a sum of money to the means of procure a livelihood by he industry , discharge a undone debtor from he debt or a gaol , or any suchlike example of goodness , create a man more honour and respect than he could acquire by the finest house , furniture , picture , or clothes , that be ever beheld ? for not only the object himself who be thus relieved , but all who hear the name of such a person , must , I imagine , reverence he infinitely more than the possessor of all those other thing ; which when we so admire , we rather praise the builder , the workman , the painter , the lace - maker , the taylor , and the rest , by whose ingenuity they be produce , than the person who by he money make they he own . for my own part , when I have wait behind my lady in a room hang with fine picture , while I have be look at they I have never once think of they owner , nor hath any one else , as I ever observe ; for when it hath be ask whose picture that be , it be never once answer the master 's of the house ; but , , , or , which I suppose be the name of the painter ; but if it be ask -- who redeem such a one out of prison ? who lent such a ruin tradesman money to set up ? who clothed that family of poor small child ? it be very plain what must be the answer . and besides , these great folk be mistaken if they imagine they get any honour at all by these means ; for I do not remember I ever be with my lady at any house where she commend the house or furniture but I have hear she at she return home make sport and jeer at whatever she have before commend ; and I have be tell by other gentleman in livery that it be the same in they family : but I defy the wisest man in the world to turn a true good action into ridicule . I defy he to do it . he who should endeaavor it would be laugh at himself , instead of make other laugh . nobody scarce doth any good , yet they all agree in praising those who do . indeed , it be strange that all man should consent in commending goodness , and no man endeavou to deserve that commendation ; whilst , on the contrary , all rail at wickedness , and all be as eager to be what they abuse . this I know not the reason of ; but it be as plain as daylight to those who converse in the world , as I have do these three year . " " be all the great folk wick then ? " say . " to be sure there be some exceptions , " answer . " some gentleman of we cloth report charitable action do by they lord and master ; and I have hear , the great poet , at my lady 's table , tell story of a man that live at a place call , and another at the bath , one -- -- I forget he name , but it be in the book of verse . this gentleman hath build up a stately house too , which the squire like very well ; but he charity be see farther than he house , though it stand on a hill , -- ay , and bring he more honou too . it be he charity that put he in the book , where the squire say he put all those who deserve it ; and to be sure , as he live among all the great people , if there be any such , he would know they . " this be all of 's speech which I could get he to recollect , which I have deliver as near as be possible in he own word , with a very small embellishment . but I believe the reader hath not be a little surprized at the long silence of parson Adams , especially as so many occasion offer themselves to exert he curiosity and observation . the truth be , he be fast asleep , and have so be from the beginning
beginning of the preceding narrative ; and , indeed , if the reader consider that so many hour have pass since he have close he eye , he will not wonder at he repose , though even himself , or as great a orator ( if any such be ) , have be in he rostrum or tub before he . , who whilst he be speak have continue in one attitude , with he head recline on one side , and he eye cast on the ground , no sooner perceive , on look up , the position of , who be stretch on he back , and snor louder than the usual braying of the animal with long ear , than he turn towards , and , take she by the hand , begin a dalliance , which , though consistent with the purest innocence and decency , neither he would have attempt nor she permit before any witness . whilst they amuse themselves in this harmless and delightful manner they hear a pack of hound approach in full cry towards they , and presently afterwards see a hare pop forth from the wood , and , cross the water , land within a few yard of they in the meadow . the hare be no sooner on shore than it seat itself on its hinder leg , and listen to the sound of the pursuer . be wonderfully pleased with the little wretch , and eagerly long to have it in she arm that she might preserve it from the dangers which seem to threat it ; but the rational part of the creation do not always aptly distinguish they friend from they foe ; what wonder then if this silly creature , the moment it beheld she , fle from the friend who would have protect it , and , traverse the meadow again , pass the little rivulet on the opposite side ? it be , however , so spend and weak , that it fall down twice or thrice in its way . this affec the tender heart of , who exclaim , with tear in she eye , against the barbarity of worry a poor innocent defenceless animal out of its life , and put it to the extremest torture for diversion . she have not much time to make reflection of this kind , for on a sudden the hound rush through the wood , which resound with they throat and the throat of they retinue , who attend on they on horseback . the dog now past the rivulet , and pursue the footstep of the hare ; five horseman attempt to leap over , three of whom succeed , and two be in the attempt throw from they saddle into the water ; they companion , and they own horsis too , proceed after they sport , and leave they friend and rider to invoke the assistance of , or employ the more active means of strength and agility for they deliverance . , however , be not so unconcerned on this occasion ; he leave for a moment to herself , and run to the gentleman , who be immediately on they leg , shak they ear , and easily , with the help of he hand , obtain the bank ( for the rivulet be not at all deep ) ; and , without stay to thank they kind assister , run dripp across the meadow , call to they brother sportsman to stop they horse ; but they hear they not . the hound be now very little behind they poor reeling , stagger prey , which , faint almost at every step , crawl through the wood , and have almost get round to the place where Fanny stood , when it be overtake by its enemy , and be drive out of the covert , be catch , and instantly tore to piece before 's face , who be unable to assist it with any aid more powerful than pity ; nor could she prevail on , who have be himself a sportsman in he youth , to attempt anything contrary to the law of hunting in favour of the hare , which he say be kill fairly . the hare be catch within a yard or two of , who lay asleep at some distance from the lover ; and the hound , in devour it , and pull it backwards and forwards , have draw it so close to he , that some of they ( by mistake perhaps for the hare 's skin ) laid hold of the skirt of he cassock ; other at the same time apply they tooth to he wig , which he have with a handkerchief fastened to he head , begin to pull he about ; and have not the motion of he body have more effect on he than seem to be wrotch by the noise , they must certainly have taste he flesh , which delicious flavour might have be fatal to he ; but be rouse by these tugging , he instantly awak , and with a jerk deliver he head from he wig , he with most admirable dexterity recover he leg , which now see the only member he could entrust he safety to . have , therefore , escape likewise from at least a third part of he cassock , which he willingly leave as he _exuviae_ or spoil to the enemy , he fle with the utmost speed he could summon to he assistance . nor let this be any detraction from the bravery of he character : let the number of the enemy , and the surprize in which he be take , be consider ; and if there be any modern so outrageously brave that he can not admit of flight in any circumstance whatever , I say
say ( but I whisper that softly , and I solemnly declare without any intention of give offence to any brave man in the nation ) , I say , or rather I whisper , that he be a ignorant fellow , and hath never read nor , nor know he anything of Hector or Turnus ; nay , he be unacquainted with the history of some great man live , who , though as brave as lions , ay , as tiger , have run away , the know how far , and the know why , to the surprize of they friend and the entertainment of they enemy . but if person of such heroic disposition be a little offended at the behaviour of , we assure they they shall be as much pleased with what we shall immediately relate of . the master of the pack be just arrive , or , as the sportsman call it , come in , when Adams set out , as we have before mention . this gentleman be generally say to be a great lover of humwe ; but , not to mince the matter , especially as we be upon this subject , he be a great hunter of man ; indeed , he have hitherto follow the sport only with dog of he own species ; for he keep two or three couple of barking curs for that use only . however , as he think he have now find a man nimble enough , he be willing to indulge himself with other sport , and accordingly , cry out , " away , " encourage the hound to pursue , swear it be the largest jack - hare he ever see ; at the same time halloo and hoop as if a conquered foe be fly before he ; in which he be imitate by these two or three couple of human or rather two - leg curs on horseback which we have mention before . now , thou , whoever thout art , whether a muse , or by what other name soever thou choosest to be call , who presidest over biography , and hast inspire all the writer of live in these we time : thou who didst infuse such wonderful humour into the pen of immortal ; who hast carefully guide the judgment whilst thou hast exalt the nervous manly style of thy Mallet : thou who hadst no hand in that dedication and preface , or the translation , which thou wouldst willingly have strike out of the life of : lastly , thout who , without the assistance of the least spice of literature , and even against he inclination , hast , in some page of he book , force to write ; do thou assist I in what I find myself unequal to . do thou introduce on the plain the young , the gay , the brave Andrews , whilst man shall view he with admiration and envy , tender virgin with love and anxious concern for he safety . no sooner do perceive the distress of he friend , when first the quick - scenting dog attack he , than he grasp he cudgel in he right hand - - a cudgel which he father have of he grandfather , to whom a mighty strong man of have give it for a present in that day when he break three head on the stage . it be a cudgel of mighty strength and wonderful art , make by one of 's best workman , whom no other artificer can equal , and who hath make all those stick which the beaus have lately walk with about the in a morning ; but this be far he masterpiece . on it be head be engrave a nose and ching , which might have be mistaken for a pair of nutcracker . the learn have imagine it design to represent the ; but it be in fact copy from the face of a certain long baronet , of infinite wit , humour , and gravity . he do intend to have engrave here many histories : as the first night of ---- 's play , where you would have see critic in embroidery transplant from the box to the pit , whose ancient inhabitant be exalt to the galleries , where they play on catcall . he do intend to have paint a auction room , where would have appear aloft in he pulpit , trumpet forth the praise of a china basin , and with astonishment wonder that " nobody bid more for that fine , that superb -- " he do intend to have engrave many other thing , but be force to leave all out for want of room . no sooner have grasp he cudgel in he hand than lightning dart from he eye ; and the heroick youth , swift of foot , run with the utmost speed to he friend 's assistance . he overtake he just as have laid hold of the skirt of he cassock , which , be tear , hang to the ground . reader , we would make a simile on this occasion , but for two reason : the first be , it would interrupt the description , which should be rapid in this part ; but that doth not weigh much , many precedent occur for such a interruption : the second and much the greater reason be , that we could find no simile adequate to we purpose : for indeed , what instance could we bring to set before we reader 's eye at once the idea of friendship , courage , youth , beauty , strength , and swiftness ? all which blaze in the person of . let those , therefore , that describe lions and tiger , and hero fiercer than both
both , raise they poem or play with the simile of , who be himself above the reach of any simile . now have laid fast hold on the parson 's skirt , and stopt he flight ; which no sooner perceive than he level he cudgel at he head and lay he sprawl . and then fall on he greatcoat , and have undoubtedly bring he to the ground , have not Joseph , collect all he force , give such a rap on the back , that , quit he hold , he run how over the plain . a harder fate remain for thee , of ! Ringwood the best hound that ever pursue a hare , who never throw he tongue but where the scent be undoubtedly true ; good at trailing , and sure in a highway ; no babler , no overrunner ; respecte by the whole pack , who , whenever he open , know the game be at hand . he fall by the stroke of . and , and wonder and , be the next victim of he wrath , and measure they length on the ground . then , a bitch which have breed up in he house , and feed at he own table , and lately send the squire fifty mile for a present , run fiercely at and bit he by the leg : no dog be ever fiercer than she , be descende from a Amazonian breed , and have worried bull in she own country , but now wage a unequal fight , and have share the fate of those we have mention before , have not ( the reader may believe it or not if he please ) in that instant interpose , and , in the shape of the huntsman , snatch she favourite up in she arm . the parson now face about , and with he crabstick felle many to the earth , and scatter other , till he be attack by and pull to the ground . then fly to he rescue , and with such might fall on the victor , that , of eternal blot to he name ! run yelpe away . the battle now rage with the most dreadful violence , when , lo ! the huntsman , a man of year and dignity , lifte he voice , and call he hound from the fight , tell they , in a language they understand , that it be in vain to contend longer , for that fate have decree the victory to they enemy . thus far the muse hath with she usual dignity relate this prodigious battle , a battle we apprehend never equal by any poet , romance or life writer whatever , and , have bring it to a conclusion , she cease ; we shall therefore proceed in we ordinary style with the continuation of this history . the squire and he companion , whom the figure of Adams and the gallantry of have at first thrown into a violent fit of laughter , and who have hithertoo beheld the engagement with more delight than any chase , shooting - match , race , cock - fighting , bull or bear baiting , have ever give they , begin now to apprehend the danger of they hound , many of which lay sprawling in the field . the squire , therefore , have first call he friend about he , as guard for safety of he person , ride manfully up to the combatant , and , summon all the terror he be master of into he countenance , demand with a authoritative voice of what he mean by assault he dog in that manner ? answer , with great intrepidity , that they have first fallen on he friend ; and if they have belong to the greatest man in the kingdom , he would have treat they in the same way ; for , whilst he vein contain a single drop of blood , he would not stand idle by and see that gentleman ( point to ) abuse either by man or beast ; and , have so say , both he and brandish they wooden weapon , and put themselves into such a posture , that the squire and he company think proper to preponderate before they offer to revenge the cause of they four -footed ally . at this instant Fanny , whom the apprehension of 's danger have alarm so much that , forget she own , she have make the utmost expedition , come up . the squire and all the horseman be so surprized with she beauty , that they immediately fix both they eye and thought solely on she , every one declaring he have never see so charme a creature . neither mirth nor anger engage they a moment longer , but all sit in silent amaze . the huntsman only be free from she attraction , who be busy in cut the ear of the dog , and endeavour to recover they to life ; in which he succeed so well , that only two of no great note remain slaughtere on the field of action . upon this the huntsman declare , " ' well it be no worse ; for he part he could not blame the gentleman , and wonder he master would encourage the dog to hunt ; that it be the surest way to spoil they , to make they follow vermin instead of stick to a hare . " the squire , be inform of the little mischief that have be do , and perhaps have more mischief of another kind in he head , accost with a more favourable aspect than before : he tell he he be sorry for what have happen ; that he have endeavoure all he could to prevent it
it the moment he be acquaint with he cloth , and greatly commend the courage of he servant , for so he imagine to be . he then invite to dinner , and desire the young woman might come with he . refuse a long while ; but the invitation be repeat with so much earnestness and courtesy , that at length he be force to accept it . he wig and hat , and other spoils of the field , be gather together by ( for otherwise probably they would have be forget ) , he put himself into the best order he could ; and then the horse and foot move forward in the same pace towards the squire 's house , which stand at a very little distance . whilst they be on the road the lovely attract the eye of all : they endeavoure to outvie one another in encomium on she beauty ; which the reader will pardon my not relate , as they have not anything new or uncommon in they : so must he likewise my not set down the many curiious jest which be make on Adams ; some of they declare that parson - hunting be the best sport in the world ; other commend he stand at , which they say he have do as well as any badger ; with such like merriment , which , though it would ill become the dignity of this history , afforde much laughter and diversion to the squire and he facetious companion . . _a scene of roasting , very nicly adapt to the present taste and time ._ they arrive at the squire 's house just as he dinner be ready . a little dispute arise on the account of , whom the squire , who be a bachelor , be desirous to place at he own table ; but she would not consent , nor would permit she to be part from ; so that she be at length with he consign over to the kitchen , where the servants be order to make he drink ; a favour which be likewise intend for Adams ; which design be execute , the squire think he should easily accomplish what he have when he first see she intend to perpetrate with . it may not be improper , before we proceed farther , to open a little the character of this gentleman , and that of he friend . the master of this house , then , be a man of a very considerable fortune ; a bachelor , as we have say , and about forty year of age : he have be educate ( if we may use the expression ) in the country , and at he own home , under the care of he mother , and a tutor who have order never to correct he , nor to compel he to learn more than he like , which it seem be very little , and that only in he childhood ; for from the age of fifteen he addict himself entirely to hunt and other rural amusement , for which he mother take care to equip he with horse , hound , and all other necessary ; and he tutor , endeavour to ingratiate himself with he young pupil , who would , he know , be able handsomely to provide for he , become he companion , not only at these exercise , but likewise over a bottle , which the young squire have a very early relish for . at the age of twenty he mother begin to think she have not fulfil the duty of a parent ; she therefore resolve to persuade she son , if possible , to that which she imagine would well supply all that he might have learn at a public school or university -- this be what they commonly call travel ; which , with the help of the tutor , who be fix on to attend he , she easily succeed in . he make in three year the tour of , as they term it , and return home well furnish with french clothes , phrase , and servants , with a hearty contempt for he own country ; especially what have any savour of the plain spirit and honesty of we ancestor . he mother greatly applaude herself at he return . and now , be master of he own fortune , he soon procure himself a seat in parliament , and be in the common opinion one of the finest gentleman of he age : but what distinguished he chiefly be a strange delight which he take in everything which be ridiculous , odious , and absurd in he own species ; so that he never choose a companion without one or more of these ingredient , and those who be mark by nature in the most eminent degree with they be most he favourite . if he ever find a man who either have not , or endeavoure to conceal , these imperfection , he take great pleasure in invent methods of force he into absurdity which be not natural to he , or in draw forth and expose those that be ; for which purpose he be always provide with a set of fellow , whom we have before call curs , and who do , indeed , no great honour to the canine kind ; they business be to hunt out and display everything that have any savour of the above -mentioned quality , and especially in the gravest and best character ; but if they fail in they search , they be to turn even virtue and wisdom themselves into ridicule , for the diversion of they master and feeder . the gentleman of curlike disposition who be now at he house , and whom he have brotch with he
he from , were , a old half - pay officer , a player , a dull poet , a quack - doctor , a scraping fiddler , and a lame german dancing - master . as soon as dinner be serve , while be say , the convey he chair from behind he ; so that when he endeavoure to seat himself he fall down on the ground , and this complete joke the first , to the great entertainment of the whole company . the second joke be perform by the poet , who sit next he on the other side , and take a opportunity , while poor be respectfully drink to the master of the house , to overturn a plate of soup into he breech ; which , with the many apology he make , and the parson 's gentle answer , cause much mirth in the company . joke the third be serve up by one of the waiting - man , who have be order to convey a quantity of gin into 's ale , which he declare to be the best liquor he ever drank , but rather too rich of the malt , contribute again to they laughter . , from whom we have most of this relation , could not recollect all the jest of this kind practise on he , which the inoffensive disposition of he own heart make he slow in discovering ; and indeed , have it not be for the information which we receive from a servant of the family , this part of we history , which we take to be none of the least curious , must have be deplorably imperfect ; though we must own it probable that some more joke be ( as they call it ) cracke during they dinner ; but we have by no means be able to come at the knowledge of they . when dinner be remove , the poet begin to repeat some verse , which , he say , be make extempore . the follow be a copy of they , procure with the greatest difficulty :-- _An extempore Poem on parson Adam ._ do ever mortal such a parson view ? he cassock old , he wig not over -new , well might the hound have he for fox mistaken , in smell more like to that than rusty bacon [ ] ; but would it not make any mortal stare to see this parson take for a hare ? could err thus grossly , even he for a good player might have take thee . [ ] all hound that will hunt fox or other vermin will hunt a piece of rusty bacon trail on the ground . at which word the bard whipt off the player 's wig , and receive the approbation of the company , rather perhaps for the dexterity of he hand than he head . the player , instead of retort the jest on the poet , begin to display he talents on the same subject . he repeat many scrap of wit out of play , reflect on the whole body of the clergy , which be receive with great acclamation by all present . it be now the dancing - master 's turn to exhibit he talents ; he therefore , address himself to Adam in broken , tell he , " he be a man ver well make for dance , and he suppose by he walk that he have learn of some great master . " he say , " it be ver pretty quality in clergyman to dance ; " and conclude with desire he to dance a minuet , tell he , " he cassock would serve for petticoat ; and that he would himself be he partner . " at which word , without wait for a answer , he pull out he glove , and the fiddler be prepare he fiddle . the company all offer the dancing - master wager that the parson out - dance he , which he refuse , say " he believe so too , for he have never see any man in he life who look de dance so well as : " he then step forwards to take Adams by the hand , which the latter hastily withdrew , and , at the same time clench he fist , advise he not to carry the jest too far , for he would not endure be put upon . the dancing - master no sooner see the fist than he prudently retire out of its reach , and stand aloon , mimick Adams , whose eye be fix on he , not guess what he be at , but to avoid he lay hold on he , which he have once attempt . in the meanwhile , the captain , perceive a opportunity , pin a cracker or devil to the cassock , and then light it with they little smoking - candle . Adam , be a stranger to this sport , and believe he have be blow up in reality , start from he chair , and jump about the room , to the infinite joy of the beholder , who declare he be the best dancer in the universe . as soon as the have do torment he , and he have a little recover he confusion , he return to the table , stand up in the posture of one who intend to make a speech . they all cry out , " hear he , hear he ; " and he then speak in the follow manner : " sir , I be sorry to see one to whom Providence hath be so bountiful in bestow he favour make so ill and ungrateful a return for they ; for , though you have not insult I yourself , it be
be visible you have delighte in those that do it , nor have once discourage the many rudeness which have be show towards I ; indeed , towards yourself , if you rightly understand they ; for I be you guest , and by the law of hospitality entitle to you protection . one gentleman have think proper to produce some poetry upon I , of which I shall only say , that I have rather be the subject than the composer . he hath please to treat I with disrespect as a parson . I apprehend my order be not the subject of scorn , nor that I can become so , unless by be a disgrace to it , which I hope poverty will never be call . another gentleman , indeed , hath repeat some sentence , where the order itself be mention with contempt . he say they be take from play . I be sure such play be a scandal to the government which permit they , and curse will be the nation where they be represent . how other have treat I I need not observe ; they themselve , when they reflect , must allow the behaviour to be as improper to my year as to my cloth . you find I , sir , travel with two of my parishioner ( I omit you hound fal on I ; for I have quite forgive it , whether it proceed from the wantonness or negligence of the huntsman ) : my appearance might very well persuade you that you invitation be a act of charity , though in reality we be well provide ; yes , sir , if we have have a hundred mile to travel , we have sufficient to bear we expense in a noble manner . " ( at which word he produce the half - guinea which be find in the basket . ) " I do not show you this out of ostentation of riche , but to convince you I speak truth . you seat I at you table be a honour which I do not ambitiously affect . when I be here , I endeavoure to behave towards you with the utmost respect ; if I have fail , it be not with design ; nor could I , certainly , so far be guilty as to deserve the insult I have suffer . if they be mean , therefore , either to my order or my poverty ( and you see I be not very poor ) , the shame doth not lie at my door , and I heartily pray that the sin may be avert from yours . " he thus finish , and receive a general clap from the whole company . then the gentleman of the house tell he , " he be sorry for what have happen ; that he could not accuse he of any share in it ; that the verse be , as himself have well observed , so bad , that he might easily answer they ; and for the serpent , it be undoubtedly a very great affro not do he by the dancing - master , for which , if he well thrash he , as he deserv , he should be very much pleased to see it " ( in which , probably , he speak truth ) . Adam answer , " whoever have do it , it be not he profession to punish he that way ; but for the person whom he have accuse , I be a witness , " say he , " of he innocence ; for I have my eye on he all the while . whoever he be , God forgive he , and bestow on he a little more sense as well as humanity . " the answer with a surly look and accent , " that he hope he do not mean to reflect upon he ; -- and he , he have as much imanity as another , and , if any man say he have not , he would convince he of he mistake by cut he throat . " Adam , smile , say , " he believe he have speak right by accident . " to which the captain return , " what do you mean by my speak right ? if you be not a parson , I would not take these word ; but you gown protect you . if any man who wear a sword have say so much , I have pull he by the nose before this . " Adam reply , " if he attempt any rudeness to he person , he would not find any protection for himself in he gown ; " and , clench he fist , declare " he have thrash many a stouter man . " the gentleman do all he could to encourage this warlike disposition in , and be in hope to have produce a battle , but he be disappoint ; for the captain make no other answer than , " it be very well you be a parson ; " and so , drink off a bumper to old mother , end the dispute . then the doctor , who have hitherto be silent , and who be the gravest but most mischievous dog of all , in a very pompous speech highly applaude what Adams have say , and as much discommend the behaviour to he . he proceed to encomium on the Church and poverty ; and , lastly , recommend forgiveness of what have pass to , who immediately answer , " that everything be forgive ; " and in the warmth of he goodness he fill a bumper of strong beer ( a liquor he prefer to wine ) , and drank a health to the whole company , shak
shak the captain and the poet heartily by the hand , and address himself with great respect to the doctor ; who , indeed , have not laugh outwardly at anything that past , as he have a perfect command of he muscle , and could laugh inwardly without betraie the least symptom in he countenance . the doctor now begin a second formal speech , in which he declaim against all levity of conversation , and what be usually call mirth . he say , " there be amusement fit for person of all age and degree , from the rattle to the discuss a point of philosophy ; and that man discover themselves in nothing more than in the choice of they amusement ; for , " say he , " as it must greatly raise we expectation of the future conduct in life of boy whom in they tender year we perceive , instead of taw or ball , or other childish plaything , to chuse , at they leisure hour , to exercise they genius in contention of wit , learn , and such like ; so must it inspire one with equal contempt of a man , if we should discover he play at taw or other childish play . " Adams highly commend the doctor 's opinion , and say , " he have often wonder at some passage in ancient author , where , , and other great man be represent to have pass many hour in amusement of the most trifling kind . " the doctor reply , " he have by he a old greek manuscript where a favourite diversion of be record . " " ay ! " say the parson eagerly ; " I should be most infinitely oblige to you for the favour of peruse it . " the doctor promise to send it he , and farther say , " that he believe he could describe it . I think , " say he , " as near as I can remember , it be this : there be a throne erect , on one side of which sit a king and on the other a queen , with they guard and attendant range on both side ; to they be introduce a ambassador , which pbe Socrate always used to perform himself ; and when he be lead up to the footstep of the throne he address himself to the monarch in some grave speech , full of virtue , and goodness , and morality , and such like . after which , he be seat between the king and queen , and royally entertained . this I think be the chief part . perhaps I may have forget some particular ; for it be long since I read it . " Adam say , " it be , indeed , a diversion worthy the relaxation of so great a man ; and think something resembl it should be institute among we great man , instead of card and other idle pastime , in which , he be inform , they trifle away too much of they life . " he add , " the religion be a nobler subject for these speech than any could have invent . " the gentleman of the house approve what say , and declare " he be resolve to perform the ceremony this very evening . " to which the doctor object , as no one be prepare with a speech , " unless , " say he ( turn to Adams with a gravity of countenance which would have deceive a more knowing man ) , " you have a sermon about you , doctor . " " , " say , " I never travel without one , for fear of what may happen . " he be easily prevail on by he worthy friend , as he now call the doctor , to undertake the part of the ambassador ; so that the gentleman send immediate order to have the throne erect , which be perform before they have drank two bottle ; and , perhaps , the reader will hereafter have no great reason to admire the nimbleness of the servants . indeed , to confess the truth , the throne be no more than this : there be a great tub of water provide , on each side of which be place two stool raise higher than the surface of the tub , and over the whole be laid a blanket ; on these stool be place the king and queen , namely , the master of the house and the captain . and now the ambassador be introduce between the poet and the doctor ; who , have read he sermon , to the great entertainment of all present , be lead up to he place and seat between they majesty . they immediately rise up , when the blanket , want its support at either end , give way , and souse Adams over head and ear in the water . the captain make he escape , but , unluckily , the gentleman himself not be as nimble as he ought , catch hold of he before he descende from he throne , and pull he in with he , to the entire secret satisfaction of all the company . Adams , after duck the squire twice or thrice , leapt out of the tub , and look sharp for the doctor , whom he would certainly have convey to the same place of honou ; but he have wisely withdraw : he then search for he crabstick , and have find that , as well as he fellow traveller , he declare he would not stay a moment longer in such a house . he then depart , without take leave of he host , whom he have exact a more severe
severe revenge on than he intend ; for , as he do not use sufficient care to dry himself in time , he catch a cold by the accident which throw he into a fever that have like to have cost he he life . . which some reader will think too short and other too long ._ Adams , and , who be no less enrage than he friend at the treatment he meet with , go out with they stick in they hand , and carry off , notwithstand the opposition of the servants , who do all , without proceeding to violence , in they power to detain they . they walk as fast as they could , not so much from any apprehension of be pursue as that might , by exercise , prevent any harm from the water . the gentleman , who have give such order to he servants concern Fanny that he do not in the least fear she get away , no sooner hear that she be go , than he begin to rave , and immediately despatch several with order either to bring she back or never return . the poet , the player , and all but the dancing - master and doctor , go on this errand . the night be very dark in which we friend begin they journey ; however , they make such expedition , that they soon arrive at a inn which be at seven mile ' distance . here they unanimously consent to pass the evening , be now as dry as he be before he have set out on he embassy . this inn , which indeed we might call a ale - house , have not the word , the , be writ on the sign , afforde they no better provision than bread and cheese and ale ; on which , however , they make a very comfortable meal ; for hunger be better than a french cook . they have no sooner supped , than Adams , return thanks to the for he food , declare he have eat he homely common with much greater satisfaction than he splendid dinner ; and express great contempt for the folly of mankind , who sacrifice they hope of heaven to the acquisition of vast wealth , since so much comfort be to be find in the humblest state and the lowest provision . " very true , sir , " say a grave man who sit smoak he pipe by the fire , and who be a traveller as well as himself . " I have often be as much surprize as you be , when I consider the value which mankind in general set on riche , since every day 's experience show we how little be in they power ; for what , indeed , truly desirable , can they bestow on we ? can they give beauty to the deform , strength to the weak , or health to the infirm ? surely if they could we should not see so many ill - favoured face haunt the assemblie of the great , nor would such number of feeble wretch languish in they coach and palace . no , not the wealth of a kingdom can purchase any paint to dress pale Ugliness in the bloom of that young maiden , nor any drug to equip disease with the vigour of that young man . do not rich bring we to solicitude instead of rest , envy instead of affection , and danger instead of safety ? can they prolong they own possession , or lengthan he day who enjoy they ? so far otherwise , that the sloth , the luxury , the care which attend they , shorten the life of million , and bring they with pain and misery to a untimely grave . where , then , be they value if they can neither embellish nor strengthen we form , sweeten nor prolong we life a?--Again : can they adorn the mind more than the body ? do they not rather swell the heart with vanity , puff up the cheek with pride , shut we ear to every call of virtue , and we bowel to every motive of compassion ? " " give I you hand , brother , " say , in a rapture , " for I suppose you be a clergyman . " -- " no , truly , " answer the other ( indeed , he be a priest of the of ; but those who understand we law will not wonder he be not over -ready to own it ) .--" whatever you be , " cry , " you have speak my sentiment : I believe I have preach every syllable of you speech twenty time over ; for it hath always appear to I easier for a cable - rope ( which by the way be the true rendering of that word we have translate camel ) to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to get into the kingdom of heaven . " -- " that , sir , " say the other , " will be easily grant you by divine , and be deplorably true ; but as the prospect of we good at a distance doth not so forcibly affect we , it might be of some service to mankind to be make thoroughly sensible -- which I think they might be with very little serious attention -- that even the blessing of this world be not to be purchase with riche ; a doctrine , in my opinion , not only metaphysically , but , if I may so say , mathematically demonstrable ; and which I have be always so perfectly convinced of that I have a contempt for nothing so much as for gold .
. " Adams now begin a long discourse : but as most which he say occur among many author who have treat this subject , I shall omin insert it . during its continuance and retir to rest , and the host likewise leave the room . when the english parson have conclude , the resum the discourse , which he continue with great bitterness and invective ; and at last end by desire Adams to lend he eighteen - pence to pay he reckoning ; promise , if he never pay he , he might be assure of he prayer . the good man answer that eighteen - pence would be too little to carry he any very long journey ; that he have half a guinea in he pocket , which he would divide with he . he then fall to search he pocket , but could find no money ; for indeed the company with whom he dine have pass one jest upon he which we do not then enumerate , and have pick he pocket of all that treasure which he have so ostentatiously produce . " bless I ! " cry , " I have certainly lose it ; I can never have spend it . , as I be a , I have a whole half - guinea in my pocket this morning , and have not now a single halfpenny of it leave . sure the must have take it from I ! " --" , " answer the priest , smile , " you need make no excuse ; if you be not willing to lend I the money , I be contente . " --" , " cry Adams , " if I have the greatest sum in the world -- aye , if I have ten pound about I -- I would bestow it all to rescue any from distress . I be more vex at my loss on you account than my own . be ever anything so unlucky ? because I have no money in my pocket I shall be suspect to be no . " --" I be more unlucky , " quoth the other , " if you be as generous as you say ; for really a crown would have make I happy , and convey I in plenty to the place I be go , which be not above twenty mile off , and where I can arrive by to - morrow night . I assure you I be not accustom to travel pennyless . I be but just arrive in ; and we be force by a storm in we passage to throw all we have overboard . I do not suspect but this fellow will take my word for the trifle I owe he ; but I hate to appear so mean as to confess myself without a shilling to such people ; for these , and indeed too many other , know little difference in they estimation between a beggar and a thief . " however , he think he should deal better with the host that even than the next morning : he therefore resolve to set out immediately , notwithstand the darkness ; and accordingly , as soon as the host return , he communicate to he the situation of he affair ; upon which the host , scratch he head , answer , " why , I do not know , master ; if it be so , and you have no money , I must trust , I think , though I have rather always have ready money if I could ; but , marry , you look like so honest a gentleman that I do not fear you pay I if it be twenty time as much . " the priest make no reply , but , take leave of he and as fast as he could , not without confusion , and perhaps with some distrust of 's sincerity , depart . he be no sooner gone than the host fall a - shak he head , and declare , if he have suspect the fellow have no money , he would not have draw he a single drop of drink , say he despair of ever see he face again , for that he look like a confounded rogue . " rabbit the fellow , " cry he , " I think , by he talking so much about riche , that he have a hundred pound at least in he pocket . " Adams chide he for he suspicion , which , he say , be not become a ; and then , without reflec on he loss , or consider how he himself should depart in the morning , he retire to a very homely bed , as he companion have before ; however , health and fatigue give they a sweeter repose than be often in the power of velvet and down to bestow . . _Contain as surprizing and bloody adventur as can be find in this or perhaps any other authentic history ._ it be almost morning when , whose eye the thought of he dear have open , as he lay fondly meditating on that lovely creature , hear a violent knocking at the door over which he lay . he presently jump out of bed , and , open the window , be ask if there be no traveller in the house ? and presently , by another voice , if two man and a woman have not take up there they lod that night ? though he know not the voice , he begin to entertain a suspicion of the truth -- for indeed he have receive some information from one of the servants of the squire 's house of he design -- and answer in the negative . one of the servant , who know the
the host well , call out to he by he name just as he have open another window , and ask he the same question ; to which he answer in the affirmative . of ho ! say another , have we find you ? and order the host to come down and open he door . , who be as wakeful as , no sooner hear all this than she leape from she bed , and , hastily put on she gown and petticoat , run as fast as possible to 's room , who then be almost drest . he immediately let she in , and , embrace she with the most passionate tenderness , bid she fear nothing , for he would die in she defence . " be that a reason why I should not fear , " say she , " when I should lose what be dearer to I than the whole world ? " , then kiss she hand , say , " he could almost thank the occasion which have extort from she a tenderness she would never indulge he with before . " he then run and wake he bedfellow , who be yet fast asleep , notwithstand many call from ; but be no sooner make sensible of they danger than he leape from he bed , without consider the presence of , who hastily turn she face from he , and enjoy a double benefit from the dark , which , as it would have prevent any offence , to a innocence less pure , or a modesty less delicate , so it conceal even those blush which be raise in she . Adam have soon put on all he clothes but he breech , which , in the hurry , he forget ; however , they be pretty well supply by the length of he other garment ; and now , the house - door be open , the captain , the poet , the player , and three servants come in . the captain tell the host that two fellow , who be in he house , have run away with a young woman , and desire to know in which room she lay . the host , who presently believe the story , direct they , and instantly the captain and poet , just one another , run up . the poet , who be the nimblest , enter the chamber first , search the bed , and every other part , but to no purpose ; the bird be fly , as the impatient reader , who might otherwise have be in pain for she , be before advertise . they then enquire where the man lay , and be approach the chamber , when roar out , in a loud voice , that he would shoot the first man who offer to attack the door . the enquire what fire - arm they have ; to which the host answer , he believe they have none ; nay , he be almost convinced of it , for he have hear one ask the other in the evening what they should have do if they have be overtake , when they have no arm ; to which the other answer , they would have defend themselves with they stick as long as they be able , and would assist a just cause . this satisfie the captain , but not the poet , who prudently retreate downstairs , say , it be he business to record great action , and not to do they . the captain be no sooner well satisfied that there be no fire - arm than , bid defiance to gunpowder , and swear he love the smell of it , he order the servants to follow he , and , march boldly up , immediately attempt to force the door , which the servants soon help he to accomplish . when it be open , they discover the enemy draw up three deep ; Adam in the front , and in the rear . the tell that if they would go all back to the house again they should be civilly treat ; but unless they consent he have order to carry the young lady with he , whom there be great reason to believe they have steal from she parent ; for , notwithstand she disguise , she air , which she could not conceal , sufficiently discover she birth to be infinitely superior to theirs . Fanny , burst into tear , solemnly assure he he be mistaken ; that she be a poor helpless foundling , and have no relation in the world which she know of ; and , throw herself on she knee , beg that he would not attempt to take she from she friend , who , she be convinced , would die before they would lose she ; which confirm with word not far from amount to a oath . the captain swore he have no leisure to talk , and , bid they thank themselves for what happen , he order the servants to fall on , at the same time endeavour to pass by , in order to lay hold on ; but the parson , interrupt he , receive a blow from one of they , which , without consider whence it come , he return to the captain , and give he so dexterous a knock in that part of the stomach which be vulgarly call the pit , that he stagger some pace backward . the captain , who be not accustom to this kind of play , and who wisely apprehend the consequence of such another blow , two of they see to he equal to a thrust through the body , draw forth he hanger , as approach he , and be level a blow at
at he head , which would probably have silence the preacher for ever , have not in that instant lift up a certain huge stone pot of the chamber with one hand , which six beaus could not have lift with both , and discharge it , together with the contents , full in the captain 's face . the uplifted hanger drop from he hand , and he fall prostrate on the floor with a lumpish noise , and he halfpence rattle in he pocket ; the red liquor which he vein contain , and the white liquor which the pot contain , run in one stream down he face and he clothes . have quite escape , some of the water have in its passage she its honour on he head , and begin to trickle down the wrinkle or rather furrow of he cheek , when one of the servants , snatch a mop out of a pail of water , which have already do its duty in wash the house , push it in the parson 's face ; yet could not he bear he down , for the parson , wrest the mop from the fellow with one hand , with the other bring he enemy as low as the earth , have give he a stroke over that part of the face where , in some man of pleasure , the natural and artificial nos be conjoin . , seem to incline the victory on the traveller ' side , when , accord to she custom , she begin to show the fickleness of she disposition ; for now the host , enter the field , or rather chamber of battle , fly directly at , and , dart he head into he stomach ( for he be a stout fellow and a expert boxer ) , almost stagger he : but , step one leg back , do with he left hand so chick he under the ching that he reel . the youth be pursue he blow with he right hand when he receive from one of the servants such a stroke with a cudgel on he temple , that it instantly deprive he of sense , and he measure he length on the ground . rent the air with she cry , and be come to the assistance of ; but the two serving - man and the host now fall on he , and soon subdue he , though he fight like a madman , and look so black with the impressions he have receive from the mop , that would certainly have take he for a inchanted Moor . but now follow the most tragical part ; for the captain be risen again , and , see on the floor , and secure , he instantly laid hold on , and , with the assistance of the poet and player , who , hear the battle be over , be now come up , drag she , cry and tear she hair , from the sight of she , and , with a perfect deafness to all she entreaty , carry she downstair by violence , and fasten she on the player 's horse ; and the captain , mount he own , and lead that on which this poor miserable wretch be , depart , without any more consideration of she cry than a butcher hath of those of a lamb ; for indeed he thought be entertain only with the degree of favour which he promise himself from the squire on the success of this adventure . the servant , who be order to secure and as safe as possible , that the squire might receive no interruption to he design on poor Fanny , immediately , by the poet 's advice , tie Adam to one of the bed - post , as they do on the other side , as soon as they could bring he to himself ; and then , leave they together , back to back , and desire the host not to set they at liberty , nor to go near they , till he have further order , they depart towards they master ; but happen to take a different road from that which the captain have fall into . . _A discourse between the poet and the player ; of no other use in this history but to divert the reader ._ before we proceed any farther in this tragedy we shall leave and to themselves , and imitate the wise conductor of the stage , who in the midst of a grave action entertain you with some excellent piece of satire or humwe call a dance . which piece , indeed , be therefore danced , and not speak , as it be deliver to the audience by person whose think faculty be by most people hold to lie in they heel ; and to whom , as well as heroe , who think with they hand , hath only give head for the sake of conformity , and as they be of use in dancing , to hang they hat on . the poet , address the player , proceed thus , " as I be say " ( for they have be at this discourse all the time of the engagement above - stair ) , " the reason you have no good new play be evident ; it be from you discouragement of author . gentlemen will not write , sir , they will not write , without the expectation of fame or profit , or perhaps both . play be like tree , which will not grow without nourishment ; but like mushroom , they shoot up spontaneously , as it be , in a rich soil . the muse , like vine , may be prune , but not with a hatchet . the
the town , like a peevish child , know not what it desire , and be always best pleas with a rattle . a farce - writer hath indeed some chance for success : but they have lose all taste for the sublime . though I believe one reason of they depravity be the badness of the actor . if a man write like a angel , sir , those fellow know not how to give a sentiment utterance . " -- " not so fast , " say the player : " the modern actor be as good at least as they author , nay , they come nearer they illustrious predecessor ; and I expect a on the stage again , sooner than a or a Otway ; and indeed I may turn you observation against you , and with truth say , that the reason no author be encourage be because we have no good new play . " --" I have not affir the contrary , " say the poet ; " but I be surprize you grow so warm ; you can not imagine yourself interested in this dispute ; I hope you have a better opinion of my taste than to apprehend I squint at yourself . no , sir , if we have six such actor as you , we should soon rival the Bettertons and Sandfords of former time ; for , without a compliment to you , I think it impossible for any one to have excel you in most of you part . Nay , it be solemn truth , and I have hear many , and all great judge , express as much ; and , you will pardon I if I tell you , I think every time I have see you lately you have constantly acquire some new excellence , like a snowball . you have deceive I in my estimation of perfection , and have outdone what I think inimitable . " --" you be as little interested , " answer the player , " in what I have say of other poet ; for -- and I if there be not many stroke , ay , whole scene , in you last tragedy , which at least equal . there be a delicacy of sentiment , a dignity of expression in it , which I will own many of we gentleman do not do adequate justice to . to confess the truth , they be bad enough , and I pity a author who be present at the murder of he work . " -- " Nay , it be but seldom that it can happen , " return the poet ; " the work of most modern author , like dead - bear child , can not be murder . it be such wretch half - begotten , half - writ , lifeless , spiritless , low , grovell stuff , that I almost pity the actor who be obliged to get it by heart , which must be almost as difficult to remember as word in a language you do not understand . " --" I be sure , " say the player , " if the sentences have little meaning when they be writ , when they be speak they have less . I know scarce one who ever lay a emphasis right , and much less adapt he action to he character . I have see a tender lover in a attitude of fight with he mistress , and a brave hero sue to he enemy with he sword in he hand . I do not care to abuse my profession , but rot I if in my heart I be not inclin to the poet 's side . " --" it be rather generous in you than just , " say the poet ; " and , though I hate to speak ill of any person 's production -- nay , I never do it , nor will -- but yet , to do justice to the actor , what could or have make of such horrible stuff as 's , 's , or 's ; or those low , dirty , last - dying - speech , which a fellow in the city of , you or , what be he name , call tragedy ? " --" very well , " say the player ; " and pray what do you think of such fellows as and , or that face - make puppy yong , that ill - look dog , or that saucy slut ? what work would they make with you Shakespears , Otways , and ? how would those harmonious line of the last come from they tongue ?-- " ' -- no more ; for I disdain all pomp when thou be by : far be the noise of king and crown from we , whose gentle soul we kinder fate have steer ' another way . free as the forest bird we will pair together , without rememb'r who we fathers be : fly to the arbor , grot , and flow 'ry mead ; there in soft murmur interchange we soul ; together drink the crystal of the stream , or taste the yellow fruit which autumn yield , and , when the golden evening call we home , we to we downy nests , and sleep till morn . ' " or how would this disdain of -- " ' who would be that foolish sordo the call have man ? ' " " hold ! hold ! hold ! " say the poet : " do repeat that tender speech in the third act of my play which you make such a figure in . " --" I would willingly , " say the player , " but I have forget it . " -- " ay , you be
be not quite perfect in it when you play it , " cry the poet , " or you would have have such a applause as be never give on the stage ; a applause I be extremely concerned for you losing . " --" sure , " say the player , " if I remember , that be hiss more than any passage in the whole play . " -- " ay , you speak it be hiss , " say the poet .--" my speak it ! " say the player .--" I mean you not speak it , " say the poet . " you be out , and then they hiss . " --" they hiss , and then I be out , if I remember , " answer the player ; " and I must say this for myself , that the whole audience allow I do you part justice ; so do not lay the damnation of you play to my account . " --" I do not know what you mean by damnation , " reply the poet .--" why , you know it be act but one night , " cry the player .-- " no , " say the poet , " you and the whole town be enemy ; the pit be all my enemy , fellow that would cut my throat , if the fear of hang do not restrain they . all taylor , sir , all taylor . " --" why should the taylor be so angry with you ? " cry the player . " I suppose you do not employ so many in make you clothes . " --" I admit you jest , " answer the poet ; " but you remember the affair as well as myself ; you know there be a party in the pit and upper gallery that would not suffer it to be give out again ; though much , ay infinitely , the majority , all the box in particular , be desirous of it ; nay , most of the ladie swore they never would come to the house till it be act again . indeed , I must own they policy be good in not let it be give out a second time : for the rascal know if it have go a second night it would have run fifty ; for if ever there be distress in a tragedy -- I be not fond of my own performance ; but if I should tell you what the best judge say of it -- be it entirely owe to my enemy neither that it do not succeed on the stage as well as it hath since among the polite reader ; for you can not say it have justice do it by the performer . " --" I think , " answer the player , " the performer do the distress of it justice ; for I be sure we be in distress enough , who be pelt with orange all the last act : we all imagine it would have be the last act of we life . " the poet , whose fury be now raise , have just attempt to answer when they be interrupt , and a end put to they discourse , by a accident , which if the reader be impatient to know , he must skip over the next chapter , which be a sort of counterpart to this , and contain some of the best and gravest matter in the whole book , be a discourse between parson and . . _Contain the exhortation of parson Adam to he friend in affliction ; calculate for the instruction and improvement of the reader ._ Joseph no sooner come perfectly to himself than , perceive he mistress go , he bewail she loss with groan which would have pierce any heart but those which be possess by some people , and be make of a certain composition not unlike flint in its hardness and other property ; for you may strike fire from they , which will dart through the eyes , but they can never distill one drop of water the same way . he own , poor youth ! be of a softer composition ; and at those word , " of my dear Fanny ! of my love ! shall I never , never see thee more ? " he eye overflow with tear , which would have become any but a hero . in a word , he despair be more easy to be conceive than relate . , after many groans , sit with he back to , begin thus in a sorrowful tone : " you can not imagine , my good child , that I entirely blame these first agony of you grief ; for , when misfortunes attack we by surprize , it must require infinitely more learn than you be master of to resist they ; but it be the business of a man and a to summon as quickly as he can to he aid ; and she will presently teach he patience and submission . be comforte , therefore , child ; I say be comforte . it be true , you have lose the prettiest , kindest , loveliest , sweetest young woman , one with whom you might have expect to have live in happiness , virtue , and innocence ; by whom you might have promise yourself many little darling , who would have be the delight of you youth and the comfort of you age . you have not only lose she , but have reason to fear the utmost violence which lust and power can inflict upon she . now , indeed , you may easily raise idea of horror , which might drive you to despairespect " -- " o I shall run mad
mad ! " cry . " o that I could but command my hand to tear my eye out and my flesh off ! " --" if you would use they to such purpose , I be glad you can not , " answer . " I have state you misfortune as strong as I possibly can ; but , on the other side , you be to consider you be a , that no accident happen to we without the permission , and that it be the duty of a man , and a , to submit . we do not make ourselves ; but the same power which make we rule over we , and we be absolutely at he disposal ; he may do with we what he please , nor have we any right to complain . a second reason against we complaint be we ignorance ; for , as we know not future event , so neither can we tell to what purpose any accident tend ; and that which at first threaten we with evil may in the end produce we good . I should indeed have say we ignorance be twofold ( but I have not at present time to divide properly ) , for , as we know not to what purpose any event be ultimately direct , so neither can we affirm from what cause it originally spring . you be a man , and consequently a sinner ; and this may be a punishment to you for you sins : indeed in this sense it may be esteem as a good , yea , as the greatest good , which satisfy the anger of , and avert that wrath which can not continue without we destruction . thirdly , we impotency of relieving ourselves demonstrate the folly and absurdity of we complaint : for whom do we resist , or against whom do we complain , but a power from whose shaft no armour can guard we , no speed can fly ?-- a power which leave we no hope but in submission . " " of sir ! " cry , " all this be very true , and very fine , and I could hear you all day if I be not so grieve at heart as now I be . " -- " would you take physic , " say Adams , " when you be well , and refuse it when you be sick ? be not comfort to be administer to the afflict , and not to those who rejoice or those who be at ease ? " " o ! you have not speak one word of comfort to I yet ! " return . " no ! " cry Adams ; " what be I then do ? what can I say to comfort you ? " " o tell I , " cry , " that Fanny will escape back to my arm , that they shall again enclose that lovely creature , with all she sweetness , all she untainted innocence about she ! " " why , perhaps you may , " cry Adams , " but I can not promise you what be to come . you must , with perfect resignation , wait the event : if she be restore to you again , it be you duty to be thankful , and so it be if she be not . , if you be wise and truly know you own interest , you will peaceably and quietly submit to all the dispensation of Providence , be thoroughly assure that all the misfortune , how great soever , which happen to the righteous , happen to they for they own good . Nay , it be not you interest only , but you duty , to abstain from immoderate grief ; which if you indulge , you be not worthy the name of a . " he speak these last word with a accent a little severer than usual ; upon which beg he not to be angry , say , he mistake he if he think he deny it be he duty , for he have know that long ago . " what signify know you duty , if you do not perform it ? " answer . " you knowledge increase you guilt . of ! I never think you have this stubbornness in you mind . " reply , " he fancie he misunderstand he ; which I assure you , " say he , " you do , if you imagine I endeaavor to grieve ; upon my soul I do not . " Adams rebuk he for swear , and then proceed to enlarge on the folly of grief , tell he , all the wise man and philosopher , even among the heathen , have write against it , quote several passage from , and the Consolation , which , though it be not 's , be , he say , as good almost as any of he work ; and conclude all by hinting that immoderate grief in this case might incense that power which alone could restore he he Fanny . this reason , or indeed rather the idea which it raise of the restoration of he mistress , have more effect than all which the parson have say before , and for a moment abate he agony ; but , when he fear sufficiently set before he eye the danger that poor creature be in , he grief return again with repeat violence , nor could Adam in the least asswage it ; though it may be doubt in he behalf whether himself could have prevail any better . they remain some time in silence , and groan and sigh issue from they both ; at length burst out into the follow soliloquy :-- " yes , I will bear
bear my sorrow like a man , but I must also feel they as a man . I can not but remember such thing be , and be most dear to I . " Adams ask he what stuff that be he repeat ? to which he answer , they be some line he have get by heart out of a play . " ay , there be nothing but heathenism to be learn from play , " reply he . " I never hear of any play fit for a to read , but and the conscious lover ; and , I must own , in the latter there be some thing almost solemn enough for a sermon . " but we shall now leave they a little , and enquire after the subject of they conversation . . more adventure , which we hope will as much please as surprize the reader ._ neither the facetious dialogue which pass between the poet and the player , nor the grave and truly solemn discourse of , will , we conceive , make the reader sufficient amend for the anxiety which he must have feel on the account of poor , whom we leave in so deplorable a condition . we shall therefore now proceed to the relation of what happen to that beautiful and innocent virgin , after she fall into the wicked hand of the captain . the man of war , have convey he charming prize out of the inn a little before day , make the utmost expedition in he power towards the squire 's house , where this delicate creature be to be offer up a sacrifice to the lust of a ravisher . he be not only deaf to all she bewailing and entreaty on the road , but accost she ear with impurity which , have be never before accustom to they , she happily for herself very little understood . at last he change he note , and attempt to soothe and mollify she , by set forth the splendor and luxury which would be she fortune with a man who would have the inclination , and power too , to give she whatever she utmost wish could desire ; and tell she he doubt not but she would soon look kinder on he , as the instrument of she happiness , and despise that pitiful fellow whom she ignorance only could make she fond of . she answer , she know not whom he mean ; she never be fond of any pitiful fellow . " be you affront , madam , " say he , " at my call he so ? but what better can be say of one in a livery , notwithstand you fondness for he ? " she return , that she do not understand he , that the man have be she fellow - servant , and she believe be as honest a creature as any alive ; but as for fondness for man --" I warrant ye , " cry the captain , " we shall find means to persuade you to be fond ; and I advise you to yield to gentle one , for you may be assure that it be not in you power , by any struggle whatever , to preserve you virginity two hour longer . it will be you interest to consent ; for the squire will be much kinder to you if he enjoy you willingly than by force . " at which word she begin to call aloud for assistance ( for it be now open day ) , but , find none , she lift she eye to heave , and supplicate the assistance to preserve she innocence . the captain tell she , if she persist in she vociferation , he would find a means of stop she mouth . and now the poor wretch , perceive no hope of succou , abandon herself to despair , and , sigh out the name of ! ! a river of tear run down she lovely cheek , and wet the handkerchief which cover she bosom . a horseman now appear in the road , upon which the captain threaten she violently if she complain ; however , the moment they approached each other she beg he with the utmost earnestness to relieve a distressed creature who be in the hand of a ravisher . the fellow stopt at those word , but the assure he it be he wife , and that he be carry she home from she adulterer , which so satisfi the fellow , who be a old one ( and perhaps a married one too ) , that he wish he a good journey , and ride on . he be no sooner past than the abuse she violently for break he command , and threaten to gagg she , when two more horseman , arm with pistol , come into the road just before they . she again solicit they assistance , and the captain tell the same story as before . upon which one say to the other , " that be a charming wench , Jack ; I wish I have be in the fellow 's place , whoever he be . " but the other , instead of answer he , cry out , " Zound , I know she ; " and then , turn to she , say , " sure you be not Fanny ? " --" indeed , indeed , I be , " she cry -- " o , I know you now - heaven hath send you to my assistance , to deliver I from this wicked man , who be carry I away for he vile purpose -- of for 's sake rescue I from he ! " a fierce dialogue immediately ensue between the captain and these two man ,
, who , be both arm with pistol , and the chariot which they attend be now arrive , the captain saw both force and thstratagey be vain , and endeavoure to make he escape , in which however he could not succeed . the gentleman who ride in the chariot order it to stop , and with a air of authority examine into the merit of the cause ; of which be advertise by , whose credit be confirm by the fellow who know she , he order the captain , who be all bloody from he encounter at the inn , to be convey as a prisoner behind the chariot , and very gallantly take into it ; for , to say the truth , this gentleman ( who be no other than the celebrate , and who proceed the only a few mile , by set out earlier in the morning ) be a very gallant person , and love a pretty girl better than anything besides he own money or the money of other people . the chariot now proceed towards the inn , which , as be inform , lay in they way , and where it arrive at that very time while the poet and player be dispute below - stair , and and be discourse back to back above ; just at that period to which we bring they both in the two preceding chapter the chariot stopt at the door , and in a instant Fanny , leap from it , run up to she .-- of reader ! conceive if thou canst the joy which fire the breast of these lover on this meeting ; and if thy own heart doth not sympathetically assist thee in this conception , I pity thee sincerely from my own ; for let the hard - hear villain know this , that there be a pleasure in a tender sensation beyond any which he be capable of taste . , be inform by Fanny of the presence of , stopt to see he , and receive he homage ; for , as be a hypocrite , a sort of people whom never see through , the one pay that respect to he see goodness which the other believe to be pay to he riche ; hence be so much he favourite , that he once lent he four pound thirteen shilling and sixpence to prevent he go to gaol , on no greater security than a bond and judgment , which probably he would have make no use of , though the money have not be ( as it be ) pay exactly at the time . it be not perhaps easy to describe the figure of Adam ; he have risen in such a hurry , that he have on neither breech , garter , nor stocking ; nor have he take from he head a red spot handkerchief , which by night bound he wig , turn inside out , around he head . he have on he torn cassock and he greatcoat ; but , as the remainder of he cassock hang down below he greatcoat , so do a small stripe of white , or rather whitish , linen appear below that ; to which we may add the several colour which appear on he face , where a long piss - burnt beard serve to retain the liquor of the stone - pot , and that of a blacker hue which distill from the mop .-- this figure , which have deliver from he captivity , be no sooner spy by than it disorder the compose gravity of he muscle ; however , he advise he immediately to make himself clean , nor would accept he homage in that pickle . the poet and player no sooner see the captain in captivity than they begin to consider of they own safety , of which flight present itself as the only mean ; they therefore both of they mount the poet 's horse , and make the most expeditious retreat in they power . the host , who well know and 's livery , be not a little surprized at this change of the scene ; nor be he confusion much help by he wife , who be now just risen , and , have hear from he the account of what have pass , comforte he with a decent number of fool and blockhead ; ask he why he do not consult she , and tell he he would never leave follow the nonsensical dictate of he own numskull till she and she family be ruin . , be inform of the captain 's arrival , and see he Fanny now in safety , quit she a moment , and , run downstairs , go directly to he , and stripp off he coat , challenge he to fight ; but the captain refuse , say he do not understand boxing . he then grasp a cudgel in one hand , and , catch the captain by the collar with the other , give he a most severe drubbing , and end with tell he he have now have some revenge for what he dear Fanny have suffer . when have a little regale himself with some provision which he have in he chariot , and have put on the best appearance he clothes would allow he , order the captain into he presence , for he say he be guilty of felony , and the next justice of peace should commit he ; but the servants ( whose appetite for revenge be soon satisfied ) , be sufficiently contente with the drubbing which have inflict on he , and which be indeed of no very moderate kind , have suffer he to go off , which he do , threaten a severe revenge against , which I have never hear
hear he think proper to take . the mistress of the house make she voluntary appearance before , and with a thousand curtsy tell he , " she hope he honou would pardon she husband , who be a very nonsense man , for the sake of he poor family ; that indeed if he could be ruin alone , she should be very willing of it ; for because as why , he worship very well know he deserv it ; but she have three poor small child , who be not capable to get they own living ; and if she husband be send to gaol , they must all come to the parish ; for she be a poor weak woman , continually a - breeding , and have no time to work for they . she therefore hope he honou would take it into he worship 's consideration , and forgive she husband this time ; for she be sure he never intend any harm to man , woman , or child ; and if it be not for that block - head of he own , the man in some thing be well enough ; for she have have three child by he in less than three year , and be almost ready to cry out the fourth time . " she would have proceed in this manner much longer , have not stopt she tongue , by tell she he have nothing to say to she husband nor she neither . so , as Adams and the rest have assure she of forgiveness , she cry and curtsy out of the room . be desirous that should continue she journey with he in the chariot ; but she absolutely refuse , say she would ride behind on a horse which one of 's servants have equip he with . but , alas ! when the horse appear , it be find to be no other than that identical beast which have leave behind he at the inn , and which these honest fellow , who know he , have redeem . indeed , whatever horse they have provide for , they would have prevail with he to mount none , no , not even to ride before he belov Fanny , till the parson be supply ; much less would he deprive he friend of the beast which belong to he , and which he know the moment he see , though Adams do not ; however , when he be remind of the affair , and tell that they have bring the horse with they which he leave behind , he answer -- bless I ! and so I do . be very desirous that and should mound this horse , and declare he could very easily walk home . " if I walk alone , " say he , " I would wage a shilling that the pedestrian outstrip the equestrian traveller ; but , as I intend to take the company of a pipe , peradventure I may be a hour later . " one of the servant whisper to take he at he word , and suffer the old put to walk if he would : this proposal be answer with a angry look and a peremptory refusal by , who , catch Fanny up in he arm , averr he would rather carry she home in that manner , than take away 's horse and permit he to walk on foot . perhaps , reader , thou hast see a contest between two gentleman , or two lady , quickly decide , though they have both assert they would not eat such a nice morsel , and each insist on the other 's accept it ; but in reality both be very desirous to swallow it themselves . do not therefore conclude hence that this dispute would have come to a speedy decision : for here both party be heartily in earnest , and it be very probable they would have remain in the inn - yard to this day , have not the good put a stop to it ; for , finde he have no longer hope of satisfy he old appetite with , and be desirous of have some one to whom he might communicate he grandeur , he tell the parson he would convey he home in he chariot . this favour be by , with many bow and acknowledgment , accept , though he afterwards say , " he ascend the chariot rather that he might not offend than from any desire of ride in it , for that in he heart he prefer the pedestrian even to the vehicular expedition . " all matter be now settle , the chariot , in which ride and , move forwards ; and have borrowed a pillion from the host , have just seate herself thereon , and have laid hold of the girdle which she lover wore for that purpose , when the wise beast , who conclude that one at a time be sufficient , that two to one be odd , & c. , discover much uneasiness at he double load , and begin to consider he hinder as he fore leg , move the direct contrary way to that which be call forwards . could , with all he horsemanship , persuade he to advance ; but , without have any regard to the lovely part of the lovely girl which be on he back , he use such agitation , that , have not one of the man come immediately to she assistance , she have , in plain , tumble backward on the ground . this inconvenience be presently remedy by a exchange of horse ; and then Fanny be again place on she pillion , on a better - natured and somewhat a better - feed beast , the parson
parson 's horse , finde he have no longer odd to contend with , agree to march ; and the whole procession set forwards for - hall , where they arrive in a few hour without anything remarkable happen on the road , unless it be a curiious dialogue between the parson and the steward : which , to use the language of a late Apologist , a pattern to all biographer , " wait for the reader in the next chapter . " chapter XIII . _a curious dialogue which pass between and , better worth read than all the work of and many other ._ the chariot have not proceed far before observe it be a very fine day . " ay , and a very fine country too , " answer .--" I should think so more , " return , " if I have not lately travel over the , which I take to exceed this and all other prospect in the universe . " --" a fig for prospect ! " answer ; " one acre here be worth ten there ; and for my own part , I have no delight in the prospect of any land but my own . " --" , " say , " you can indulge yourself with many fine prospects of that kind . " --" I thank I have a little , " reply the other , " with which I be content , and envy no man : I have a little , , with which I do as much good as I can . " Adam answer , " that rich without charity be nothing worth ; for that they be a blessing only to he who make they a blessing to other . " --" you and I , " say , " have different notion of charity . I own , as it be generally use , I do not like the word , nor do I think it become one of we gentleman ; it be a mean parson - like quality ; though I would not infer many parson have it neither . " --" , " say , " my definition of charity be , a generous disposition to relieve the distressed . " --" there be something in that definition , " answer , " which I like well enough ; it be , as you say , a disposition , and do not so much consist in the act as in the disposition to do it . but , alas ! , who be mean by the distressed ? believe I , the distress of mankind be mostly imaginary , and it would be rather folly than goodness to relieve they . " -- " sure , sir , " reply , " hunger and thirst , cold and nakedness , and other distress which attend the poor , can never be say to be imaginary evils . " --" how can any man complain of hunger , " say , " in a country where such excellent salads be to be gather in almost every field ? or of thirst , where every river and stream produce such delicious potation ? and as for cold and nakedness , they be evil introduce by luxury and custom . a man naturally want clothes no more than a horse or any other animal ; and there be whole nation who go without they ; but these be thing perhaps which you , who do not know the world " --" you will pardon I , sir , " return ; " I have read of the Gymnosophists . " --" a plague of you Jehosaphats ! " cry ; " the greatest fault in we constitution be the provision make for the poor , except that perhaps make for some other . , I have not a estate which doth not contribute almost as much again to the poor as to the land - tax ; and I do assure you I expect to come myself to the parish in the end . " to which give a dissenting smile , thus proceed : " I fancy , , you be one of those who imagine I be a lump of money ; for there be many who , I fancy , believe that not only my pocket , but my whole clothes , be line with bank - bill ; but I assure you , you be all mistaken ; I be not the man the world esteem I . if I can hold my head above water it be all I can . I have injur myself by purchasing . I have be too liberal of my money . indeed , I fear my here will find my affair in a worse situation than they be repute to be . ah ! he will have reason to wish I have love money more and land less . pray , my good neighbour , where should I have that quantity of riche the world be so liberal to bestow on I ? where could I possibly , without I have steal it , acquire such a treasure ? " " why , truly , " say , " I have be always of you opinion ; I have wonder as well as yourself with what confidence they could report such thing of you , which have to I appear as mere impossibility ; for you know , sir , and I have often hear you say it , that you wealth be of you own acquisition ; and can it be credible that in you short time you should have amass such a heap of treasure as these people will have you worth ? indeed , have you inherit a estate like , which have descende in you family for many generation , they might have have a colour
colour for they assertion . " " why , what do they say I be worth ? " cry , with a malicious sneer . " , " answer , " I have hear some aver you be not worth less than twenty thousand pound . " at which frown . " Nay , sir , " say , " you ask I only the opinion of other ; for my own part , I have always deny it , nor do I ever believe you could possibly be worth half that sum . " " however , , " say he , squeeze he by the hand , " I would not sell they all I be worth for double that sum ; and as to what you believe , or they believe , I care not a fig , no not a fart . I be not poor because you think I so , nor because you attempt to undervalue I in the country . I know the envy of mankind very well ; but I thank heaven I be above they . it be true , my wealth be of my own acquisition . I have not a estate , like , that have descend in my family through many generation ; but I know heir of such estate who be force to travel about the country like some people in tear cassock , and might be glad to accept of a pitiful curacy for what I know . yes , sir , as shabby fellow as yourself , whom no man of my figure , without that vice of good - nature about he , would suffer to ride in a chariot with he . " " , " say , " I value not you chariot of a rush ; and if I have know you have intend to affront I , I would have walk to the world 's end on foot ere I would have accept a place in it . however , sir , I will soon ry you of that inconvenience ; " and , so say , he open the chariot door , without call to the coachman , and leapt out into the highway , forget to take he hat along with he ; which , however , throw after he with great violence . and stopt to bear he company the rest of the way , which be not above a mile . . chapter I . the arrival of and the rest at - hall ._ the coach and six , in which rode , overtake the other traveller as they enter the parish . she no sooner see than she cheek glow with red , and immediately after become as totally pale . she have in she surprize almost stopt she coach ; but recollect herself timely enough to prevent it . she enter the parish amidst the ringing of bell and the acclamation of the poor , who be rejoice to see they patroness return after so long a absence , during which time all she rent have be draft to , without a shilling be spend among they , which tend not a little to they utter impoverish ; for , if the court would be severely miss in such a city as , how much more must the absence of a person of great fortune be feel in a little country village , for whose inhabitant such a family find a constant employment and supply ; and with the offal of whose table the infirm , a , and infant poor be abundantly feed , with a generosity which hath scarce a visible effect on they benefactor 's pocket ! but , if they interest inspire so public a joy into every countenance , how much more forcibly do the affection which they bear operate upon all who beheld he return ! they flock about he like dutiful child round a indulgent parent , and vy with each other in demonstration of duty and love . the parson on he side shook every one by the hand , enquire heartily after the healt of all that be absent , of they child , and relation ; and exprest a satisfaction in he face which nothing but benevolence make happy by its objects could infuse . do and want a hearty welcome from all who see they . in short , no three person could be more kindly receive , as , indeed , no ever more deserve to be universally belove . Adams carry he fellow - traveller home to he house , where he insist on they partaking whatever he wife , whom , with he child , he find in health and joy , could provide :-- where we shall leave they enjoy perfect happiness over a homely meal , to view scene of greater splendour , but infinitely less bliss . we more intelligent reader will doubtless suspect , by this second appearance of on the stage , that all be not end by the dismission of ; and , to be honest with they , they be in the right : the arrow have pierce deeper than she imagine ; nor be the wound so easily to be cure . the removal of the object soon cool she rage , but it have a different effect on she love ; that depart with he person , but this remain lurking in she mind with he image . restless , interrupt slumber , and confuse horrible dream be she portion the first night . in the morning , fancy paint she a more delicious scene ; but to delude , not delight she ; for , before she could reach the promise happiness , it vanish , and leave she to curse , not bless , the vision . she start from she sleep , she imagination be all on fire
fire with the phantom , when , she eye accidentally glance towards the spot where yesterday the real have stood , that little circumstance raise he idea in the liveliest colour in she memory . each look , each word , each gesture rush back on she mind with charms which all he coldness could not abate . Nay , she impute that to he youth , he folly , he awe , he religion , to everything but what would instantly have produce contempt , want of passion for the sex , or that which would have rouse she hatred , want of like to she . then hurry she farther , and tell she she must see this beautiful youth no more ; nay , suggest to she that she herself have dismiss he for no other fault than probably that of too violent a awe and respect for herself ; and which she ought rather to have esteem a merit , the effect of which be besides so easily and surely to have be remove ; she then blame , she curse the hasty rashness of she temper ; she fury be vent all on herself , and appear innocent in she eye . she passion at length grew so violent , that it force she on seek relief , and now she think of recalle he : but pride forbad that ; pride , which soon drive all softer passion from she soul , and represent to she the meanness of he she be fond of . that think soon begin to obscure he beauty ; contempt succeed next , and then disdain , which presently introduce she hatred of the creature who have give she so much uneasiness . these enemie of have no sooner take possession of she mind than they insinuate to she a thousand thing in he disfavour ; everything but dislike of she person ; a think which , as it would have be intolerable to bear , she check the moment it endeavoure to arise . come now to she assistance ; and she consider she dismission of he , stript , and without a character , with the utmost pleasure . she riote in the several kind of misery which she imagination suggest to she might be he fate ; and , with a smile compose of anger , mirth , and scorn , view he in the rag in which she fancy have drest he . , be summon , attend she mistress , who have now in she own opinion totally subdue this passion . whilst she be dress she ask if that fellow have be turn away accord to she order . answer , she have tell she ladyship so ( as indeed she have ) .--" and how do he behave ? " reply the lady . " truly , madam , " cry , " in such a manner that infect everybody who see he . the poor lad have but little wage to receive ; for he constantly allow he father and mother half he income ; so that , when you ladyship 's livery be stript off , he have not wherewithal to buy a coat , and must have go naked if one of the footman have not incommodate he with one ; and whilst he be stand in he shirt ( and , to say truth , he be a amorous figure ) , be tell you ladyship would not give he a character , he sigh , and say he have do nothing willingly to offend ; that for he part , he should always give you ladyship a good character wherever he go ; and he pray to bless you ; for you be the best of lady , though he enemy have set you against he . I wish you have not turn he away ; for I believe you have not a faithfuller servant in the house . " --" how come you then , " reply the lady , " to advise I to turn he away ? " --" I , madam ! " say ; " I be sure you will do I the justice to say , I do all in my power to prevent it ; but I see you ladyship be angry ; and it be not the business of we upper servants to hinterfear on these occasion . " " and be it not you , audacious wretch ! " cry the lady , " who make I angry ? be it not you tittle - tattle , in which I believe you bely the poor fellow , which incense I against he ? he may thank you for all that hath happen ; and so may I for the loss of a good servant , and one who probably have more merit than all of you . poor fellow ! I be charme with he goodness to he parent . why do not you tell I of that , but suffer I to dismiss so good a creature without a character ? I see the reason of you whole behaviour now as well as you complaint ; you be jealous of the wench . " " I jealous ! " say ; " I assure you , I look upon myself as he better ; I be not meat for a footman , I hope . " these word throw the lady into a violent passion , and she send from she presence , who depart , toss she nose , and cry , " , come up ! there be some people more jealous than I , I believe . " she lady affect not to hear the word , though in reality she do , and understand they too . now ensue a second conflict , so like the former , that it might saavor of repetition
repetition to relate it minutely . it may suffice to say that find good reason to doubt whether she have so absolutely conquer she passion as she have flatter herself ; and , in order to accomplish it quite , take a resolution , more common than wise , to retire immediately into the country . the reader hath long ago see the arrival of , whom no pertness could make she mistress resolve to part with ; lately , that of , she forerunner ; and , lastly , that of the lady herself . the morning after she arrival be , she go to church , to the great surprize of everybody , who wonder to see she ladyship , be no very constant church - woman , there so suddenly upon she journey . be likewise there ; and I have hear it be remark that she fix she eye on he much more than on the parson ; but this I believe to be only a malicious rumour . when the prayer be end stand up , and with a loud voice pronounce , " I publish the banns of marriage between and , both of this parish , " &c . whether this have any effect on or no , who be then in she pew , which the congregation could not see into , I could never discover : but certain it be that in about a quarter of a hour she stand up , and direct she eye to that part of the church where the woman sat , and persist in look that way during the remainder of the sermon in so scrutinize a manner , and with so angry a countenance , that most of the woman be afraid she be offend at they . the moment she return home she send for into she chamber , and tell she she wonder what that impudent fellow do in that parish ? upon which give she a account of she meeting Adams with he on the road , and likewise the adventure with . at the relation of which the lady often change she countenance ; and when she have hear all , she order into she presence , to whom she behave as the reader will see in the next chapter . chapter ii . _a dialogue between and the ._ be not far off , for he be drink she ladyship 's health below in a cup of she ale . he no sooner come before she than she begin in the follow manner : " I wonder , sir , after the many great obligation you have have to this family " ( with all which the reader hath in the course of this history be minutely acquainted ) , " that you will ungratefully show any respect to a fellow who hath be turn out of it for he misdeed . doth it , I can tell you , sir , become a man of you character , to run about the country with a idle fellow and wench . indeed , as for the girl , I know no harm of she . Slipslop tell I she be formerly breed up in my house , and behave as she ink , till she hanker after this fellow , and he spoil she . Nay , she may still , perhaps , do very well , if he will let she alone . you be , therefore , do a monstrous thing in endeavouring to procure a match between these two people , which will be to the ruin of they both . " --" madam , " say , " if you ladyship will but hear I speak , I protest I never hear any harm of ; if I have , I should have correcte he for it ; for I never have , nor will , encourage the fault of those under my care . as for the young woman , I assure you ladyship I have as good a opinion of she as you ladyship yourself or any other can have . she be the sweetest - tempered , honestest , worthiest young creature ; indeed , as to she beauty , I do not commend she on that account , though all man allow she be the handsomest woman , gentle or simple , that ever appear in the parish . " --" you be very impertinent , " say she , " to talk such fulsome stuff to I . it be mighty become truly in a clergyman to trouble himself about handsome woman , and you be a delicate judge of beauty , no doubt . a man who hath live all he life in such a parish as this be a rare judge of beauty ! ridiculous ! beauty indeed ! a country wench a beauty ! I shall be sick whenever I hear beauty mention again . and so this wench be to stock the parish with beauty , I hope . but , sir , we poor be numerous enough already ; I will have no more vagabonds settle here . " -- " Madam , " say Adams , " you ladyship be offend with I , I protest , without any reason . this couple be desirous to consummate long ago , and I dissuad they from it ; nay , I may venture to say , I believe I be the sole cause of they delay it . " -- " well , " say she , " and you do very wisely and honestly too , notwithstand she be the greatest beauty in the parish . " -- " and now , madam , " continue he , " I only perform my office to . " -- " pray , do not mister such fellow to I , " cry the lady . "
" he , " say the parson , " with the consent of , before my face , put in the banns . " " yes , " answer the lady , " I suppose the slut be forward enough ; Slipslop tell I how she head run upon fellow ; that be one of she beauty , I suppose . but if they have put in the banns , I desire you will publish they no more without my order . " -- " madam , " cry Adams , " if any one put in a sufficient caution , and assign a proper reason against they , I be willing to surcease . " --" I tell you a reason , " say she : " he be a vagabond , and he shall not settle here , and bring a nest of beggar into the parish ; it will make we but little amend that they will be beauty . " --" madam , " answer , " with the utmost submission to you ladyship , I have be inform by lawyer Scout that any person who serve a year gain a settlement in the parish where he serve . " -- " , " reply the lady , " be a impudent coxcomb ; I will have no lawyer interfere with I . I repeat to you again , I will have no more incumbrance bring on we : so I desire you will proceed no farther . " -- " madam , " return , " I would obey you ladyship in everything that be lawful ; but surely the party be poor be no reason against they marrying . forbid there should be any such law ! the poor have little share enough of this world already ; it would be barbarous indeed to deny they the common privileges and innocent enjoyment which nature indulge to the animal creation . " -- " Since you understand yourself no better , " cry the lady , " nor the respect due from such as you to a woman of my distinction , than to affront my ear by such loose discourse , I shall mention but one short word ; it be my order to you that you publish these banns no more ; and if you dare , I will recommend it to you master , the doctor , to discard you from he service . I will , sir , notwithstand you poor family ; and then you and the greatest beauty in the parish may go and beg together . " -- " madam , " answer , " I know not what you ladyship mean by the term master and service . I be in the service of a master who will never discard I for do my duty ; and if the doctor ( for indeed I have never be able to pay for a licence ) think proper to turn I from my cure , will provide I , I hope , another . at least , my family , as well as myself , have hand ; and he will prosper , I doubt not , we endeavour to get we bread honestly with they . whilst my conscience be pure , I shall never fear what man can do unto I . " --" I condemn my humility , " say the lady , " for demean myself to converse with you so long . I shall take other measure ; for I see you be a confederate with they . but the sooner you leave I the better ; and I shall give order that my door may no longer be open to you . I will suffer no parson who run about the country with beauty to be entertain here . " -- " madam , " say , " I shall enter into no persons ' door against they will ; but I be assure , when you have enquire farther into this matter , you will applaud , not blame , my proceeding ; and so I humbly take my leave : " which he do with many bow , or at least many attempt at a bow . chapter III . what pass between the lady and lawyer Scout ._ in the afternoon the lady send for , whom she attack most violently for intermeddling with she servants , which he deny , and indeed with truth , for he have only assert accidentally , and perhaps rightly , that a year 's service gai a settlement ; and so far he own he might have formerly inform the parson and believe it be law . " I be resolve , " say the lady , " to have no discarded servants of mine settle here ; and so , if this be you law , I shall send to another lawyer . " say , " if she send to a hundred lawyer , not one or all of they could alter the law . the utmost that be in the power of a lawyer be to prevent the law 's take effect ; and that he himself could do for she ladyship as well as any other ; and I believe , " say he , " madam , you ladyship , not be conversant in these matters , hath mistaken a difference ; for I assert only that a man who serve a year be settled . now there be a material difference between be settle in law and settle in fact ; and as I affir generally he be settle , and law be preferable to fact , my settlement must be understand in law and not in fact . and suppose , madam , we admit he be settle in law , what use will they make of it ? how doth that relate to fact ? he
he be not settle in fact ; and if he be not settle in fact , he be not a inhabitant ; and if he be not a inhabitant , he be not of this parish ; and then undoubtedly he ought not to be publish here ; for hath tell I you ladyship 's pleasure , and the reason , which be a very good one , to prevent burden we with the poor ; we have too many already , and I think we ought to have a act to hang or transport half of they . if we can prove in evidence that he be not settle in fact , it be another matter . what I say to be on a supposition that he be settle in fact ; and indeed , if that be the case , I should doubt . " -- " do not tell I you fact and you if , " say the lady ; " I do not understand you gibberish ; you take too much upon you , and be very impertinent , in pretending to direct in this parish ; and you shall be teach better , I assure you , you shall . but as to the wench , I be resolve she shall not settle here ; I will not suffer such beautie as these to produce child for we to keep . " --" , indeed ! you ladyship be pleased to be merry , " answer .-- " describe she so to I , " say the lady . " pray , what sort of dowdy be it , ? " --" the ugliest creature almost I ever beheld ; a poor dirty drab , you ladyship never see such a wretch . " --" well , but , dear , let she be what she will , these ugly woman will bring child , you know ; so that we must prevent the marriage . " -- " true , madam , " reply , " for the subsequent marriage co-operat with the law will carry law into fact . when a man be marry he be settle in fact , and then he be not removable . I will see , and I make no doubt of prevail with he . he only objection be , doubtless , that he shall lose he fee ; but that be once make easy , as it shall be , I be confident no farther objection will remain . no , no , it be impossible ; but you ladyship can not discommend he unwillingness to depart from he fee . every man ought to have a proper value for he fee . as to the matter in question , if you ladyship please to employ I in it , I will venture to promise you success . the law of this land be not so vulgar to permit a mean fellow to contend with one of you ladyship 's fortune . we have one sure card , which be , to carry he before , who , upon hear you ladyship 's name , will commit he without any farther question . as for the dirty slut , we shall have nothing to do with she ; for , if we get rid of the fellow , the ugly jade will -- " -- " take what measure you please , good , " answer the lady : " but I wish you could ry the parish of both ; for tell I such story of this wench , that I abhor the thought of she ; and , though you say she be such a ugly slut , yet you know , dear , these forward creature , who run after man , will always find some as forward as themselves ; so that , to prevent the increase of beggar , we must get rid of she . " -- " you ladyship be very much in the right , " answer ; " but I be afraid the law be a little deficient in give we any such power of prevention ; however , the justice will stretch it as far as he be able , to oblige you ladyship . to say truth , it be a great blessing to the country that he be in the commission , for he hath take several poor off we hand that the law would never lay hold on . I know some justice who think as much of commit a man to as he lordship at ' size would of hang he ; but it would do a man good to see he worship , we justice , commit a fellow to , he take so much pleasure in it ; and when once we ha 'um there , we seldom hear any more of 'um . he be either starve or eat up by vermin in a month 's time . " -- here the arrival of a visitor put a end to the conversation , and , have undertake the cause and promise it success , depart . this Scout be one of those fellow who , without any knowledge of the law , or be breed to it , take upon they , in defiance of a act of parliament , to act as lawyer in the country , and be call so . they be the pest of society , and a scandal to a profession , to which indeed they do not belong , and which owe to such kind of rascallion the ill - will which weak person bear towards it . with this fellow , to whom a little before she would not have condescende to have speak , do a certain passion for , and the jealousy and the disdain of poor innocent Fanny , betray the into a familiar discourse , in which she
she inadvertently confirm many hint with which , whose gallant he be , have pre-acquaint he ; and whence he have take a opportunity to assert those severe falsehood of little Fanny which possibly the reader might not have be well able to account for if we have not think proper to give he this information . _A short chapter , but very full of matter ; particularly the arrival of and he lady ._ all that night , and the next day , the past with the utmost anxiety ; she mind be distract and she soul toss up and down by many turbulent and opposite passion . she love , hate , pitie , scorn , admire , despise the same person by fit , which change in a very short interval . on morning , which happen to be a holiday , she go to church , where , to she surprize , publish the banns again with as audible a voice as before . it be lucky for she that , as there be no sermon , she have a immediate opportunity of return home to vent she rage , which she could not have conceal from the congregation five minute ; indeed , it be not then very numerous , the assembly consiste of no more than , he clerk , he wife , the lady , and one of she servants . at she return she meet , who accost she in these word :--" of meam , what doth you ladyship think ? to be sure , lawyer carry and both before the justice . all the parish be in tear , and say they will certainly be hang ; for nobody know what it be for " --" I suppose they deserve it , " say the lady . " what ! dost thou mention such wretch to I ? " --" of dear madam , " answer , " be it not a pity such a graceless young man should die a virulent death ? I hope the judge will take commensuration on he youth . as for , I do not think it signify much what become of she ; and if poor hath do anything , I could venture to swear she traduce he to it : few man ever come to a fragrant punishment , but by those nasty creature , who be a scandal to we sect . " the lady be no more pleased at this news , after a moment 's reflection , than herself ; for , though she wish Fanny far enough , she do not desire the removal of , especially with she . she be puzzl how to act or what to say on this occasion , when a coach and six drive into the court , and a servant acquaint she with the arrival of she nephew and he lady . she order they to be conduct into a drawing - room , whither she presently repair , have compose she countenance as well as she could , and be a little satisfied that the wedding would by these means be at least interrupt , and that she should have a opportunity to execute any resolution she might take , for which she see herself provide with a excellent instrument in . the apprehend she servant have make a mistake when he mention 's lady ; for she have never hear of he marriage : but how great be she surprize when , at she enter the room , she nephew present he wife to she ; say , " madam , this be that charme , of whom I be convince you have hear so much . " the lady receive she with more civility than he expect ; indeed with the utmost ; for she be perfectly polite , nor have any vice inconsistent with good - breeding . they past some little time in ordinary discourse , when a servant come and whisper , who presently tell the lady he must desert they a little on some business of consequence ; and , as they discourse during he absence would afford little improvement or entertainment to the reader , we will leave they for a while to attend . . _Contain justice business ; curiious precedent of deposition , and other matter necessary to be peruse by all justex of the peace and they clerk ._ the young squire and he lady be no sooner alight from they coach than the servants begin to inquire after , from whom they say they lady have not hear a word , to she great surprize , since he have leave 's . upon this they be instantly inform of what have lately happen , with which they hastily acquaint they master , who take a immediate resolution to go himself , and endeavou to restore he she brother , before she even know she have lose he . the justice before whom the criminal be carry , and who live within a short mile of the lady 's house , be luckily 's acquaintance , by he have a estate in he neighbourhood . order therefore he horse to he coach , he set out for the judgment - seat , and arrive when the justice have almost finish he business . he be conduct into a hall , where he be acquaint that he worship would wait on he in a moment ; for he have only a man and a woman to commit to first . as he be now convince he have not a minute to lose , he insist on the servant 's introduce he directly into the room where the justice be then execute he office , as he call it . be bring thither , and the first compliment be pass between the squire and he worship , the former ask the latter what
what crime those two young people have be guilty of ? " no great crime , " answer the justice ; " I have only order they to Bridewell for a month . " " but what be they crime ? " repeat the squire . " , a not please you honour , " say . " ay , " say the justice , " a kind of felonious larcenous thing . I believe I must order they a little correction too , a little stripping and whipping . " ( poor Fanny , who have hitherto support all with the thought of 's company , tremble at that sound ; but , indeed , without reason , for none but the devil himself would have execute such a sentence on she . ) " , " say the squire , " I be ignorant of the crime -- the fact I mean . " " why , there it be in peaper , " answer the justice , show he a deposition which , in the absence of he clerk , he have wrin himself , of which we have with great difficulty procure a authentic copy ; and here it follow _verbatim et literatim :_-- the depusition of , layer , and , yeoman , take before mee , one of he magesty 's justass of the piece for ._ " these deponant saith , and first for himself saith , that on the -- of this instant , be - day , betwin the of 2 and 4 in the afternoon , he zeed and walk akross a certane felde belunge to layer , and out of the path which lede through the say felde , and there he zede with a nife cut one hassel twig , of the value , as he believe , of three half - pence , or thereabout ; and he saith that the say be likewise walk on the grass out of the say path in the say felde , and do receive and karry in she hand the say twig , and so be cumfart , ead , and abatt to the say therein . and the say for himself say that he verily believe the say twig to be he own proper twig , " &c . " ! " say the squire , " would you commit two person to Bridewell for a twig ? " " yes , " say the lawyer , " and with great lenity too ; for if we have call it a young tree , they would have be both hang . " " , " say the justice , take aside the squire ; " I should not have be so severe on this occasion , but desire to get they out of the parish ; so lawyer will give the constable order to let they run away , if they please : but it seem they intend to marry together , and the lady hath no other means , as they be legally settle there , to prevent they bring a incumbrance on she own parish . " " well , " say the squire , " I will take care my aunt shall be satisfied in this point ; and likewise I promise you , here shall never be any incumbrance on she . I shall be oblige to you , therefore , if , instead of , you will commit they to my custody . " " o ! to be sure , sir , if you desire it , " answer the justice ; and without more adue and be deliver over to , whom very well know , but little guess how nearly he be related to he . the justice bur not he mittimus , the constable be send about he business , the lawyer make no complaint for want of justice ; and the prisoner , with exult heart , give a thousand thanks to he honour ; who do not intend they obligation to he should cease here ; for , order he man to produce a cloak - bag , which he have cause to be bring from Booby's on purpose , he desire the justice that he might have with he into a room ; where , order he servant to take out a suit of he own clothes , with linnen and other necessary , he leave to dress himself , who , not yet know the cause of all this civility , excuse he accept such a favour as long as decently he could . whilst be dress , the squire repair to the justice , whom he find talk with ; for , during the examination , she have floppe she hat over she eye , which be also bath in tear , and have by that mean conceal from he worship what might perhaps have render the arrival of unnecessary , at least for herself . the justice no sooner see she countenance clear up , and she bright eye shine through she tear , than he secretly curse himself for have once think of for she . he would willingly have send he own wife thither , to have have in she place . and , conceive almost at the same instant desire and scheme to accomplish they , he employ the minute whilst the squire be absent with in assure she how sorry he be for have treat she so roughly before he know she merit ; and tell she , that since be unwilling that she should settle in she parish , she be heartily welcome to he , where he promise she he protection , add that he would take and she into he own family , if she like it ; which assurance he confirm with a squeeze by the hand . she thank he very kindly , and say ,
, " she would acquaint with the offer , which he would certainly be glad to accept ; for that be angry with they both ; though she do not know either have do anything to offend she , but impute it to , who have always be she enemy . " the squire now return , and prevent any farther continuance of this conversation ; and the justice , out of a pretend respect to he guest , but in reality from a apprehension of a rival ( for he know nothing of he marriage ) , order into the kitchen , whither she gladly retire ; nor do the squire , who decline the trouble of explai the whole matter , oppose it . it would be unnecessary , if I be able , which indeed I be not , to relate the conversation between these two gentleman , which roll , as I have be inform , entirely on the subject of horse - racing . be soon drest in the plainest dress he could find , which be a blue coat and breech , with a gold edging , and a red waistcoat with the same : and as this suit , which be rather too large for the squire , exactly fit he , so he become it so well , and look so genteel , that no person would have doubte its be as well adapt to he quality as he shape ; nor have suspect , as one might , when my ----, or ----, or ----, appear in lace or embroidery , that the taylor 's man wear those clothes home on he back which he should have carry under he arm . the squire now take leave of the justice ; and , call for , make she and , against they will , get into the coach with he , which he then order to drive to 's . it have move a few yard only , when the squire ask if he know who that man be cross the field ; for , add he , I never see one take such stride before . answer eagerly , " o , sir , it be parson Adam ! " " of la , indeed , and so it be , " say ; " poor man , he be come to do what he could for we . well , he be the worthiest , best - natured creature . " -- " ay , " say ; " God bless he ! for there be not such another in the universe . " " the best creature live sure , " cry . " be he ? " say the squire ; " then I be resolve to have the best creature live in my coach ; " and so say , he order it to stop , whilst , at he request , hallow to the parson , who , well know he voice , make all the haste imaginable , and soon come up with they . he be desire by the master , who could scarce refrain from laughter at he figure , to mount into the coach , which he with many thanks refuse , say he could walk by its side , and he would warrant he keep up with it ; but he be at length over -prevail on . the squire now acquaint with he marriage ; but he might have spare himself that labour ; for he servant , whilst be dress , have perform that office before . he continue to express the vast happiness he enjoy in he sister , and the value he have for all who belong to she . make many bow , and exprest as many acknowledgment : and parson Adams , who now first perceive 's new apparel , burst into tear with joy , and fall to rub he hand and snapp he finger as if he have be mad . they be now arrive at the 's , and the squire , desire they to wait a moment in the court , walk in to he aunt , and call she out from he wife , acquaint she with 's arrival ; say , " madam , as I have marry a virtuous and worthy woman , I be resolve to own she relation , and show they all a proper respect ; I shall think myself therefore infinitely oblige to all mine who will do the same . it be true , she brother hath be you servant , but he be now become my brother ; and I have one happiness , that neither he character , he behaviour , or appearance , give I any reason to be asham of call he so . in short , he be now below , dress like a gentleman , in which light I intend he shall hereafter be see ; and you will oblige I beyond expression if you will admit he to be of we party ; for I know it will give great pleasure to my wife , though she will not mention it . " this be a stroke of fortune beyond the 's hope or expectation ; she answer he eagerly , " nephew , you know how easily I be prevail on to do anything which desire -- Phoo , I mean which you desire I ; and , as he be now you relation , I can not refuse to entertain he as such . " the squire tell she he know he obligation to she for she compliance ; and go three step , return and tell she -- he have one more favour , which he believe she would easily grant , as she have accord he the former . " there be a young woman --" -- " nephew , " say
say she , " do not let my good - nature make you desire , as be too commonly the case , to impose on I . nor think , because I have with so much condescension agree to suffer you brother - in - law to come to my table , that I will submit to the company of all my own servants , and all the dirty trollop in the country . " " madam , " answer the squire , " I believe you never see this young creature . I never beheld such sweetness and innocence join with such beauty , and withal so genteel . " " upon my soul I will not admit she , " reply the lady in a passion ; " the whole world sha not prevail on I ; I resent even the desire as a affront , and -- " the squire , who know she inflexibility , interrupt she , by ask pardon , and promise not to mention it more . he then return to , and she to . he take aside , and tell he he would carry he to he sister , but could not prevail as yet for . beg that he might see he sister alone , and then be with he Fanny ; but the squire , know the pleasure he wife would have in she brother 's company , would not admit it , tell Joseph there would be nothing in so short a absence from , whilst he be assure of she safety ; add , he hope he could not so easily quit a sister whom he have not see so long , and who so tenderly love he . immediately comply ; for indeed no brother could love a sister more ; and , recommend , who rejoice that she be not to go before , to the care of , he attend the squire upstairs , whilst repair with the parson to he house , where she think herself secure of a kind reception . . of which you be desire to read no more than you like ._ the meeting between and be not without tear of joy on both side ; and they embrace be full of tenderness and affection . they be , however , regard with much more pleasure by the nephew than by the aunt , to whose flame they be fuel only ; and this be increase by the addition of dress , which be indeed not want to set off the lively colour in which have draw health , strength , comeliness , and . in the afternoon , at they request , entertain they with a account of he adventur : nor could conceal she dissatisfaction at those part in which be concerned , especially when launch forth into such rapturous praise of she beauty . she say , apply to she niece , that she wonder she nephew , who have pretend to marry for love , should think such a subject proper to amuse he wife with ; add , that , for she part , she should be jealous of a husband who speak so warmly in praise of another woman . answer , indeed , she think she have cause ; but it be a instance of 's aptness to see more beauty in woman than they be mistress of . at which word both the woman fix they eye on two look - glass ; and reply , that man were , in the general , very ill judge of beauty ; and then , whilst both contemplate only they own face , they pay a cross compliment to each other 's charms . when the hour of rest approach , which the lady of the house defer as long as decently she could , she inform ( whom for the future we shall call , he have as good a title to that appellation as many other -- I mean that incontest one of good clothes ) that she have order a bed to be provide for he . he decline this favour to he utmost ; for he heart have long be with he Fanny ; but she insist on he accept it , alledge that the parish have no proper accommodation for such a person as he be now to esteem himself . the squire and he lady both join with she , be at last force to give over he design of visiting that even ; who , on she side , as impatiently expect he till midnight , when , in complacence to 's family , who have sit up two hour out of respect to she , she retire to be , but not to sleep ; the thought of she love keep she wake , and he not return accord to he promise fill she with uneasiness ; of which , however , she could not assign any other cause than merely that of be absent from he . rise early in the morning , and visit she in whom he soul delight . she no sooner hear he voice in the parson 's parlour than she leapt from she bed , and , dress herself in a few minute , go down to he . they pass two hour with inexpressible happiness together ; and then , have appoint , by 's permission , for they marriage , return , accord to he promise , to breakfast at the 's , with whose behaviour , since the evening , we shall now acquaint the reader . she be no sooner retire to she chamber than she ask " what she think of this wonderful creature she nephew have marry ? " -- " madam ? " say , not yet sufficiently understand what answer she be to make . " I ask you , " answer
answer the lady , " what you think of the dowdy , my niece , I think I be to call she ? " Slipslop , want no further hint , begin to pull she to piece , and so miserably deface she , that it would have be impossible for any one to have know the person . the lady give she all the assistance she could , and end with say , " I think , , you have do she justice ; but yet , bad as she be , she be a angel compare to this Fanny . " then fall on , whom she hack and hew in the like barbarous manner , conclude with a observation that there be always something in those low - life creature which must eternally extinguish they from they betters . " really , " say the lady , " I think there be one exception to you rule ; I be certain you may guess who I mean . " -- " not I , upon my word , madam , " say . " I mean a young fellow ; sure you be the dullest wretch , " say the lady . " o la ! I be indeed . yes , truly , madam , he be a accession , " answer . " ay , be he not , ? " return the lady . " be he not so genteel that a prince might , without a blush , acknowledge he for he son ? he behaviour be such that would not shame the best education . he borrow from he station a condescension in everything to he superior , yet unattended by that mean servility which be call good behaviour in such persons . everything he doth hath no mark of the base motive of fear , but visibly show some respect and gratitude , and carry with it the persuasion of love . and then for he virtue : such piety to he parent , such tender affection to he sister , such integrity in he friendship , such bravery , such goodness , that , if he have be bear a gentleman , he wife would have possess the most invaluable blessing . " -- " to be sure , ma 'am , " say . " but as he be , " answer the lady , " if he have a thousand more good quality , it must render a woman of fashion contemptible even to be suspect of think of he ; yes , I should despise myself for such a thought . " -- " to be sure , ma 'am , " say . " and why to be sure ? " reply the lady ; " thou art always one 's echo . be he not more worthy of affection than a dirty country clown , though bear of a family as old as the flood ? or a idle worthless rake , or little puisny beau of quality ? and yet these we must condemn ourselves to , in order to avoid the censure of the world ; to shin the contempt of other , we must ally ourselves to those we despise ; we must prefer birth , title , and fortune , to real merit . it be a tyranny of custom , a tyranny we must comply with ; for we people of fashion be the slave of custom ." --" come up ! " say , who now know well which party to take . " if I be a woman of you ladyship 's fortune and quality , I would be a slave to nobody . " -- " I , " say the lady ; " I be speak if a young woman of fashion , who have see nothing of the world , should happen to like such a fellow .-- I , indeed ! I hope thou dost not imagine -- " -- " no , ma 'am , to be sure , " cry . " no ! what no ? " cry the lady . " thou be always ready to answer before thou hast hear one . so far I must allow he be a charming fellow . I , indeed ! no , Slipslop , all thought of man be over with I . I have lose a husband who -- but if I should reflect I should run mad . my future ease must depend upon forgetfulness . Slipslop , let I hear some of thy nonsense , to turn my thought another way . what dost thou think of ? " --" why , I think , " say , " he be the handsomest , most properest man I ever see ; and if I be a lady of the greatest degree it would be well for some folk . you ladyship may talk of custom , if you please : but I be confidous there be no more comparison between young Andrews and most of the young gentleman who come to you ladyship 's house in ; a parcel of whipper - snapper spark : I would sooner marry we old parson Adam . never tell I what people say , whilst I be happy in the arm of he I love . some folk rail against other folk because other folk have what some folk would be glad of . " --" and so , " answer the lady , " if you be a woman of condition , you would really marry ? " --" yes , I assure you ladyship , " reply , " if he would have I ." --" fool , idiot ! " cry the lady ; " if he would have a woman of fashion ! be that a question ? " --" no , truly , madam , " say ,
, " I believe it would be none if be out of the way ; and I be confidous , if I be in you ladyship 's place , and like , she should not stay in the parish a moment . I be sure lawyer would send she packing if you ladyship would but say the word . " this last speech of raise a tempest in the mind of she mistress . she fear have betraye she , or rather that she have betraye herself . after some silence , and a double change of she complexion , first to pale and then to red , she thus speak : " I be astonished at the liberty you give you tongue . would you insinuate that I employ against this wench on account of the fellow ? " --" , , " say , fright out of she wit , " I assassinate such a thing ! " --" I think you dare not , " answer the lady ; " I believe my conduct may defy malice itself to assert so curse a slander . if I have ever discover any wantonness , any lightness in my behaviour ; if I have follow the example of some whom thou hast , I believe , see , in allow myself indecent liberty , even with a husband ; but the dear man who be go " ( here she begin to sob ) , " be he alive again " ( then she produce tear ) , " could not upbraid I with any one act of tenderness or passion . no , , all the time I cohabit with he he never obtain even a kiss from I without my expressing reluctance in the grant it . I be sure he himself never suspect how much I love he . since he death , thou knowest , though it be almost six week ( it want but a day ) ago , I have not admit one visitor till this fool my nephew arrive . I have confine myself quite to one party of friend . and can such a conduct as this fear to be arraign ? to be accuse , not only of a passion which I have always despise , but of fix it on such a object , a creature so much beneath my notice ! " -- " upon my word , ma 'am , " say , " I do not understand you ladyship ; nor know I anything of the matter . " --" I believe indeed thou dost not understand I . those be delicacy which exist only in superior mind ; thy coarse idea can not comprehend they . thou be a low creature , of the Andrew breed , a reptile of a lower order , a weed that grow in the common garden of the creation . " --" I assure you ladyship , " say , whose passion be almost of as high a order as she lady 's , " I have no more to do with than other folk . really , you ladyship talk of servant as if they be not bear of the specious . Servant have flesh and blood as well as quality ; and himself be a proof that they have as good , if not better . and for my own part , I can not perceive my dear [ ] be coarser than other people 's ; and I be sure , if be a dear of mine , I should not be asham of he in company with gentleman ; for whoever hath see he in he new clothes must confess he look as much like a gentleman as anybody . Coarse , quotha ! I can not bear to hear the poor young fellow run down neither ; for I will say this , I never hear he say a ill word of anybody in he life . I be sure he coarseness doth not lie in he heart , for he be the best - natured man in the world ; and as for he skin , it be no coarser than other people 's , I be sure . he bosom , when a boy , be as white as drive snow ; and , where it be not cover with hair , be so still . Ifakins ! if I be , with a hundr a year , I should not envy the best she who wear a head . a woman that could not be happy with such a man ought never to be so ; for if he can not make a woman happy , I never yet beheld the man who could . I say again , I wish I be a great lady for he sake . I believe , when I have make a gentleman of he , he would behave so that nobody should deprecate what I have do ; and I fancy few would venture to tell he he be no gentleman to he face , nor to mine neither . " at which word , take up the candle , she ask she mistress , who have be some time in she bed , if she have any farther command ? who mildly answer , she have none ; and , tell she she be a comical creature , bid she good - night . [ a ] mean perhaps idea . . Philosophical reflection , the like not to be find in any light french romance . 's grave advice to , and 's encounter with a beau ._ , my good reader , hath so vast a prevalence over the human mind , that there be scarce anything too strange or too strong to be assert of it . the story of the miser , who , from long accustom to cheat other
other , come at last to cheat himself , and with great delight and triumph pick he own pocket of a guinea to convey to he hoard , be not impossible or improbable . in like manner it fare with the practiser of deceit , who , from have long deceive they acquaintance , gain at last a power of deceive themselves , and acquire that very opinion ( however false ) of they own ability , excellency , and virtue , into which they have for year perhaps endeavoure to betray they neighbours . now , reader , to apply this observation to my present purpose , thou must know , that as the passion generally call love exercise most of the talents of the female or fair world , so in this they now and then discover a small inclination to deceit ; for which thou will not be angry with the beautiful creature when thou hast consider that at the age of seven , or something earlier , miss be instruct by she mother that master be a very monstrous kind of animal , who will , if she suffer he to come too near she , infallibly eat she up and grind she to piece : that , so far from kissing or toy with he of she own accord , she must not admit he to kiss or toy with she : and , lastly , that she must never have any affection towards he ; for if she should , all she friend in petticoat would esteem she a traitress , point at she , and hunt she out of they society . these impression , be first receive , be farther and deeper inculcate by they school -mistress and companion ; so that by the age of ten they have contract such a dread and abhorrence of the above - name monster , that whenever they see he they fly from he as the innocent hare doth from the greyhound . hence , to the age of fourteen or fifteen , they entertain a mighty antipathy to master ; they resolve , and frequently profess , that they will never have any commerce with he , and entertain fond hope of pass they life out of he reach , of the possibility of which they have so visible a example in they good maiden aunt . but when they arrive at this period , and have now pass they second climacteric , when they wisdom , grow riper , begin to see a little farther , and , from almost daily fal in master 's way , to apprehend the great difficulty of keep out of it ; and when they observe he look often at they , and sometimes very eagerly and earnestly too ( for the monster seldom take any notice of they till at this age ) , they then begin to think of they danger ; and , as they perceive they can not easily avoid he , the wiser part bethink themselves of provide by other means for they security . they endeaavor , by all methods they can invent , to render themselves so amiable in he eye , that he may have no inclination to hurt they ; in which they generally succeed so well , that he eye , by frequent languishing , soon lessen they idea of he fierceness , and so far abate they fear , that they venture to parley with he ; and when they perceive he so different from what he hath be describe , all gentleness , softness , kindness , tenderness , fondness , they dreadful apprehension vanish in a moment ; and now ( it be usual with the human mind to skip from one extreme to its opposite , as easily , and almost as suddenly , as a bird from one bough to another ) love instantly succeed to fear : but , as it happen to person who have in they infancy be thoroughly frightene with certain no - person call ghost , that they retain they dread of those being after they be convinced that there be no such thing , so these young lady , though they no longer apprehend devouring , can not so entirely shake off all that hath be instil into they ; they still entertain the idea of that censure which be so strongly imprint on they tender mind , to which the declaration of abhorrence they every day hear from they companion greatly contribute . to avoid this censure , therefore , be now there only care ; for which purpose they still pretend the same aversion to the monster : and the more they love he , the more ardently they counterfeit the antipathy . by the continual and constant practice of which deceit on other , they at length impose on themselves , and really believe they hate what they love . thus , indeed , it happen to , who love long before she know it ; and now love he much more than she suspect . she have indeed , from the time of he sister 's arrival in the quality of she niece , and from the instant she view he in the dress and character of a gentleman , begin to conceive secretly a design which love have conceal from herself till a dream betraye it to she . she have no sooner risen than she send for she nephew . when he come to she , after many compliment on he choice , she tell he , " he might perceive , in she condescension to admit she own servant to she table , that she look on the family of Andrews as he relation , and indeed hers ; that , as he have marry into such a family , it become he to endeaavor by all methods to raise
raise it as much as possible . at length she advise he to use all he heart to dissuade from he intend match , which would still enlarge they relation to meanness and poverty ; conclude that , by a commission in the army , or some other genteel employment , he might soon put yong Mr Andrews on the foot of a gentleman ; and , that be once do , he accomplishment might quickly gain he a alliance which would not be to they discredit . " she nephew heartily embrace this proposal , and , find with he wife , at he return to she chamber , he immediately begin thus : " my love to my dear Pamela , brother , will extend to all she relation ; nor shall I show they less respect than if I have marry into the family of a duke . I hope I have give you some early testimony of this , and shall continue to give you daily more . you will excuse I therefore , brother , if my concern for you interest make I mention what may be , perhaps , disagreeable to you to hear : but I must insist upon it , that , if you have any value for my alliance or my friendship , you will decline any thought of engage farther with a girl who be , as you be a relation of mine , so much beneath you . I know there may be at first some difficulty in you compliance , but that will daily diminish ; and you will in the end sincerely thank I for my advice . I own , indeed , the girl be handsome ; but beauty alone be a poor ingredient , and will make but a uncomfortable marriage . " --" , " say , " I assure you she beauty be she least perfection ; nor do I know a virtue which that young creature be not possesst of . " -- " as to she virtue , " answer , " you can be yet but a slender judge of they ; but , if she have never so many , you will find she equal in these among she superior in birth and fortune , which now you be to esteem on a footing with yourself ; at least I will take care they shall shortly be so , unless you prevent I by degrad yourself with such a match , a match I have hardly patience to think of , and which would break the heart of you parent , who now rejoice in the expectation of see you make a figure in the world . " --" I know not , " reply , " that my parent have any power over my inclination ; nor be I oblige to sacrifice my happiness to they whim or ambition : beside , I shall be very sorry to see that the unexpected advancement of my sister should so suddenly inspire they with this wicked pride , and make they despise they equal . I be resolve on no account to quit my dear Fanny ; no , though I could raise she as high above she present station as you have raise my sister . " -- " you sister , as well as myself , " say , " be greatly oblige to you for the comparison : but , sir , she be not worthy to be compare in beauty to my ; nor hath she half she merit . and besides , sir , as you civilly throw my marriage with you sister in my tooth , I must teach you the wide difference between we : my fortune enable I to please myself ; and it would have be as overgrown a folly in I to have omit it as in you to do it . " --" my fortune enable I to please myself likewise , " say ; " for all my pleasure be centere in ; and whilst I have health I shall be able to support she with my labour in that station to which she be bear , and with which she be content . " --" , " say , " advise you as a friend ; and no doubt my papa and mamma will be of he opinion , and will have great reason to be angry with you for destroy what he goodness hath do , and throw down we family again , after he hath raise it . it would become you better , brother , to pray for the assistance of against such a passion than to indulge it . " --" sure , sister , you be not in earnest ; I be sure she be you equal , at least . " --" she be my equal , " answer ; " but I be no longer ; I be now this gentleman 's lady , and , as such , be above she .-- I hope I shall never behave with a unbecoming pride : but , at the same time , I shall always endeaavor to know myself , and question not the assistance of to that purpose . " they be now summon to breakfast , and thus end they discourse for the present , very little to the satisfaction of any of the party . be now walk in a avenue at some distance from the house , where have promise to take the first opportunity of come to she . she have not a shilling in the world , and have subsist ever since she return entirely on the charity of parson Adam . a young gentleman , attend by many servants , come up to she , and ask she if that be not the 's house before he ? this , indeed , he well know
know ; but have fram the question for no other reason than to make she look up , and discover if she face be equal to the delicacy of she shape . he no sooner see it than he be strike with amazement . he stopt he horse , and swore she be the most beautiful creature he ever beheld . then , instantly alight and deliver he horse to he servant , he rapt out half - a - dozen oath that he would kiss she ; to which she at first submit , begge he would not be rude ; but he be not satisfy with the civility of a salute , nor even with the rudest attack he could make on she lip , but catch she in he arm , and endeavoure to kiss she breast , which with all she strength she resist , and , as we spark be not of the Herculean race , with some difficulty prevent . the young gentleman , be soon out of breath in the struggle , quit she , and , remount he horse , call one of he servants to he , whom he order to stay behind with she , and make she any offer whatever to prevail on she to return home with he in the evening ; and to assure she he would take she into keeping . he then ride on with he other servants , and arrive at the lady 's house , to whom he be a distant relation , and be come to pay a visit . the trusty fellow , who be employ in a office he have be long accustom to , discharge he part with all the fidelity and dexterity imaginable , but to no purpose . she be entirely deaf to he offer , and reject they with the utmost disdain . at last the pimp , who have perhaps more warm blood about he than he master , begin to sollicit for himself ; he tell she , though he be a servant , he be a man of some fortune , which he would make she mistress of ; and this without any insult to she virtue , for that he would marry she . she answer , if he master himself , or the greatest lord in the land , would marry she , she would refuse he . at last , be weary with persuasion , and on fire with charms which would have almost kind a flame in the bosom of a ancient philosopher or modern divine , he fasten he horse to the ground , and attack she with much more force than the gentleman have exert . poor Fanny would not have be able to resist he rudeness a short time , but the deity who preside over chaste love send she to she assistance . he no sooner come within sight , and perceive she struggling with a man , than , like a cannon - ball , or like lightning , or anything that be swifter , if anything be , he run towards she , and , come up just as the ravisher have tear she handkerchief from she breast , before he lip have touch that seat of innocence and bliss , he deal he so lusty a blow in that part of he neck which a rope would have become with the utmost propriety , that the fellow stagger backward , and , perceive he have to do with something rougher than the little , tender , trembl hand of , he quit she , and , turn about , see he rival , with fire flashing from he eye , again ready to assail he ; and , indeed , before he could well defend himself , or return the first blow , he receive a second , which , have it fall on that part of the stomach to which it be direct , would have be probably the last he would have have any occasion for ; but the ravisher , lifte up he hand , drive the blow upward to he mouth , whence it dislodge three of he tooth ; and now , not conceive any extraordinary affection for the beauty of 's person , nor be extremely pleased with this method of salutation , he collect all he force , and aim a blow at 's breast , which he artfully parry with one fist , so that it lose it be force entirely in air ; and , step one foot backward , he dart he fist so fiercely at he enemy , that , have he not catch it in he hand ( for he be a boxer of no inferior fame ) , it must have tumble he on the ground . and now the ravisher meditate another blow , which he aim at that part of the breast where the heart be lod ; do not catch it as before , yet so prevent its aim that it fall directly on he nose , but with abated force . then , move both fist and foot forward at the same time , throw he head so dexterously into the stomach of the ravisher that he fall a lifeless lump on the field , where he lay many minute breathless and motionless . when see she receive a blow in he face , and blood run in a stream from he , she begin to tear she hair and invoke all human and divine power to he assistance . she be not , however , long under this affliction before , have conquer he enemy , run to she , and assure she he be not hurt ; she then instantly fell on she knee , and thanke God that he have make the means of she rescue , and at the same time preserve
preserve he from be injure in attempt it . she offer , with she handkerchief , to wipe he blood from he face ; but he , see he rival attempt to recover he leg , turn to he , and ask he if he have enough ? to which the other answer he have ; for he believe he have fight with the instead of a man ; and , loose he horse , say he should not have attempt the wench if he have know she have be so well provide for . Fanny now beg to return with she to parson Adam , and to promise that he would leave she no more . these be proposition so agreeable to , that , have he hear they , he would have give a immediate assent ; but indeed he eye be now he only sense ; for you may remember , reader , that the ravisher have tore she handkerchief from 's neck , by which he have discover such a sight , that hath declare all the statue he ever beheld be so much inferior to it in beauty , that it be more capable of convert a man into a statue than of be imitate by the greatest master of that art . this modest creature , whom no warmth in summer could ever induce to expose she charms to the wanton sun , a modesty to which , perhaps , they owed they inconceivable whiteness , have stood many minute bare - necke in the presence of before she apprehension of he danger and the horror of see he blood would suffer she once to reflect on what concern herself ; till at last , when the cause of she concern have vanish , a admiration at he silence , together with observe the fix position of he eye , produce a idea in the lovely maid which bring more blood into she face than have flow from 's nostril . the snowy hue of she bosom be likewise change to vermilion at the instant when she clap she handkerchief round she neck . see the uneasiness she suffer , and immediately remove he eye from a object , in surveying which he have feel the greatest delight which the organ of sight be capable of convey to he soul ; --so great be he fear of offend she , and so truly do he passion for she deserve the noble name of love . Fanny , be recovere from she confusion , which be almost equall by what have feel from observe it , again mention she request ; this be instantly and gladly comply with ; and together they cross two or three field , which bring they to the habitation of . . _a discourse which happen between , , , and Fanny ; with some behaviour of which will be call by some few reader very low , absurd , and unnatural ._ the parson and he wife have just end a long dispute when the lover come to the door . indeed , this young couple have be the subject of the dispute ; for be one of those prudent people who never do anything to injure they family , or , perhaps , one of those good mother who would even stretch they conscience to serve they child . she have long entertained hope of see she eldest daughter succeed , and of make she second son a exciseman by 's interest . these be expectation she could not endure the thought of quitting , and be , therefore , very uneasy to see she husband so resolute to oppose the lady 's intention in 's affair . she tell he , " it behove every man to take the first care of he family ; that he have a wife and six child , the maintaining and provide for whom would be business enough for he without intermeddling in other folk ' affair ; that he have always preach up submission to superior , and would do ill to give a example of the contrary behaviour in he own conduct ; that if do wrong she must answer for it herself , and the sin would not lie at they door ; that have be a servant , and breed up in the lady 's own family , and consequently she must have know more of she than they do , and it be very improbable , if she have behave herself well , that the lady would have be so bitterly she enemy ; that perhaps he be too much inclin to think well of she because she be handsome , but handsome woman be often no better than they should be ; that g -- make ugly woman as well as handsome one ; and that if a woman have virtue it signify nothing whether she have beauty or no . " for all which reason she conclude he should oblige the lady , and stop the future publication of the banns . but all these excellent argument have no effect on the parson , who persist in do he duty without regard the consequence it might have on he worldly interest . he endeavoure to answer she as well as he could ; to which she have just finish she reply ( for she have always the last word everywhere but at church ) when and enter they kitchen , where the parson and he wife then sit at breakfast over some bacon and cabbage . there be a coldness in the civility of Mrs Adams which person of accurate speculation might have observe , but escape she present guest ; indeed , it be a good deal cover by the heartiness of , who no sooner hear that have neither eat nor drank that morne than he present she a bone of bacon he
he have just be gnawing , be the only remain of he provision , and then run nimbly to the tap , and produce a mug of small beer , which he call ale ; however , it be the best in he house . , address himself to the parson , tell he the discourse which have past between , he sister , and himself concern Fanny ; he then acquaint he with the danger whence he have rescue she , and communicate some apprehension on she account . he conclude that he should never have a easy moment till be absolutely he , and beg that he might be suffer to fetch a licence , say he could easily borrow the money . the parson answer , that he have already give he sentiment concern a licence , and that a very few day would make it unnecessary . " , " say he , " I wish this haste doth not arise rather from you impatience than you fear ; but , as it certainly spring from one of these cause , I will examine both . of each of these therefore in they turn ; and first for the first of these , namely , impatience . now , child , I must inform you that , if in you purpose marriage with this young woman you have no intention but the indulgence of carnal appetite , you be guilty of a very heinous sin . marriage be ordain for nobler purpose , as you will learn when you hear the service provide on that occasion read to you . Nay , perhaps , if you be a good lad , I , child , shall give you a sermon gratis , wherein I shall demonstrate how little regard ought to be have to the flesh on such occasion . the text will be the 5th , and part of the 28th verse --_ Whosoever looketh on a woman , so as to lust after her_ . the latter part I shall omit , as foreign to my purpose . indeed , all such brutal lust and affection be to be greatly subdue , if not totally eradicate , before the vessel can be say to be consecrate to honou . to marry with a view of gratify those inclination be a prostitution of that holy ceremony , and must entail a curse on all who so lightly undertake it . if , therefore , this haste arise from impatience , you be to correct , and not give way to it . now , as to the second head which I propose to speak to , namely , fear : it argue a diffidence , highly criminal , of that power in which alone we should put we trust , see we may be well assure that he be able , not only to defeat the design of we enemy , but even to turn they heart . instead of take , therefore , any unjustifiable or desperate means to ry ourselves of fear , we should resort to prayer only on these occasion ; and we may be then certain of obtain what be best for we . when any accident threaten we we be not to despair , nor , when it overtake we , to grieve ; we must submit in all thing to the will of Providence , and set we affections so much on nothing here that we can not quit it without reluctance . you be a young man , and can know but little of this world ; I be older , and have see a great deal . all passion be criminal in they excess ; and even love itself , if it be not subservient to we duty , may render we blind to it . have so love he son Isaac as to refuse the sacrifice require , be there any of we who would not condemn he ? Joseph , I know you many good quality , and value you for they ; but , as I be to render a account of you soul , which be committed to my cure , I can not see any fault without remind you of it . you be too much inclin to passion , child , and have set you affections so absolutely on this young woman , that , if g -- require she at you hand , I fear you would reluctantly part with she . now , believe I , no ought so to set he heart on any person or thing in this world , but that , whenever it shall be require or take from he in any manner by , he may be able , peaceably , quietly , and contentedly to resign it . " at which word one come hastily in , and acquaint that he youngest son be drown . he stand silent a moment , and soon begin to stamp about the room and deplore he loss with the bitterest agony . , who be overwhelm with concern likewise , recover himself sufficiently to endeaavor to comfort the parson ; in which attempt he use many argument that he have at several time remember out of he own discourse , both in private and public ( for he be a great enemy to the passion , and preach nothing more than the conquest of they by reason and grace ) , but he be not at leisure now to hearke to he advice . " child , child , " say he , " do not go about impossibility . have it be any other of my child I could have borne it with patience ; but my little prattler , the darling and comfort of my old age -- the little wretch , to be snatch out of life just at he entrance into it
it ; the sweetest , best - tempere boy , who never do a thing to offend I . it be but this morning I give he he first lesson in _. this be the very book he learn ; poor child ! it be of no further use to thee now . he would have make the best scholar , and have be a ornament to the Church ;-- such part and such goodness never meet in one so young . " " and the handsomest lad too , " say , recover from a swoon in 's arm . " my poor , shall I never see thee more ? " cry the parson . " yes , surely , " say , " and in a better place ; you will meet again , never to part more . " I believe the parson do not hear these word , for he pay little regard to they , but go on lamenting , whilst the tear trickle down into he bosom . at last he cry out , " where be my little darling ? " and be sally out , when to he great surprize and joy , in which I hope the reader will sympathize , he meet he son in a wet condition indeed , but alive and run towards he . the person who bring the news of he misfortune have be a little too eager , as people sometimes be , from , I believe , no very good principle , to relate ill news ; and , see he fall into the river , instead of run to he assistance , directly ran to acquaint he father of a fate which he have conclude to be inevitable , but whence the child be relieve by the same poor pedlar who have relieve he father before from a less distress . the parson 's joy be now as extravagant as he grief have be before ; he kiss and embrace he son a thousand time , and dance about the room like one frantic ; but as soon as he discover the face of he old friend the pedlar , and hear the fresh obligation he have to he , what be he sensation ? not those which two courtier feel in one another 's embrace ; not those with which a great man receive the vile treacherous engine of he wicked purpose , not those with which a worthless younger brother wish he elder joy of a son , or a man congratulate he rival on he obtain a mistress , a place , or a honour .-- no , reader ; he feel the ebullition , the overflowing of a full , honest , open heart , towards the person who have confer a real obligation , and of which , if thou canst not conceive a idea withing , I will not vainly endeaavor to assist thee . when these tumult be over , the parson , take aside , proceed thus -- " no , , do not give too much way to thy passion , if thou dost expect happiness . " the patience of , nor perhaps of , could bear no longer ; he interrupt the parson , say , " it be easier to give advice than take it ; nor do he perceive he could so entirely conquer himself , when he apprehend he have lose he son , or when he find he recover . " --" , " reply Adam , raise he voice , " it doth not become green head to advise grey hair .-- thou be ignorant of the tenderness of fatherly affection ; when thou be a father thou will be capable then only of know what a father can feel . no man be oblige to impossibility ; and the loss of a child be one of those great trials where we grief may be allow to become immoderate . " -- " well , sir , " cry , " and if I love a mistress as well as you you child , surely she loss would grieve I equally . " --" yes , but such love be foolishness and wrong in itself , and ought to be conquer , " answer ; " it savour too much of the flesh . " --" sure , sir , " say , " it be not sinful to love my wife , no , not even to doat on she to distraction ! " -- " indeed but it be , " say Adams . " every man ought to love he wife , no doubt ; we be command so to do ; but we ought to love she with moderation and discretion . " --" I be afraid I shall be guilty of some sin in spite of all my endeavour , " say ; " for I shall love without any moderation , I be sure . " --" you talk foolishly and childishly , " cry Adam .-- " indeed , " say , who have listen to the latter part of they conversation , " you talk more foolishly yourself . I hope , my dear , you will never preach any such doctrine as that husband can love they wife too well . if I know you have such a sermon in the house I be sure I would burn it , and I declare , if I have not be convince you have love I as well as you could , I can answer for myself , I should have hate and despise you . come up ! doctrine , indeed ! a wife hath a right to insist on she husband 's love she as much as ever he can ; and he be a sinful villain who doth not . Doth he not promise to love she
she , and to comfort she , and to cherish she , and all that ? I be sure I remember it all as well as if I have repeat it over but yesterday , and shall never forget it . besides , I be certain you do not preach as you practise ; for you have be a loving and a cherish husband to I ; that be the truth of n't ; and why you should endeaavor to put such wicked nonsense into this young man 's head I can not devise . do not hearke to he , ; be as good a husband as you be able , and love you wife with all you body and soul too . " here a violent rap at the door put a end to they discourse , and produce a scene which the reader will find in the next chapter . . _A visit which the polite and she polite friend pay to the parson ._ the have no sooner have a account from the gentleman of he meeting a wonderful beauty near she house , and perceive the rapture with which he speak of she , than , immediately conclude it must be Fanny , she begin to meditate a design of bring they better acquaint ; and to entertain hope that the fine clothes , present , and promise of this youth , would prevail on she to abandon : she therefore propose to she company a walk in the field before dinner , when she lead they towards 's house ; and , as she approach it , tell they if they please she would divert they with one of the most ridiculous sight they have ever see , which be a old foolish parson , who , she say , laugh , keep a wife and six brat on a salary of about twenty pound a year ; add , that there be not such another rag family in the parish . they all readily agree to this visit , and arrive whilst be declaim as in the last chapter . , which be the name of the young gentleman we have see ride towards 's , with he cane mimick the rap of a footman at the door . the people within , namely , , he wife and three child , , , and the pedlar , be all throw into confusion by this knock , but go directly to the door , which be open , the and she company walk in , and be receive by the parson with about two hundred bow , and by he wife with as many curtsy ; the latter tell the lady " she be asham to be see in such a pickle , and that she house be in such a litter ; but that if she have expect such a honour from she ladyship she should have find she in a better manner . " the parson make no apology , though he be in he half - cassock and a flannel nightcap . he say " they be heartily welcome to he poor cottage , " and turn to , cry out , " non mea renidet in domo lacunar_. " the beau answer , " he do not understand Welsh ; " at which the parson stare and make no reply . , or , be a young gentleman of about four foot five inche in height . he wear he own hair , though the scarcity of it might have give he sufficient excuse for a periwig . he face be thin and pale ; the shape of he body and leg none of the best , for he have very narrow shoulders and no calf ; and he gait might more properly be call hopping than walking . the qualification of he mind be well adapt to he person . we shall handle they first negatively . he be not entirely ignorant ; for he could talk a little french and s two or three italian song ; he have liv too much in the world to be bashful , and too much at court to be proud : he seem not much inclin to avarice , for he be profuse in he expense ; nor have he all the feature of prodigality , for he never give a shilling : no hater of woman , for he always dangle after they ; yet so little subject to lust , that he have , among those who know he best , the character of great moderation in he pleasure ; no drinker of wine ; nor so addict to passion but that a hot word or two from a adversary make he immediately cool . now , to give he only a dash or two on the affirmative side : though he be bear to a immense fortune , he choose , for the pitiful and dirty consideration of a place of little consequence , to depend entirely on the will of a fellow whom they call a great man ; who treat he with the utmost disrespect , and exact of he a plenary obedience to he command , which he implicitly submit to , at the expense of he conscience , he honour , and of he country , in which he have himself so very large a share . and to finish he character ; as he be entirely well satisfied with he own person and part , so he be very apt to ridicule and laugh at any imperfection in another . such be the little person , or rather thing , that hopp after into 's kitchen . the parson and he company retreat from the chimney - side , where they have be seate , to give room to the lady and hers . instead of return any of the curtsy or extraordinary
extraordinary civility of , the lady , turn to , cry out , " ! !_ " and presently after discovering ( for she do not need the circumstance of she stand by to assure the identity of she person ) , she ask the beau " whether he do not think she a pretty girl ? " --" , madam , " answer he , " 'ti the very same I meet . " " I do not imagine , " reply the lady , " you have so good a taste . " --" because I never like you , I warrant , " cry the beau . " ridiculous ! " say she : " you know you be always my aversion . " " I would never mention aversion , " answer the beau , " with that face [ ] ; dear , wash you face before you mention aversion , I beseech you . " he then laugh , and turn about to coquet it with . [ ] Lest this should appear unnatural to some reader , we think proper to acquaint they , that it be take verbatim from very polite conversation . have be all this time begge and pray the lady to sit down , a favour which she at last obtained . the little boy to whom the accident have happen , still keep he place by the fire , be chid by he mother for not be more mannerly : but take he part , and , commend he beauty , tell the parson he be he very picture . she then , see a book in he hand , ask " if he could read ? " --" yes , " cry , " a little latin , madam : he be just get into . " --" a fig for quere genius ! " answer she ; " let I hear he read a little . " --" , , lege , " say Adams : but the boy make no answer , till he see the parson knin he brows , and then cry , " I do not understand you , father . " --" how , boy ! " say Adams ; " what doth lego make in the imperative mood ? , doth it not ? " --" yes , " answer .-- " and what besides ? " say the father . " , " quoth the son , after some hesitation . " a good boy , " say the father : " and now , child , what be the of lego ? " -- to which the boy , after long puzzling , answer , he could not tell . " how ! " cry Adams , in a passion ;--" what , hath the water wash away you learn ? why , what be latin for the english verb read ? consider before you speak . " the child consider some time , and then the parson cry twice or thrice , " --, --. " answer , " . " --" very well ; --and then what be the , " say the parson , " of the verb lego ? " --" to read , " cry .--" very well , " say the parson ; " a good boy : you can do well if you will take pain .-- I assure you ladyship he be not much above eight year old , and be out of he Propria qua already .-- come , , read to she ladyship ; " -- which she again desire , in order to give the beau time and opportunity with , begin as in the follow chapter . . the history of two friend , which may afford a useful lesson to all those person who happen to take up they residence in married family ._ " and be two friend . " -- " Pronounce it , child , " cry the parson .--" , , " say , " let you son read without interruption . " then proceed . " and be two friend , who , have be educate together at the same school , commence a friendship which they preserve a long time for each other . it be so deeply fix in both they mind , that a long absence , during which they have maintain no correspondence , do not eradicate nor lessen it : but it revive in all its force at they first meeting , which be not till after fifteen year ' absence , most of which time have spend in the - es . " --" Pronounce it short , Indies , " say Adams .-- " pray ? sir , be quiet , " say the lady .-- the boy repeat -- " in the , whilst have serve he king and country in the army . in which different service they have find such different success , that be now married , and retire with a fortune of thirty thousand pound ; and be arrive to the degree of a lieutenant of foot ; and be not worth a single shilling . " the regiment in which be statione happen to be order into quarter within a small distance from the estate which have purchase , and where he be settled . this latter , who be now become a country gentleman , and a justice of peace , come to attend the quarter session in the town where he old friend be quarter , soon after he arrival . some affair in which a soldier be concerned occasion to attend the justice . , and time , and the change of climate have so much altered , that do not immediately recollect the feature of he old acquaintance : but it be otherwise with . he know the moment he see he ; nor
nor could he contain himself from quit the bench , and run hastily to embrace he . stand at first a little surprized ; but have soon sufficient information from he friend , whom he no sooner remember than he return he embrace with a passion which make many of the spectator laugh , and give to some few a much higher and more agreeable sensation . " not to detain the reader with minute circumstance , insist on he friend 's return with he to he house that even ; which request be comply with , and leave for a month 's absence for obtain of the commanding officer . " if it be possible for any circumstance to give any addition to the happiness which propose in this visit , he receive that additional pleasure by finding , on he arrival at he friend 's house , that he lady be a old acquaintance which he have formerly contract at he quarter , and who have always appear to be of a most agreeable temper ; a character she have ever maintain among she intimate , be of that number , every individual of which be call quite the best sort of woman in the world . " but , good as this lady be , she be still a woman ; that be to say , a angel , and not a angel . " --" you must mistake , child , " cry the parson , " for you read nonsense . " --" it be so in the book , " answer the son . be then silence by authority , and proceed -- " for though she person be of that kind to which man attribute the name of angel , yet in she mind she be perfectly woman . of which a great degree of obstinacy give the most remarkable and perhaps most pernicious instance . " a day or two pass after 's arrival before any instance of this appear ; but it be impossible to conceal it long . both she and she husband soon lose all apprehension from they friend 's presence , and fall to they dispute with as much vigour as ever . these be still pursue with the utmost ardour and eagerness , however trifl the causis be whence they first arise . Nay , however incredible it may seem , the little consequence of the matter in debate be frequently give as a reason for the fierceness of the contention , as thus : ' if you love I , sure you would never dispute with I such a trifle as this . ' the answer to which be very obvious ; for the argument would hold equally on both side , and be constantly retort with some addition , as -- 'I be sure I have much more reason to say so , who be in the right . ' during all these dispute , always keep strict silence , and preserve a even countenance , without show the least visible inclination to either party . one day , however , when madam have leave the room in a violent fury , could not refrain from refer he cause to he friend . be ever anything so unreasonable , say he , as this woman ? what shall I do with she ? I doat on she to distraction ; nor have I any cause to complain of , more than this obstinacy in she temper ; whatever she assert , she will maintain against all the reason and conviction in the world . pray give I you advice .-- first , say , I will give my opinion , which be , flatly , that you be in the wrong ; for , suppose she be in the wrong , be the subject of you contention any way material ? what signify it whether you be marry in a red or a yellow waistcoat ? for that be you dispute . now , suppose she be mistaken ; as you love she you say so tenderly , and I believe she deserve it , would it not have be wiser to have yield , though you certainly know yourself in the right , than to give either she or yourself any uneasiness . for my own part , if ever I marry , I be resolve to enter into a agreement with my wife , that in all dispute ( especially about trifle ) that party who be most convinced they be right shall always surrender the victory ; by which mean we shall both be forward to give up the cause . I own , say , my dear friend , shak he by the hand , there be great truth and reason in what you say ; and I will for the future endeavour to follow you advice . they soon after break up the conversation , and , go to he wife , ask she pardon , and tell she he friend have convince he he have be in the wrong . she immediately begin a vast encomium on , in which he second she , and both agree he be the worthiest and wisest man upon earth . when next they meet , which be at supper , though she have promise not to mention what she husband tell she , she could not forbear cast the kindest and most affectionate look on , and ask he , with the sweetest voice , whether she should help he to some pott woodcock ? Pot partridge , my dear , you mean , say the husband . my dear , say she , I ask you friend if he will eat any pott woodcock ; and I be sure I must know , who pott it . I think I should know too , who shoot they , reply the husband ,
, and I be convinced that I have not see a woodcock this year ; however , though I know I be in the right , I submit , and the potted partridge be pott woodcock if you desire to have it so . it be equal to I , say she , whether it be one or the other ; but you would persuade one out of one 's sense ; to be sure , you be always in the right in you own opinion ; but you friend , I believe , know which he be eat . answer nothing , and the dispute continue , as usual , the greatest part of the evening . the next morning the lady , accidentally meet , and be convince he be she friend , and of she side , accost he thus :-- I be certain , sir , you have long since wonder at the unreasonableness of my husband . he be indeed , in other respects , a good sort of man , but so positive , that no woman but one of my complying temper could possibly live with he . why , last night , now , be ever any creature so unreasonable ? I be certain you must condemn he . pray , answer I , be he not in the wrong ? , after a short silence , speak as follow : I be sorry , madam , that , as good manners oblige I to answer against my will , so a adherence to truth force I to declare myself of a different opinion . to be plain and honest , you be entirely in the wrong ; the cause I own not worth disputing , but the bird be undoubtedly a partridge . of sir ! reply the lady , I can not possibly help you taste . , return , that be very little material ; for , have it be otherwise , a husband might have expect submission .--Indeed ! sir , say she , I assure you ! -- yes , madam , cry he , he might , from a person of you excellent understanding ; and pardon I for say , such a condescension would have show a superiority of sense even to you husband himself .-- but , dear sir , say she , why should I submit when I be in the right ? -- for that very reason , answer he ; it would be the greatest instance of affection imaginable ; for can anything be a greater object of we compassion than a person we live in the wrong ? ay , but I should endeaavor , say she , to set he right . pardon I , madam , answer : I will apply to you own experience if you ever find you argument have that effect . the more we judgments err , the less we be willing to own it : for my own part , I have always observe the person who maintain the worst side in any contest be the warmest . why , say she , I must confess there be truth in what you say , and I will endeaavor to practise it . the husband then come in , depart . and , approach he wife with a air of good humour , tell she he be sorry for they foolish dispute the last night ; but he be now convinced of he error . she answer , smile , she believe she owed he condescension to he complacence ; that she be asham to think a word have pass on so silly a occasion , especially as she be satisfye she have be mistaken . a little contention follow , but with the utmost good - will to each other , and be conclude by she assert that have thoroughly convinced she she have be in the wrong . upon which they both in the praise of they common friend . " now pass he time with great satisfaction , these dispute be much less frequent , as well as shorter than usual ; but the devil , or some unlucky accident in which perhaps the have no hand , shortly put a end to he happiness . he be now eternally the private referee of every difference ; in which , after have perfectly , as he think , establish the doctrine of submission , he never scruple to assure both privately that they be in the right in every argument , as before he have follow the contrary method . one day a violent litigation happen in he absence , and both party agree to refer it to he decision . the husband professe himself sure the decision would be in he favour ; the wife answer , he might be mistaken ; for she believe he friend be convince how seldom she be to blame ; and that if he know all -- the husband replie , my dear , I have no desire of any retrospect ; but I believe , if you know all too , you would not imagine my friend so entirely on you side . Nay , say she , since you provoke I , I will mention one instance . you may remember we dispute about send to school in cold weather , which point I give up to you from mere compassion , knowe myself to be in the right ; and himself tell I afterwards he think I so . my dear , reply the husband , I will not scruple you veracity ; but I assure you solemnly , on my apply to he , he give it absolutely on my side , and say he would have act in the same manner . they then proceed to produce numberless other instance , in all which have , on vows of secresy
secresy , give he opinion on both side . in the conclusion , both believe each other , they fall severely on the treachery of , and agree that he have be the occasion of almost every dispute which have fall out between they . they then become extremely loving , and so full of condescension on both side , that they vy with each other in censur they own conduct , and jointly vent they indignation on , whom the wife , fear a bloody consequence , earnestly entreate she husband to suffer quietly to depart the next day , which be the time fix for he return to quarter , and then drop he acquaintance . " however ungenerous this behaviour in may be esteem , he wife obtain a promise from he ( though with difficulty ) to follow she advice ; but they both express such unusual coldness that day to , that he , who be quick of apprehension , take aside , press he so home , that he at last discover the secret . acknowledge the truth , but tell he the design with which he have do it .-- to which the other answer , he would have ac more friendly to have let he into the whole design ; for that he might have assure himself of he secresy . reply , with some indignation , he have give he a sufficient proof how capable he be of concealing a secret from he wife . return with some warmth -- he have more reason to upbraid he , for that he have cause most of the quarrel between they by he strange conduct , and might ( if they have not discover the affair to each other ) have be the occasion of they separation . then say " -- but something now happen which put a stop to 's reading , and of which we shall treat in the next chapter . . in which the history be continue ._ have borne with great uneasiness the impertinence of to , who have be talk pretty freely to she , and offer she settlement ; but the respect to the company have restrain he from interfere whilst the beau confin himself to the use of he tongue only ; but the say beau , watch a opportunity whilst the lady 's eye be dispose another way , offer a rudeness to she with he hand ; which Joseph no sooner perceive than he present he with so sound a box on the ear , that it convey he several pace from where he stand . the lady immediately scream out , rise from they chair ; and the beau , as soon as he recover himself , draw he hanger : which observe , snatch up the lid of a pot in he left hand , and , cover himself with it as with a shield , without any weapon of offence in he other hand , steep in before , and expose himself to the enrage beau , who threaten such perdition and destruction , that it fright the woman , who be all get in a huddle together , out of they wit , even to hear he denunciation of vengeance . be of a different complexion , and beg Adams to let he rival come on ; for he have a good cudgel in he hand , and do not fear he . Fanny now faint into 's arm , and the whole room be in confusion , when , pass by , who lay snug under the pot -lid , come up to , and insist on he sheathing the hanger , promise he should have satisfaction ; which declare he would give he , and fight he at any weapon whatever . the beau now sheath he hanger , and take out a pocket - glass , and vow vengeance all the time , re-adjust he hair ; the parson deposite he shield ; and , run to , soon bring she back to life . chid for he insult on ; but he answer , he would have attack a army in the same cause . " what cause ? " say the lady . " madam , " answer , " he be rude to that young woman . " -- " what , " say the lady , " I suppose he would have kiss the wench ; and be a gentleman to be strike for such a offer ? I must tell you , , these air do not become you . " --" madam , " say , " I see the whole affair , and I do not commend my brother ; for I can not perceive why he should take upon he to be this girl 's champion . " --" I can commend he , " say Adam : " he be a brave lad ; and it become any man to be the champion of the innocent ; and he must be the basest coward who would not vindicate a woman with whom he be on the brink of marriage . " --" , " say , " my brother be not a proper match for such a young woman as this . " -- " no , " say ; " nor do you , , act in you proper character by encourage any such doings ; and I be very much surprize you should concern yourself in it . I think you wife and family you properer care . " --" indeed , madam , you ladyship say very true , " answer : " he talk a pack of nonsense , that the whole parish be he child . I be sure I do not understand what he mean by it ; it would make some woman suspect he have go astray , but I
I acquit he of that ; I can read as well as he , and I never find that the parson be obliged to provide for other folk ' child ; and besides , he be but a poor curate , and hath little enough , as you ladyship know , for I and mine . " --" you say very well , , " quoth the , who have not speak a word to she before ; " you seem to be a very sensible woman ; and I assure you , you husband be act a very foolish part , and oppose he own interest , see my nephew be violently set against this match : and indeed I can not blame he ; it be by no means one suitable to we family . " in this manner the lady proceed with , whilst the beau hopp about the room , shak he head , partly from pain and partly from anger ; and be chid Fanny for she assurance in aiming at such a match as she brother . poor Fanny answer only with she tear , which have long since begin to wet she handkerchief ; which perceive , take she by the arm , and wrap it in he carry she off , swear he would own no relation to any one who be a enemy to she he love more than all the world . he go out with under he left arm , brandish a cudgel in he right , and neither nor the beau think proper to oppose he . and she company make a very short stay behind he ; for the lady 's bell now summon they to dress ; for which they have just time before dinner . Adam seem now very much deject , which he wife perceive , begin to apply some matrimonial balsam . she tell he he have reason to be concerned , for that he have probably ruin he family with he trick almost ; but perhaps he be grieve for the loss of he two child , and . he eldest daughter go on : " indeed , father , it be very hard to bring stranger here to eat you child 's bread out of they mouth . you have keep they ever since they come home ; and , for anything I see to the contrary , may keep they a month longer ; be you oblige to give she meat , tho 'f she be never so handsome ? but I do not see she be so much handsomer than other people . if people be to be keep for they beauty , she would scarce fare better than she neighbour , I believe . as for , I have nothing to say ; he be a young man of honest principle , and will pay some time or other for what he hath ; but for the girl -- why doth she not return to she place she run away from ? I would not give such a vagabond slut a halfpenny though I have a million of money ; no , though she be starve . " " indeed but I would , " cry little ; " and , father , rather than poor Fanny shall be starve , I will give she all this bread and cheese " --( offer what he hold in he hand ) . Adam smile on the boy , and tell he he rejoice to see he be a ; and that if he have a halfpenny in he pocket , he would have give it he ; tell he it be he duty to look upon all he neighbour as he brother and sister , and love they accordingly . " yes , papa , " say he , " I love she better than my sister , for she be handsomer than any of they . " " be she so , saucebox ? " say the sister , give he a box on the ear ; which the father would probably have resent , have not , , and the pedlar at that instant return together . Adams bid he wife prepare some food for they dinner ; she say , " truly she could not , she have something else to do . " Adam rebuk she for dispute he command , and quote many text of Scripture to prove " that the husband be the head of the wife , and she be to submit and obey . " the wife answer , " it be blasphemy to talk Scripture out of church ; that such thing be very proper to be say in the pulpit , but that it be profane to talk they in common discourse . " tell " he be not come with any design to give he or any trouble ; but to desire the favour of all they company to the ( a ale - house in the parish ) , where he have bespeak a piece of bacon and green for they dinner . " , who be a very good sort of woman , only rather too strict in oeconomy , readily accept this invitation , as do the parson himself by she example ; and away they all walk together , not omitt little , to whom give a shilling when he hear of he intend liberality to . . where the good - natured reader will see something which will give he no great pleasure ._ the pedlar have be very inquisitive from the time he have first hear that the great house in this parish belong to the , and have learn that she be the widow of , and that have buy Fanny , at about the age of three or four year , of a travel woman ; and , now they homely
homely but hearty meal be end , he tell he believe he could acquaint she with she parent . the whole company , especially she herself , start at this offer of the pedlar 's . he then proceed thus , while they all lent they strictest attention :--" though I be now contente with this humble way of get my livelihood , I be formerly a gentleman ; for so all those of my profession be call . in a word , I be a drummer in a irish regiment of foot . whilst I be in this honourable station I attend a officer of we regiment into a - recruiting . in we march from to ( for since the decay of the woollen trade the clothing town have furnish the army with a great number of recruit ) we overtake on the road a woman , who seem to be about thirty year old or thereabout , not very handsome , but well enough for a soldier . as we come up to she , she mende she pace , and fall into discourse with we lady ( for every man of the party , namely , a serjeant , two private man , and a drum , be provide with they woman except myself ) , she continue to travel on with we . I , perceive she must fall to my lot , advance presently to she , make love to she in we military way , and quickly succeed to my wish . we struck a bargain within a mile , and live together as man and wife to she die day . " " I suppose , " say Adams , interrupt he , " you be marry with a licence ; for I do not see how you could contrive to have the banns publish while you be march from place to place . " " no , sir , " say the pedlar , " we take a licence to go to be together without any banns . " " ay ! ay ! " say the parson ; " _ex necessitate , a licence may be allowable enough ; but surly , surly , the other be the more regular and eligible way . " the pedlar proceed thus : " she return with I to we regiment , and remove with we from quarter to quarter , till at last , whilst we lay at , she fall ill of a fever and die . when she be on she death - bed she call I to she , and , cry bitterly , declare she could not depart this world without discover a secret to I , which , she say , be the only sin which sit heavy on she heart . she say she have formerly travel in a company of gypsy , who have make a practice of steal away child ; that for she own part , she have be only once guilty of the crime ; which , she say , she lament more than all the rest of she sins , since probably it might have occasion the death of the parent ; for , add she , it be almost impossible to describe the beauty of the young creature , which be about a year and a half old when I kidnap it . we keep she ( for she be a girl ) above two year in we company , when I sell she myself , for three guinea , to , in . now , you know whether there be any more of that name in this county . " " yes , " say Adams , " there be several Booby who be squire , but I believe no baronet now alive ; besides , it answer so exactly in every point , there be no room for doubt ; but you have forget to tell we the parent from whom the child be steal . " " they name , " answer the pedlar , " be Andrews . they live about thirty mile from the squire ; and she tell I that I might be sure to find they out by one circumstance ; for that they have a daughter of a very strange name , , or Pam_e_la ; some pronounce it one way , and some the other . " , who have change colour at the first mention of the name , now faint away ; turn pale , and poor begin to roar ; the parson fell on he knee , and ejaculate many thanksgiving that this discovery have be make before the dreadful sin of incest be commit ; and the pedlar be strike with amazement , not be able to account for all this confusion ; the cause of which be presently open by the parson 's daughter , who be the only unconcerned person ( for the mother be chaf 's temples , and take the utmost care of she ) : and , indeed , be the only creature whom the daughter would not have pitie in she situation ; wherein , though we compassionate she ourselves , we shall leave she for a little while , and pay a short visit to . chapter XIII . the history , return to the , give some account of the terrible conflict in she breast between love and pride ; with what happen on the present discovery ._ the lady sit down with she company to dinner , but eat nothing . as soon as she cloth be remove she whisper that she be take a little ill , and desire she to entertain she husband and beau Didapper . she then go up into she chamber , send for , throw herself on the bed in the agony of love , rage , and despair ; nor could she
she conceal these boiling passion longer without bursting . now approach she bed , and ask how she ladyship do ; but , instead of revealing she disorder , as she intend , she enter into a long encomium on the beauty and virtue of ; end , at last , with express she concern that so much tenderness should be throw away on so despicable a object as . , well know how to humour she mistress 's frenzy , proceed to repeat , with exaggeration , if possible , all she mistress have say , and conclude with a wish that have be a gentleman , and that she could see she lady in the arm of such a husband . the lady then start from the bed , and , take a turn or two across the room , cry out , with a deep sigh , " sure he would make any woman happy ! " --" you ladyship , " say she , " would be the happiest woman in the world with he . a fig for custom and nonsense ! what ' vail what people say ? shall I be afraid of eat sweetmeat because people may say I have a sweet tooth ? if I have a mind to marry a man , all the world should not hinder I . you ladyship hath no parent to tutelar you infection ; beside , he be of you ladyship 's family now , and as good a gentleman as any in the country ; and why should not a woman follow she mind as well as man ? why should not you ladyship marry the brother as well as you nephew the sister . I be sure , if it be a fragrant crime , I would not persuade you ladyship to it . " --" but , dear , " answer the lady , " if I could prevail on myself to commit such a weakness , there be that curse in the way , whom the idiot -- of how I hate and despise he ! " --" she ! a little ugly mynx , " cry ; " leave she to I . I suppose you ladyship hath hear of 's fitting with one of 's servants about she ; and he master hath order they to carry she away by force this evening . I will take care they shall not want assistance . I be talk with this gentleman , who be below , just when you ladyship send for I ." --" go back , " say the , " this instant , for I expect will soon be go . do all you can ; for I be resolve this wench shall not be in we family : I will endeaavor to return to the company ; but let I know as soon as she be carry off . " go away ; and she mistress begin to arraign she own conduct in the follow manner :-- " what be I do ? how do I suffer this passion to creep imperceptibly upon I ? how many day be past since I could have submit to ask myself the question ?-- a footman ! Distraction ! can I afterwards bear the eye of my acquaintance ? but I can retire from they ; retire with one in whom I propose more happiness than the world without he can give I ! Retire - to feed continually on beauty which my inflam imagination sicken with eagerly gaze on ; to satisfy every appetite , every desire , with they utmost wish . ! and do I doat thus on a footman ? I despise , I detest my passion .-- yet why ? be he not generous , gentle , kind ?--Kind ! to whom ? to the meanest wretch , a creature below my consideration . Doth he not -- yes , he doth prefer she . curse he beauty , and the little low heart that possess they ; which can basely descmend to this despicable wench , and be ungratefully deaf to all the honour I do he . and can I then love this monster ? no , I will tear he image from my bosom , tread on he , spurn he . I will have those pitiful charms , which now I despise , mang in my sight ; for I will not suffer the little jade I hate to riot in the beauty I contemn . no ; though I despise he myself , though I would spurn he from my foot , be he to languish at they , no other should taste the happiness I scorn . why do I say happiness ? to I it would be misery . to sacrifice my reputation , my character , my rank in life , to the indulgence of a mean and a vile appetite ! how I detest the thought ! how much more exquisite be the pleasure result from the reflection of virtue and prudence than the faint relish of what flow from vice and folly ! Whither do I suffer this improper , this mad passion to hurry I , only by neglecting to summon the aids of reason to my assistance ? , which hath now set before I my desire in they proper colour , and immediately help I to expel they . yes , I thank and my pride , I have now perfectly conquer this unworthy passion ; and if there be no obstacle in its way , my pride would disdain any pleasure which could be the consequence of so base , so mean , so vulgar -- " return at this instant in a violent hurry , and with the utmost eagerness cry out , " of madam ! I have strange news . Tom the footman be just come from the
the ; where , it seem , and the rest of they be a jinketting ; and he say there be a strange man who hath discover that and be brother and sister . " --" how , ? " cry the lady , in a surprize .--" I have not time , madam , " cry , " to enquire about particle , but say it be most certainly true . " this unexpected account entirely obliterate all those admirable reflection which the supreme power of reason have so wisely make just before . in short , when despair , which have more share in produce the resolution of hatre we have see take , begin to retreat , the lady hesitate a moment , and then , forget all the purport of she soliloquy , dismiss she woman again , with order to bid attend she in the parlour , whither she now hasten to acquaint with the news . say she could not believe it ; for she have never hear that she mother have lose any child , or that she have ever have any more than and herself . the lady flow into a violent rage with she , and talk of upstart and disown relation who have so lately be on a level with she . make no answer ; but she husband , take up she cause , severely reprimand he aunt for she behaviour to he wife : he tell she , if it have be earlier in the evening she should not have stay a moment longer in she house ; that he be convinced , if this young woman could be prove she sister , she would readily embrace she as such , and he himself would do the same . he then desire the fellow might be send for , and the young woman with he , which immediately order ; and , think proper to make some apology to for what she have say , it be readily accept , and all thing reconcile . the pedlar now attend , as do and , who would not quit she ; the parson likewise be induce , not only by curiosity , of which he have no small portion , but he duty , as he apprehend it , to follow they ; for he continue all the way to exhort they , who be now break they heart , to offer up thanksgiving , and be joyful for so miraculous a escape . when they arrive at - they be presently call into the parlour , where the pedlar repeat the same story he have tell before , and insist on the truth of every circumstance ; so that all who hear he be extremely well satisfied of the truth , except , who imagine , as she have never hear either of she parent mention such a accident , that it must be certainly false ; and except the , who suspect the falsehood of the story from she ardent desire that it should be true ; and , who fear its truth , from he earnest wish that it might prove false . now desire they all to suspend they curiosity and absolute belief or disbelief till the next morning , when he expect old and he wife to fetch himself and home in he coach , and then they might be certain of certainly know the truth or falsehood of this relation ; in which , he say , as there be many strong circumstance to induce they credit , so he could not perceive any interest the pedlar could have in invent it , or in endeavouring to impose such a falsehood on they . the , who be very little use to such company , entertain they all --_viz _. she nephew , he wife , she brother and sister , the beau , and the parson , with great good humour at she own table . as to the pedlar , she order he to be make as welcome as possible by she servants . all the company in the parlour , except the disappointed lover , who sit sullen and silent , be full of mirth ; for have prevail on to ask 's pardon , with which he be perfectly satisfied . many joke pass between the beau and the parson , chiefly on each other 's dress ; these afforde much diversion to the company . chide she brother for the concern which he exprest at discover a new sister . she say , if he love Fanny as he ought , with a pure affection , he have no reason to lament be related to she .-- upon which begin to discourse on Platonic love ; whence he make a quick transition to the joy in the next world , and conclude with strongly assert that there be no such thing as pleasure in this . at which and she husband smile on one another . this happy pair propose to retire ( for no other person give the least symptom of desiring rest ) , they all repair to several bed provide for they in the same house ; nor be himself suffer to go home , it be a stormy night . Fanny indeed often beg she might go home with the parson ; but she stay be so strongly insist on , that she at last , by 's advice , consent . . _Contain several curiious night - adventure , in which fell into many hair - breadth ' scape , partly owe to he goodness , and partly to he inadvertency ._ about a hour after they have all separated ( it be now past three in the morning ) , , whose passion for permit he not to close he eye , but have employ he imagination in contrivance how to satisfy he
he desire , at last hit on a method by which he hope to effect it . he have order he servant to bring he word where lay , and have receive he information ; he therefore arise , put on he breech and nightgown , and stole softly along the gallery which lead to she apartment ; and , be come to the door , as he imagine it , he open it with the least noise possible and enter the chamber . a savour now invade he nostril which he do not expect in the room of so sweet a young creature , and which might have probably have no good effect on a cooler lover . however , he grope out the bed with difficulty , for there be not a glimpse of light , and , open the curtain , he whisper in 's ( for he be a excellent mimic ) , " , my angel ! I be come to inform thee that I have discover the falsehood of the story we last night hear . I be no longer thy brother , but the lover ; nor will I be delay the enjoyment of thee one moment longer . you have sufficient assurance of my constancy not to doubt my marry you , and it would be want of love to deny I the possession of thy charms . " -- so say , he disencumber himself from the little clothes he have on , and , leap into bed , embrace he angel , as he conceive she , with great rapture . if he be surprize at receive no answer , he be no less pleased to find he hug return with equal ardour . he remain not long in this sweet confusion ; for both he and he paramour presently discover they error . indeed it be no other than the accomplished Slipslop whom he have engage ; but , though she immediately know the person whom she have mistaken for , he be at a loss to guess at the representative of . he have so little seen or take notice of this gentlewoman , that light itself would have afforde he no assistance in he conjecture . no sooner have perceive he mistake than he attempt to escape from the bed with much greater haste than he have make to it ; but the watchful prevent he . for that prudent woman , be disappointed of those delicious offering which she fancy have promise she pleasure , resolve to make a immediate sacrifice to she virtue . indeed she want a opportunity to heal some wound , which she late conduct have , she fear , give she reputation ; and , as she have a wonderful presence of mind , she conceive the person of the unfortunate beau to be luckily throw in she way to restore she lady 's opinion of she impregnable chastity . at that instant , therefore , when he offer to leap from the bed , she catch fast hold of he shirt , at the same time roar out , " o thou villain ! who hast attack my chastity , and , I believe , ruin I in my sleep ; I will swear a rape against thee , I will prosecute thee with the utmost vengeance . " the beau attempt to get loose , but she hold he fast , and when he struggle she cry out " ! murder ! rape ! robbery ! ruin ! " at which word , parson Adams , who lay in the next chamber , wakeful , and meditat on the pedlar 's discovery , jump out of bed , and , without stay to put a rag of clothes on , hasten into the apartment whence the cry proceed . he make directly to the bed in the dark , where , lay hold of the beau 's skin ( for have tear he shirt almost off ) , and find he skin extremely soft , and hear he in a low voice begge to let he go , he no longer doubt but this be the young woman in danger of ravishing , and immediately fal on the bed , and lay hold on 's ching , where he find a rough beard , he belief be confirm ; he therefore rescue the beau , who presently make he escape , and then , turn towards , receive such a cuff on he chop , that , he wrath kindling instantly , he offer to return the favour so stoutly , that have poor Slipslop receive the fist , which in the dark pass by she and fall on the pillow , she would most probably have give up the ghost . Adam , miss he blow , fall directly on , who cuff and scratch as well as she could ; nor be he behindhand with she in he endeavour , but happily the darkness of the night befriend she . she then cry she be a woman ; but answer , she be rather the devil , and if she be he would grapple with he ; and , be again irritate by another stroke on he chop , he give she such a remembrance in the gut , that she begin to roar loud enough to be hear all over the house . Adams then , seize she by the hair ( for she double - clout have fall off in the scuffle ) , pinne she head down to the bolster , and then both call for light together . the , who be as wakeful as any of she guest , have be alarme from the beginning ; and , be a woman of a bold spirit , she slipt on a nightgown , petticoat , and slipper , and take a candle , which
which always burnt in she chamber , in she hand , she walk undauntedly to 's room ; where she enter just at the instant as Adam have discover , by the two mountain which carry before she , that he be concerned with a female . he then conclude she to be a witch , and say he fancie those breast give suck to a legion of devils . Slipslop , see enter the room , cry help ! or I be ravish , with a most audible voice : and , perceive the light , turn hastily , and see the lady ( as she do he ) just as she come to the foot of the bed ; nor do she modesty , when she find the naked condition of , suffer she to approach farther . she then begin to revile the parson as the wickedest of all man , and particularly rail at he impudence in chuse she house for the scene of he debauchery , and she own woman for the object of he bestiality . poor Adam have before discover the countenance of he bedfellow , and , now first recollect he be naked , he be no less confounded than herself , and immediately whipt under the bedclothes , whence the chaste endeavoure in vain to shut he out . then put forth he head , on which , by way of ornament , he wear a flannel nightcap , he protest he innocence , and ask ten thousand pardon of for the blow he have strike she , vow he have mistake she for a witch . , then caste she eye on the ground , observe something sparkle with great lustre , which , when she have take it up , appear to be a very fine pair of diamond buttons for the sleeve . a little farther she see lie the sleeve itself of a shirt with laced ruffle . " ! " say she , " what be the meaning of this ? " " o , madam , " say , " I do not know what hath happen , I have be so terrified . here may have be a dozen man in the room . " " to whom belong this lace shirt and jewel ? " say the lady . " undoubtedly , " cry the parson , " to the young gentleman whom I mistook for a woman on come into the room , whence proceed all the subsequent mistake ; for if I have suspect he for a man , I would have seize he , have he be another Hercule , though , indeed , he seem rather to resemble Hylas . " he then give a account of the reason of he rising from bed , and the rest , till the lady come into the room ; at which , and the figure of and she gallant , whose head only be visible at the opposite corner of the bed , she could not refrain from laughter ; nor do Slipslop persist in accuse the parson of any motion towards a rape . the lady therefore desire he to return to he bed as soon as she be depart , and then order to rise and attend she in she own room , she return herself thither . when she be gone , renew he petition for pardon to , who , with a most Christian temper , not only forgave , but begin to move with much courtesy towards he , which he take as a hint to begin , immediately quit the bed , and make the best of he way towards he own ; but unluckily , instead of turn to the right , he turn to the left , and go to the apartment where lay , who ( as the reader may remember ) have not sleep a wink the precede night , and who be so hag out with what have happene to she in the day , that , notwithstand all thought of she , she be fall into so profound a sleep , that all the noise in the adjoining room have not be able to disturb she . Adams grope out the bed , and , turn the clothes down softly , a custom have long accustom he to , creep in , and deposit he carcase on the bed - post , a place which that good woman have always assign he . as the cat or lap - dog of some lovely nymph , for whom ten thousand lover languish , lie quietly by the side of the charming maid , and , ignorant of the scene of delight on which they repose , meditate the future capture of a mouse , or surprisal of a plate of bread and butter : so Adams lay by the side of Fanny , ignorant of the paradise to which he be so near ; nor could the emanation of sweet which flow from she breath overpower the fume of tobacco which play in the parson 's nostril . and now sleep have not overtake the good man , when , who have secretly appoint Fanny to come to she at the break of day , rap softly at the chamber - door , which when he have repeat twice , Adams cry , " come in , whoever you be . " think he have mistake the door , though she have give he the most exact direction ; however , know he friend 's voice , he open it , and see some female vestment lie on a chair . Fanny wake at the same instant , and stretch out she hand on 's beard , she cry out ,-- " of heaven ! where be I ? " " bless I ! where be I ? " say the
the parson . then scream , leapt out of bed , and stood , as the tragedian call it , like the statue of Surprize . " how come she into my room ? " cry Adams . " how come you into hers ? " cry , in a astonishment . " I know nothing of the matter , " answer , " but that she be a vestal for I . as I be a , I know not whether she be a man or woman . he be a infidel who doth not believe in witchcraft . they as surely exist now as in the day of . my clothes be bewitch away too , and 's bring into they place . " for he still insist he be in he own apartment ; but deny it vehemently , and say he attempt to persuade of such a falsehood convince she of he wicked designs . " how ! " say in a rage , " hath he offer any rudeness to you ? " she answer -- she could not accuse he of any more than villanously steal to be to she , which she think rudeness sufficient , and what no man would do without a wicked intention . 's great opinion of be not easily to be stagger , and when he hear from that no harm have happen he grow a little cooler ; yet still he be confound , and , as he know the house , and that the woman 's apartment be on this side 's room , and the man 's on the other , he be convinced that he be in 's chamber . assure therefore of this truth , he beg he to give some account how he come there . Adams then , stand in he shirt , which do not offend Fanny , as the curtain of the bed be draw , relate all that have happen ; and when he have end tell he ,-- it be plain he have mistake by turn to the right instead of the left . " Odso ! " cry Adams , " that be true : as sure as sixpence , you have hit on the very thing . " he then traverse the room , rub he hand , and beg 's pardon , assure she he do not know whether she be man or woman . that innocent creature firmly believe all he say , tell he she be no longer angry , and beg to conduct he into he own apartment , where he should stay himself till she have put she clothes on . and accordingly depart , and the latter soon be convince of the mistake he have commit ; however , whilst he be dress himself , he often assert he believe in the power of witchcraft notwithstanding , and do not see how a could deny it . . the arrival of and , with another person not much expect ; and a perfect solution of the difficulty raise by the pedlar ._ as soon as be return to she , and they have a long conversation together , the conclusion of which be , that , if they find themselves to be really brother and sister , they vow a perpetual celibacy , and to live together all they day , and indulge a Platonic friendship for each other . the company be all very merry at breakfast , and and rather more chearful than the preceding night . the produce the diamond button , which the beau most readily own , and alledge that he be very subject to walk in he sleep . indeed , he be far from be asham of he amour , and rather endeavoure to insinuate that more than be really true have pass between he and the fair Slipslop . they tea be scarce over when news come of the arrival of old and he wife . they be immediately introduce , and kindly receive by the , whose heart go now pit - a-pat , as do those of and . they feel , perhaps , little less anxiety in this interval than himself , whilst he fate be reveal . first open the cause by inform the old gentleman that he have a child in the company more than he know of , and , take by the hand , tell he , this be that daughter of he who have be steal away by gypsy in she infancy . , after express some astonishment , assure he honour that he have never lose a daughter by gypsy , nor ever have any other child than and . these word be a cordial to the two lover ; but have a different effect on . she order the pedlar to be call , who recount he story as he have do before .-- at the end of which , old Andrews , run to , embrace she , cry out , " she be , she be my child ! " the company be all amaze at this disagreement between the man and he wife ; and the blood have now forsake the cheek of the lover , when the old woman , turn to she husband , who be more surprized than all the rest , and have a little recover she own spirit , deliver herself as follow : " you may remember , my dear , when you go a serjeant to , you leave I big with child ; you stay abroad , you know , upward of three year . in you absence I be brotch to bed , I verily believe , of this daughter , whom I be sure I have reason to remember , for I suck she at this very breast till the day she be steal from I . one afternoon
afternoon , when the child be about a year , or a year and a half old , or thereabout , two gypsy - woman come to the door and offer to tell my fortune . one of they have a child in she lap . I show they my hand , and desire to know if you be ever to come home again , which I remember as well as if it be but yesterday : they faithfully promise I you should .-- I leave the girl in the cradle and go to draw they a cup of liquor , the best I have : when I return with the pot ( I be sure I be not absent longer than whilst I be tell it to you ) the woman be gone . I be afraid they have steal something , and look and look , but to no purpose , and , know , I have very little for they to steal . at last , hear the child cry in the cradle , I go to take it up -- but , of the living ! how be I surprize to find , instead of my own girl that I have put into the cradle , who be as fine a fat thrive child as you shall see in a summer 's day , a poor sickly boy , that do not seem to have a hour to live . I run out , pull my hair off and cry like any mad after the woman , but never could hear a word of they from that day to this . when I come back the poor infant ( which be we there , as stout as he now stand ) lift up it be eye upon I so piteously , that , to be sure , notwithstand my passion , I could not find in my heart to do it any mischief . a neighbour of mine , happen to come in at the same time , and hear the case , advise I to take care of this poor child , and would perhaps one day restore I my own . upon which I take the child up , and suck it to be sure , all the world as if it have be bear of my own natural body ; and as true as I be alive , in a little time I love the boy all to nothing as if it have be my own girl .-- well , as I be say , time grow very hard , I have two child and nothing but my own work , which be little enough , know , to maintain they , be obliged to ask relief of the parish ; but , instead of give it I , they remove I , by justice ' warrant , fifteen mile , to the place where I now live , where I have not be long settle before you come home . ( for that be the name I give he myself -- the know whether he be baptize or no , or by what name ) , , I say , seem to I about five year old when you return ; for I believe he be two or three year older than we daughter here ( for I be thoroughly convince she be the same ) ; and when you see he you say he be a chopping boy , without ever mind he age ; and so I , see you do not suspect anything of the matter , think I might e'en as well keep it to myself , for fear you should not love he as well as I do . and all this be veritably true , and I will take my oath of it before any justice in the kingdom . " the pedlar , who have be summon by the order of , listen with the utmost attention to 's story ; and , when she have finish , ask she if the supposititious child have no mark on its breast ? to which she answer , " yes , he have as fine a strawberry as ever grow in a garden . " this acknowledge , and , unbutton he coat , at the intercession of the company , show to they . " well , " say , who be a comical sly old fellow , and very likely desire to have no more child than he could keep , " you have prove , I think , very plainly , that this boy doth not belong to we ; but how be you certain that the girl be ours ? " the parson then bring the pedlar forward , and desire he to repeat the story which he have communicate to he the precede day at the ale - house ; which he comply with , and relate what the reader , as well as , hath see before . he then confirm , from he wife 's report , all the circumstance of the exchange , and of the strawberry on 's breast . at the repetition of the word strawberry , , who have see it without any emotion , start and cry , " bless I ! something come into my head . " but before he have time to bring anything out a servant call he forth . when he be go the pedlar assure that he parent be person of much greater circumstance than those he have hithertoo mistaken for such ; for that he have be steal from a gentleman 's house by those whom they call gypsy , and have be keep by they during a whole year , when , look on he as in a dying condition , they have exchange he for the other healthier child , in the manner before relate . he
he say , as to the name of he father , he wife have either never know or forgot it ; but that she have acquaint he he live about forty mile from the place where the exchange have be make , and which way , promise to spare no pain in endeavouring with he to discover the place . but , which seldom doth good or ill , or make man happy or miserable , by halves , resolve to spare he this labour . the reader may please to recollect that have intend a journey to the west , in which he be to pass through 's parish , and have promise to call on he . he be now arrive at the 's gate for that purpose , be direct thither from the parson 's house , and have send in the servant whom we have above see call forth . this have no sooner mention the discovery of a steal child , and have utter the word strawberry , than , with wildness in he look , and the utmost eagerness in he word , beg to be shew into the room , where he enter without the least regard to any of the company but , and , embrace he with a complexion all pale and trembl , desire to see the mark on he breast ; the parson follow he cape , rub he hand , and cry out , est quem quaeris ; inventus est , &c_. comply with the request of , who no sooner see the mark than , abandon himself to the most extravagant rapture of passion , he embrace with inexpressible ecstasy , and cry out in tear of joy , " I have discover my son , I have he again in my arm ! " be not sufficientely apprize yet to taste the same delight with he father ( for so in reality he be ) ; however , he return some warmth to he embrace : but he no sooner perceive , from he father 's account , the agreement of every circumstance , of person , time , and place , than he throw himself at he foot , and , embrace he knee , with tear beg he blessing , which be give with much affection , and receive with such respect , mix with such tenderness on both side , that it affect all present ; but none so much as , who leave the room in a agony , which be but too much perceive , and not very charitably account for by some of the company . . _Be the last in which this true history be brotch to a happy conclusion ._ be very little behind she in the duty she exprest towards she parent , and the joy she evidence in discover they . Gammar Andrews kiss she , and say , she be heartily glad to see she ; but for she part , she could never love any one better than . testify no remarkable emotion : he bless and kiss she , but complain bitterly that he want he pipe , not have have a whiff that morning . , who know nothing of he aunt 's fondness , impute she abrupt departure to she pride , and disdain of the family into which he be marry ; he be therefore desirous to be go with the utmost celerity ; and now , have congratulate and on the discovery , he salute , call she sister , and introduce she as such to , who behave with great decency on the occasion . he now send a message to he aunt , who return that she wish he a good journey , but be too disordered to see any company : he therefore prepare to set out , have invite to he house ; and and both so insist on he complying , that he at last consent , have first obtain a messenger from to acquaint he wife with the news ; which , as he know it would render she completely happy , he could not prevail on himself to delay a moment in acquaint she with . the company be range in this manner : the two old people , with they two daughter , ride in the coach ; the squire , , , parson Adam , and the pedlar , proceed on horseback . in they way , inform he father of he intend match with ; to which , though he express some reluctance at first , on the eagerness of he son 's instance he consent ; say , if she be so good a creature as she appear , and he describe she , he think the disadvantage of birth and fortune might be compensate . he however insist on the match be defer till he have see he mother ; in which , perceive he positive , with great duty obey he , to the great delight of parson Adams , who by these means see a opportunity of fulfil the form , and marry he parishioner without a licence . , greatly exult on this occasion ( for such ceremony be matter of no small moment with he ) , accidentally give spur to he horse , which the generous beast disdaining -- for he be of high mettle , and have be use to more expert rider than the gentleman who at present bestrode he , for whose horsemanship he have perhaps some contempt --immediately run away full speed , and play so many antic trick that he tumble the parson from he back ; which perceive , come to he relief . this accident afford infinite merriment to the servants , and no less frighted poor Fanny , who beheld he as he pass by the coach ; but the mirth of the one and
and terror of the other be soon determined , when the parson declare he have receive no damage . the horse have free himself from he unworthy rider , as he probably think he , proceed to make the best of he way ; but be stop by a gentleman and he servants , who be travel the opposite way , and be now at a little distance from the coach . they soon meet ; and as one of the servants deliver he horse , he master haile he , and , look up , presently recollect he be the justice of peace before whom he and have make they appearance . the parson presently salute he very kindly ; and the justice inform he that he have find the fellow who attempt to swear against he and the young woman the very next day , and have commit he to , where he be charge with many robbery . many compliment have pass between the parson and the justice , the latter proceed on he journey ; and the former , have with some disdain refuse 's offer of change horse , and declare he be as able a horseman as any in the kingdom , remount he beast ; and now the company again proceed , and happily arrive at they journey 's end , , by good luck , rather than by good riding , escape a second fall . the company , arrive at 's house , be all receive by he in the most courteous and entertaine in the most splendid manner , after the custom of the old hospitality , which be still preserve in some very few family in the remote part of . they all pass that day with the utmost satisfaction ; it be perhaps impossible to find any set of people more solidly and sincerely happy . and find mean to be alone upward of two hour , which be the shortest but the sweetest imaginable . in the morning propose to he son to make a visit with he to he mother ; which , notwithstand he dutiful inclination , and a longing desire he have to see she , a little concerned him , as he must be obliged to leave he Fanny ; but the goodness of relieve he ; for he propose to send he own coach and six for , whom so very earnestly invite , that at length agree with the entreaty of and , and suffer the coach to go empty for he wife . on night the coach return with , who add one more to this happy assembly . the reader may imagine much better and quicker too than I can describe the many embrace and tear of joy which succeed she arrival . it be sufficient to say she be easily prevail with to follow she husband 's example in consent to the match . on perform the service at the squire 's parish church , the curate of which very kindly exchange duty , and ride twenty mile to the 's parish so to do ; be particularly charge not to omit publish the banns , be the third and last time . at length the happy day arrive which be to put in the possession of all he wish . he arise , and drest himself in a neat but plain suit of 's , which exactly fit he ; for he refuse all finery ; as do likewise , who could be prevail on by to attire herself in nothing richer than a white dimity nightgown . she shift indeed , which present she , be of the finest kind , and have a edging of lace round the bosom . she likewise equip she with a pair of fine white thread stocking , which be all she would accept ; for she wear one of she own short round - eare cap , and over it a little straw hat , line with cherry - colou silk , and tie with a cherry - coloured ribbon . in this dress she come forth from she chamber , blush and breathe sweet ; and be by , whose eye sparkle fire , lead to church , the whole family attending , where perform the ceremony ; at which nothing be so remarkable as the extraordinary and unaffected modesty of , unless the true piety of , who publickly rebuk and for laugh in so sacr a place , and on so solemn a occasion . we parson would have do no less to the highest prince on earth ; for , though he pay all submission and deference to he superior in other matter , where the least spice of religion intervene he immediately lose all respect of person . it be he maxim , that he be a servant of the , and could not , without depart from he duty , give up the least article of he honour or of he cause to the greatest earthly potentate . indeed , he always assert that at church with he surplice on , and without that ornament in any other place , be two very different person . when the church rite be over lead he blooming bride back to 's ( for the distance be so very little they do not think proper to use a coach ) ; the whole company attend they likewise on foot ; and now a most magnificent entertainment be provide , at which parson demonstrate a appetite surprizing as well as surpass every one present . indeed the only person who betraye any deficiency on this occasion be those on whose account the feast be provide . they pamper they imagination with the much more exquisite repast which the approach of night promise they ; the thought of which fill both they mind , though with different sensation ;
