Henry Fielding the history of , a foundling . to the , ; one of the Lords commissioner of the Treasury . , Notwithstand you constant refusal , when I have ask leave to prefix you name to this dedication , I must still insist on my right to desire you protection of this work . to you , , it be owe that this history be ever begin . it be by you desire that I first think of such a composition . so many year have since past , that you may have , perhaps , forget this circumstance : but you desire be to I in the nature of command ; and the impression of they be never to be erase from my memory . again , , without you assistance this history have never be complete . be not start at the assertion . I do not intend to draw on you the suspicion of be a romance writer . I mean no more than that I partly owe to you my existence during great part of the time which I have employ in compose it : another matter which it may be necessary to remind you of ; since there be certain action of which you be apt to be extremely forgetful ; but of these I hope I shall always have a better memory than yourself . Lastly , it be owe to you that the history appear what it now be . if there be in this work , as some have be pleased to say , a stronger picture of a truly benevolent mind than be to be find in any other , who that know you , and a particular acquaintance of yours , will doubt whence that benevolence hath be copy ? the world will not , I believe , make I the compliment of think I take it from myself . I care not : this they shall own , that the two person from whom I have take it , that be to say , two of the best and worthiest man in the world , be strongly and zealously my friend . I might be contente with this , and yet my vanity will add a third to the number ; and he one of the greatest and noblest , not only in he rank , but in every public and private virtue . but here , whilst my gratitude for the princely benefaction of the of burst from my heart , you must forgive my remind you that it be you who first recommend I to the notice of my benefactor . and what be you objection to the allowance of the honour which I have sollicit ? why , you have commend the book so warmly , that you should be asham of read you name before the dedication . indeed , sir , if the book itself doth not make you asham of you commendation , nothing that I can here write will , or ought . I be not to give up my right to you protection and patronage , because you have commend my book : for though I acknowledge so many obligation to you , I do not add this to the number ; in which friendship , I be convinced , hath so little share : since that can neither biass you judgment , nor pervert you integrity . a enemy may at any time obtain you commendation by only deserve it ; and the utmost which the fault of you friend can hope for , be you silence ; or , perhaps , if too severely accuse , you gentle palliation . in short , sir , I suspect , that you dislike of public praise be you true objection to grant my request . I have observ that you have , in common with my two other friend , a unwillingness to hear the least mention of you own virtue ; that , as a great poet say of one of you , ( he might justly have say it of all three ) , you do gand by stealth , and blush to find it fame . if man of this disposition be as careful to shin applause , as other be to escape censure , how just must be you apprehension of you character fall into my hand ; since what would not a man have reason to dread , if attack by a author who have receive from he injury equal to my obligation to you ! and will not this dread of censure increase in proportion to the matter which a man be conscious of have afford for it ? if he whole life , for instance , should have be one continue subject of satire , he may well tremble when a incense satirist take he in hand . now , sir , if we apply this to you modest aversion to panegyric , how reasonable will you fear of I appear ! yet surely you might have gratify my ambition , from this single confidence , that I shall always prefer the indulgence of you inclination to the satisfaction of my own . a very strong instance of which I shall give you in this address , in which I be determined to follow the example of all other dedicator , and will consider not what my patron really deserve to have write , but what he will be best pleased to read . without further preface then , I here present you with the labour of some year of my life . what merit these labour have be already know to yourself . if , from you favourable judgament , I have conceive some esteem for they , it can not be impute to vanity ; since I should have agree as implicitly to you opinion , have it be give in
in favour of any other man 's production . Negatively , at least , I may be allow to say , that have I be sensible of any great demerit in the work , you be the last person to whose protection I would have venture to recommend it . from the name of my patron , indeed , I hope my reader will be convince , at he very entrance on this work , that he will find in the whole course of it nothing prejudicial to the cause of religion and virtue , nothing inconsistent with the strictest rule of decency , nor which can offend even the chastest eye in the perusal . on the contrary , I declare , that to recommend goodness and innocence hath be my sincere endeavour in this history . this honest purpose you have be pleased to think I have attaine : and to say the truth , it be likeliest to be attaine in book of this kind ; for a example be a kind of picture , in which virtue become , as it be , a object of sight , and strike we with a idea of that loveliness , which assert there be in she naked charms . besides display that beauty of virtue which may attract the admiration of mankind , I have attempt to engage a stronger motive to human action in she favour , by convincing man , that they true interest direct they to a pursuit of she . for this purpose I have show that no acquisition of guilt can compensate the loss of that solid inward comfort of mind , which be the sure companion of innocence and virtue ; nor can in the least balance the evil of that horror and anxiety which , in they room , guill introduce into we bosom . and again , that as these acquisition be in themselves generally worthless , so be the means to attain they not only base and infamous , but at best incertain , and always full of danger . Lastly , I have endeavoure strongly to inculcate , that virtue and innocence can scarce ever be injure but by indiscretion ; and that it be this alone which often betray they into the snare that deceit and villainy spread for they . a moral which I have the more industriously laboured , as the teaching it be , of all other , the likeliest to be attend with success ; since , I believe , it be much easier to make good man wise , than to make bad man good . for these purpose I have employ all the wit and humour of which I be master in the follow history ; wherein I have endeavoure to laugh mankind out of they favourite folly and vex . how far I have succeed in this good attempt , I shall submit to the candid reader , with only two request : first , that he will not expect to find perfection in this work ; and secondly , that he will excuse some part of it , if they fall short of that little merit which I hope may appear in other . I will detain you , sir , no longer . indeed I have run into a preface , while I profess to write a dedication . but how can it be otherwise ? I dare not praise you ; and the only means I know of to avoid it , when you be in my thought , be either to be entirely silent , or to turn my thought to some other subject . , therefore , what I have say in this epistle , not only without you consent , but absolutely against it ; and give I at least leave , in this public manner , to declare that I be , with the highest respect and gratitude ,-- , you most oblige , Obedient , humble servant , . the history of , a Foundling . book I . contain as much of the birth of the Foundling as be or to Acquaint the reader WITh in the beginning of this History . I . the introduction to the work , or bill of fare to the feast . a author ought to consider himself , not as a gentleman who give a private or eleemosynary treat , but rather as one who keep a public ordinary , at which all person be welcome for they money . in the former case , it be well know that the entertainer provide what fare he please ; and though this should be very indifferent , and utterly disagreeable to the taste of he company , they must not find any fault ; nay , on the contrary , good breeding force they outwardly to approve and to commend whatever be set before they . now the contrary of this happen to the master of a ordinary . who pay for what they eat will insist on gratify they palate , however nice and whimsical these may prove ; and if everything be not agreeable to they taste , will challenge a right to censure , to abuse , and to d -- and they dinner without controul . to prevent , therefore , give offence to they customer by any such disappointment , it hath be usual with the honest and well - mean host to provide a bill of fare which all person may peruse at they first entrance into the house ; and have thence acquaint themselves with the entertainment which they may expect , may either stay and regale with what be provide for they , or may depart to some other ordinary better accommodate to they taste . as we do not disdain to borrow wit or wisdom from any man who be capable of lend we either , we
we have condescende to take a hint from these honest victualler , and shall prefix not only a general bill of fare to we whole entertainment , but shall likewise give the reader particular bill to every course which be to be serve up in this and the ensue volume . the provision , then , which we have here make be no other than . nor do I fear that my sensible reader , though most luxurious in he taste , will start , cavil , or be offended , because I have name but one article . the tortoise -- as the alderman of , well learn in eating , know by much experience -- besides the delicious calipash and calipee , contain many different kind of food ; nor can the learn reader be ignorant , that in human nature , though here collect under one general name , be such prodigious variety , that a cook will have sooner go through all the several species of animal and vegetable food in the world , than a author will be able to exhaust so extensive a subject . a objection may perhaps be apprehend from the more delicate , that this dish be too common and vulgar ; for what else be the subject of all the romance , novel , play , and poem , with which the stall abound ? many exquisite viand might be reject by the epicure , if it be a sufficient cause for he contemning of they as common and vulgar , that something be to be find in the most paltry alley under the same name . in reality , true nature be as difficult to be meet with in author , as the ham , or sausage , be to be find in the shops . but the whole , to continue the same metaphor , consist in the cookery of the author ; for , as tell we -- " true wit be nature to advantage drest ; what oft be think , but ne 'er so well exprest . " the same animal which hath the honour to have some part of he flesh eat at the table of a duke , may perhaps be degrad in another part , and some of he limb gibbet , as it be , in the vilest stall in town . where , then , lie the difference between the food of the nobleman and the porter , if both be at dinner on the same ox or calf , but in the seasoning , the dressing , the garnishing , and the setting forth ? hence the one provoke and incite the most languid appetite , and the other turn and pall that which be the sharpest and keenest . in like manner , the excellence of the mental entertainment consist less in the subject than in the author 's skill in well dress it up . how pleased , therefore , will the reader be to find that we have , in the follow work , adhere closely to one of the highest principles of the best cook which the present age , or perhaps that of , hath produce . this great man , as be well know to all lover of polite eating , begin at first by set plain thing before he hungry guest , rise afterwards by degree as they stomach may be suppose to decrease , to the very quintessence of sauce and spice . in like manner , we shall represent human nature at first to the keen appetite of we reader , in that more plain and simple manner in which it be find in the country , and shall hereafter hash and rago it with all the high french and italian seasoning of affectation and vice which court and city afford . by these means , we doubt not but we reader may be render desirous to read on for ever , as the great person just above -mentioned be suppose to have make some person eat . have premise thus much , we will now detain those who like we bill of fare no longer from they diet , and shall proceed directly to serve up the first course of we history for they entertainment . . a short description of squire , and a fuller account of , he sister . in that part of the western division of this kingdom which be commonly call , there lately liv , and perhaps life still , a gentleman whose name be , and who might well be call the favourite of both nature and fortune ; for both of these seem to have contende which should bless and enrich he most . in this contention , nature may seem to some to have come off victorious , as she bestow on he many gift , while fortune have only one gift in she power ; but in pouring forth this , she be so very profuse , that other perhaps may think this single endowment to have be more than equivalent to all the various blessing which he enjoy from nature . from the former of these , he derive a agreeable person , a sound constitution , a solid understanding , and a benevolent heart ; by the latter , he be decree to the inheritance of one of the largest estate in the county . this gentleman have in he youth marry a very worthy and beautiful woman , of whom he have be extremely fond : by she he have three child , all of whom die in they infancy . he have likewise have the misfortune of bury this beloved wife herself , about five year before the time in which this history chuse to set out . this loss , however great , he bear like a man of sense and constancy , though it
it must be confest he would often talk a little whimsically on this head ; for he sometimes say he look on himself as still marry , and consider he wife as only go a little before he , a journey which he should most certainly , sooner or later , take after she ; and that he have not the least doubt of meet she again in a place where he should never part with she more -- sentiment for which he sense be arraign by one part of he neighbour , he religion by a second , and he sincerity by a third . he now liv , for the most part , retire in the country , with one sister , for whom he have a very tender affection . this lady be now somewhat past the age of thirty , a aera at which , in the opinion of the malicious , the title of old maid may with no impropriety be assume . she be of that species of woman whom you commend rather for good quality than beauty , and who be generally call , by they own sex , very good sort of woman -- as good a sort of woman , madam , as you would wish to know . indeed , she be so far from regrett want of beauty , that she never mention that perfection , if it can be call one , without contempt ; and would often thank she be not as handsome as - a - one , whom perhaps beauty have lead into error which she might have otherwise avoid . ( for that be the name of this lady ) very rightly conceive the charms of person in a woman to be no better than snare for herself , as well as for other ; and yet so discreet be she in she conduct , that she prudence be as much on the guard as if she have all the snare to apprehend which be ever laid for she whole sex . indeed , I have observ , though it may seem unaccountable to the reader , that this guard of prudence , like the train band , be always readiest to go on duty where there be the least danger . it often basely and cowardly desert those paragon for whom the man be all wish , sigh , die , and spread , every net in they power ; and constantly attend at the heel of that higher order of woman for whom the other sex have a more distant and awful respect , and whom ( from despair , I suppose , of success ) they never venture to attack . reader , I think proper , before we proceed any farther together , to acquaint thee that I intend to digress , through this whole history , as often as I see occasion , of which I be myself a better judge than any pitiful crintic whatever ; and here I must desire all those critic to mind they own business , and not to intermeddle with affair or work which no way concern they ; for till they produce the authority by which they be constitut judge , I shall not plead to they jurisdiction . chapter iii . a odd accident which befel at he return home . the decent behaviour of , with some proper animadversion on bastard . I have tell my reader , in the preceding chapter , that inherit a large fortune ; that he have a good heart , and no family . hence , doubtless , it will be conclude by many that he live like a honest man , owe no one a shilling , take nothing but what be he own , keep a good house , entertain he neighbour with a hearty welcome at he table , and be charitable to the poor , i.e. to those who have rather beg than work , by give they the offal from it ; that he die immensely rich and build a hospital . and true it be that he do many of these thing ; but have he do nothing more I should have leave he to have record he own merit on some fair freestone over the door of that hospital . matter of a much more extraordinary kind be to be the subject of this history , or I should grossly mis -spend my time in writing so voluminous a work ; and you , my sagacious friend , might with equal profit and pleasure travel through some page which certain droll author have be facetiously pleased to call the History of . have be absent a full quarter of a year in , on some very particular business , though I know not what it be ; but judge of its importance by it be have detain he so long from home , whence he have not be absent a month at a time during the space of many year . he come to he house very late in the evening , and after a short supper with he sister , retire much fatigued to he chamber . here , have spend some minute on he knee -- a custom which he never break through on any account -- he be prepare to step into bed , when , upon open the cloathes , to he great surprize he beheld a infant , wrapt up in some coarse linen , in a sweet and profound sleep , between he sheet . he stand some time lose in astonishment at this sight ; but , as good nature have always the ascendant in he mind , he soon begin to be touch with sentiment of compassion for the little wretch before he . he then ring he bell , and order a elderly woman - servant to rise immediately
immediately , and come to he ; and in the meantime be so eager in contemplate the beauty of innocence , appear in those lively colour with which infancy and sleep always display it , that he thought be too much engage to reflect that he be in he shirt when the matron come in . she have indeed give she master sufficient time to dress himself ; for out of respect to he , and regard to decency , she have spend many minute in adjust she hair at the look - glass , notwithstand all the hurry in which she have be summon by the servant , and though she master , for atch she know , lay expire in a apoplexy , or in some other fit . it will not be wonder at that a creature who have so strict a regard to decency in she own person , should be shocked at the least deviation from it in another . she therefore no sooner open the door , and see she master stand by the bedside in he shirt , with a candle in he hand , than she start back in a most terrible fright , and might perhaps have swoon away , have he not now recollect he be undrest , and put a end to she terror by desire she to stay without the door till he have throw some cloathes over he back , and be become incapable of shock the pure eye of , who , though in the fifty - second year of she age , vow she have never beheld a man without he coat . Sneerer and prophane wit may perhaps laugh at she first fright ; yet my graver reader , when he consider the time of night , the summon from she bed , and the situation in which she find she master , will highly justify and applaud she conduct , unless the prudence which must be suppose to attend maiden at that period of life at which have arrive , should a little lessen he admiration . when return into the room , and be acquaint by she master with the finding the little infant , she consternation be rather greater than he have be ; nor could she refrain from cry out , with great horror of accent as well as look , " my good sir ! what be to be do ? " answer , she must take care of the child that evene , and in the morning he would give order to provide it a nurse . " yes , sir , " say she ; " and I hope you worship will send out you warrant to take up the hussy its mother , for she must be one of the neighbourhood ; and I should be glad to see she commit to , and whipt at the cart 's tail . indeed , such wicked slut can not be too severely punish . I will warrant ' tis not she first , by she impudence in lay it to you worship . " " in lay it to I , ! " answer : " I can not think she hath any such design . I suppose she hath only take this method to provide for she child ; and truly I be glad she hath not do worse . " " I do not know what be worse , " cry , " than for such wicked strumpet to lay they sins at honest man 's door ; and though you worship know you own innocence , yet the world be censorious ; and it hath be many a honest man 's hap to pass for the father of child he never beget ; and if you worship should provide for the child , it may make the people the apter to believe ; besides , why should you worship provide for what the parish be obliged to maintain ? for my own part , if it be a honest man 's child , indeed -- but for my own part , it go against I to touch these misbegotten wretch , whom I do not look upon as my fellow - creature . Faugh ! how it stink ! it doth not smell like a . if I might be so bold to give my advice , I would have it put in a basket , and send out and lay at the churchwarden 's door . it be a good night , only a little rainy and windy ; and if it be well wrapt up , and put in a warm basket , it be two to one but it live till it be find in the morning . but if it should not , we have discharge we duty in take proper care of it ; and it be , perhaps , better for such creature to die in a state of innocence , than to grow up and imitate they mother ; for nothing better can be expect of they . " there be some stroke in this speech which perhaps would have offend , have he strictly attend to it ; but he have now get one of he finger into the infant 's hand , which , by it be gentle pressure , seem to implore he assistance , have certainly out - plead the eloquence of , have it be ten time greater than it be . he now give positive order to take the child to she own bed , and to call up a maid - servant to provide it pap , and other thing , against it wake . he likewise order that proper cloathes should be procure for it early in the morning , and that it should be bring to himself as soon as he be stirr . such be the discernment of
of , and such the respect she bear she master , under whom she enjoy a most excellent place , that she scruple give way to he peremptory command ; and she take the child under she arm , without any apparent disgust at the illegality of its birth ; and declare it be a sweet little infant , walk off with it to she own chamber . here betake himself to those pleasing slumber which a heart that hunger after goodness be apt to enjoy when thoroughly satisfied . as these be possibly sweeter than what be occasion by any other hearty meal , I should take more pain to display they to the reader , if I know any air to recommend he to for the procuring such a appetite . chapter iv . the reader 's neck bring into danger by a description ; he escape ; and the great condescension of . the Gothic stile of building could produce nothing nobler than 's house . there be a air of grandeur in it that strike you with awe , and rivall the beauty of the best Grecian architecture ; and it be as commodious within as venerable without . it stand on the south - east side of a hill , but nearer the bottom than the top of it , so as to be shelter from the north - east by a grove of old oak which rise above it in a gradual ascent of near half a mile , and yet high enough to enjoy a most charming prospect of the valley beneath . in the midst of the grove be a fine lawn , slop down towards the house , near the summit of which rise a plentiful spring , gush out of a rock cover with fir , and form a constant cascade of about thirty foot , not carry down a regular flight of step , but tumbl in a natural fall over the broken and mossy stone till it come to the bottom of the rock , then run off in a pebly channel , that with many lesser fall win along , till it fall into a lake at the foot of the hill , about a quarter of a mile below the house on the south side , and which be see from every room in the front . out of this lake , which fill the center of a beautiful plain , embellish with group of beech and elm , and feed with sheep , issue a river , that for several mile be see to meander through a amazing variety of meadow and wood till it empty itself into the sea , with a large arm of which , and a island beyond it , the prospect be close . on the right of this valley open another of less extent , adorn with several villag , and terminate by one of the towers of a old ruin abby , grow over with ivy , and part of the front , which remain still entire . the leave - hand scene present the view of a very fine park , compose of very unequal ground , and agreeably vari with all the diversity that hill , lawn , wood , and water , laid out with admirable taste , but owe less to art than to nature , could give . beyond this , the country gradually rise into a ridge of wild mountain , the top of which be above the cloud . it be now the middle of , and the morning be remarkably serene , when walk forth on the terrace , where the dawn open every minute that lovely prospect we have before describe to he eye ; and now have send forth stream of light , which ascend the blue firmament before he , as harbinger precede he pomp , in the full blaze of he majesty rise the sun , than which one object alone in this lower creation could be more glorious , and that himself present -- a human be replete with benevolence , meditat in what manner he might render himself most acceptable to he Creator , by do most good to he creature . reader , take care . I have unadvisedly lead thee to the top of as high a hill as 's , and how to get thee down without break thy neck , I do not well know . however , let we e'en venture to slide down together ; for ring she bell , and be summon to breakfast , where I must attend , and , if you please , shall be glad of you company . the usual compliment have past between and , and the tea be pour out , he summon , and tell he sister he have a present for she , for which she thank he -- imagine , I suppose , it have be a gown , or some ornament for she person . indeed , he very often make she such present ; and she , in complacence to he , spend much time in adorning herself . I say in complacence to he , because she always exprest the greatest contempt for dress , and for those ladie who make it they study . but if such be she expectation , how be she disappointe when , accord to the order she have receive from she master , produce the little infant ? great surprize , as hath be observ , be apt to be silent ; and so be , till she brother begin , and tell she the whole story , which , as the reader know it already , we shall not repeat . have always exprest so great a regard for what the lady be pleased to call virtue , and have herself maintain such a severity of character ,
, that it be expect , especially by , that she would have vent much bitterness on this occasion , and would have vote for send the child , as a kind of noxious animal , immediately out of the house ; but , on the contrary , she rather take the good - natured side of the question , intimate some compassion for the helpless little creature , and commend she brother 's charity in what he have do . perhaps the reader may account for this behaviour from she condescension to , when we have inform he that the good man have end he narrative with own a resolution to take care of the child , and to breed he up as he own ; for , to acknowledge the truth , she be always ready to oblige she brother , and very seldom , if ever , contradict he sentiment . she would , indeed , sometimes make a few observation , as that man be headstrong , and must have they own way , and would wish she have be blest with a independent fortune ; but these be always vent in a low voice , and at the most amount only to what be call muttering . however , what she withheld from the infant , she bestow with the utmost profuseness on the poor unknown mother , whom she call a impudent slut , a wanton hussy , a audacious harlot , a wicked jade , a vile strumpet , with every other appellation with which the tongue of virtue never fail to lash those who bring a disgrace on the sex . a consultation be now enter into how to proceed in order to discover the mother . a scrutiny be first make into the character of the female servants of the house , who be all acquit by , and with apparent merit ; for she have collect they herself , and perhaps it would be difficult to find such another set of scarecrow . the next step be to examine among the inhabitant of the parish ; and this be refer to , who be to enquire with all imaginable diligence , and to make she report in the afternoon . matter be thus settle , withdraw to he study , as be he custom , and leave the child to he sister , who , at he desire , have undertake the care of it . chapter v. contain a few common matter , with a very uncommon observation upon they . when she master be depart , stand silent , expect she cue from ; for as to what have past before she master , the prudent housekeeper by no means rely upon it , as she have often know the sentiment of the lady in she brother 's absence to differ greatly from those which she have express in he presence . do not , however , suffer she to continue long in this doubtful situation ; for have look some time earnestly at the child , as it lay asleep in the lap of , the good lady could not forbear give it a hearty kiss , at the same time declare herself wonderfully pleas with its beauty and innocence . no sooner observ this than she fall to squeeze and kiss , with as great rapture as sometimes inspire the sage dame of forty and five towards a youthful and vigorous bridegroom , cry out , in a shrill voice , " o , the dear little creature !-- the dear , sweet , pretty creature ! well , I vow it be as fine a boy as ever be see ! " these exclamation continue till they be interrupt by the lady , who now proceed to execute the commission give she by she brother , and give order for provide all necessaries for the child , appoint a very good room in the house for he nursery . she order be indeed so liberal , that , have it be a child of she own , she could not have exceed they ; but , lest the virtuous reader may condemn she for show too great regard to a base - bear infant , to which all charity be condemn by law as irreligious , we think proper to observe that she conclude the whole with say , " Since it be she brother 's whim to adopt the little brat , she suppose little master must be treat with great tenderness . for she part , she could not help think it be a encouragement to vice ; but that she know too much of the obstinacy of mankind to oppose any of they ridiculous humours . " with reflection of this nature she usually , as have be hinte , accompany every act of compliance with she brother 's inclination ; and surely nothing could more contribute to heighten the merit of this compliance than a declaration that she know , at the same time , the folly and unreasonableness of those inclination to which she submit . Tacit obedience imply no force upon the will , and consequently may be easily , and without any pain , preserve ; but when a wife , a child , a relation , or a friend , perform what we desire , with grumbling and reluctance , with expression of dislike and dissatisfaction , the manifest difficulty which they undergo must greatly enhance the obligation . as this be one of those deep observation which very few reader can be suppose capable of make themselves , I have think proper to lend they my assistance ; but this be a favour rarely to be expect in the course of my work . indeed , I shall seldom or never so indulge he , unless in such instance as this , where nothing but the inspiration
inspiration with which we writer be gift , can possibly enable any one to make the discovery . . be introduce into the parish with a simile . a short account of , with the difficulty and discouragement which may attend young woman in the pursuit of learning . , have dispose of the child accord to the will of she master , now prepare to visit those habitation which be suppose to conceal its mother . not otherwise than when a kite , tremendous bird , be beheld by the feathered generation soar aloft , and hover over they head , the amorous dove , and every innocent little bird , spread wide the alarm , and fly trembling to they hiding - place . he proudly beat the air , conscious of he dignity , and meditate intend mischief . so when the approach of be proclaim through the street , all the inhabitant run trembl into they house , each matron dread lest the visit should fall to she lot . she with stately step proudly advance over the field : aloft she bear she towering head , fill with conceit of she own pre-eminence , and scheme to effect she intend discovery . the sagacious reader will not from this simile imagine these poor people have any apprehension of the design with which be now come towards they ; but as the great beauty of the simile may possibly sleep these hundred year , till some future commentator shall take this work in hand , I think proper to lend the reader a little assistance in this place . it be my intention , therefore , to signify , that , as it be the nature of a kite to deavor little bird , so be it the nature of such persons as to insult and tyrannize over little people . this be indeed the means which they use to recompense to themselve they extreme servility and condescension to they superior ; for nothing can be more reasonable , than that slave and flatterer should exact the same tax on all below they , which they themselves pay to all above they . have occasion to exert any extraordinary condescension to , and by that mean have a little sour she natural disposition , it be usual with she to walk forth among these people , in order to refine she temper , by venting , and , as it be , purge off all ill humours ; on which account she be by no means a welcome visitant : to say the truth , she be universally dread and hat by they all . on she arrival in this place , she go immediately to the habitation of a elderly matron ; to whom , as this matron have the good fortune to resemble herself in the comeliness of she person , as well as in she age , she have generally be more favourable than to any of the rest . to this woman she impart what have happen , and the design upon which she be come thither that morning . these two begin presently to scrutinize the character of the several young girl who live in any of those house , and at last fix they strongest suspicion on one , who , they both agree , be the likeliest person to have commit this fact . this be no very comely girl , either in she face or person ; but nature have somewhat compensate the want of beauty with what be generally more esteem by those ladie whose judgment be arrive at year of perfect maturity , for she have give she a very uncommon share of understanding . this gift have a good deal improve by erudition . she have liv several year a servant with a schoolmaster , who , discover a great quickness of part in the girl , and a extraordinary desire of learn -- for every leisure hour she be always find read in the book of the scholar -- have the good - nature , or folly -- just as the reader pleasis to call it -- to instruct she so far , that she obtain a competent skill in the language , and be , perhaps , as good a scholar as most of the young man of quality of the age . this advantage , however , like most other of a extraordinary kind , be attend with some small inconvenience : for as it be not to be wonder at , that a young woman so well accomplish should have little relish for the society of those whom fortune have make she equal , but whom education have render so much she inferior ; so be it matter of no greater astonishment , that this superiority in , together with that behaviour which be its certain consequence , should produce among the rest some little envy and ill - will towards she ; and these have , perhaps , secretly burnt in the bosom of she neighbour ever since she return from she service . they envy do not , however , display itself openly , till poor , to the surprize of everybody , and to the vexation of all the young woman in these part , have publickly shone forth on a in a new silk gown , with a laced cap , and other proper appendage to these . the flame , which have before alain in embryo , now burst forth . have , by she learning , increase she own pride , which none of she neighbour be kind enough to feed with the honour she seem to demand ; and now , instead of respect and adoration , she gain nothing but hatre and abuse by she finery . the whole parish declare she could not come honestly by such thing ; and parent , instead
instead of wish they daughter the same , felicitate themselves that they child have they not . hence , perhaps , it be , that the good woman first mention the name of this poor girl to ; but there be another circumstance that confirm the latter in she suspicion ; for have lately be often at 's house . she have officiat as nurse to , in a violent fit of illness , and have sit up many night with that lady ; besides which , she have be see there the very day before 's return , by herself , though that sagacious person have not at first conceive any suspicion of she on that account : for , as she herself say , " she have always esteem as a very sober girl ( though indeed she know very little of she ) , and have rather suspect some of those wanton trollop , who give themselves air , because , forsooth , they think themselves handsome . " be now summon to appear in person before , which she immediately do . when , put on the gravity of a judge , with somewhat more than he austerity , begin a oration with the word , " you audacious strumpet ! " in which she proceed rather to pass sentence on the prisoner than to accuse she . though be fully satisfied of the guilt of , from the reason above shewn , it be possible might have require some stronger evidence to have convict she ; but she save she accuser any such trouble , by freely confess the whole fact with which she be charge . this confession , though deliver rather in term of contrition , as it appear , do not at all mollify , who now pronounce a second judgment against she , in more opprobrious language than before ; nor have it any better success with the bystander , who be now grow very numerous . many of they cry out , " they think what madam 's silk gown would end in ; " other spoke sarcastically of she learn . not a single female be present but find some means of express she abhorrence of poor , who bear all very patiently , except the malice of one woman , who reflect upon she person , and toss up she nose , say , " the man must have a good stomach who would give silk gown for such sort of trumpery ! " reply to this with a bitterness which might have surprize a judicious person , who have observe the tranquillity with which she bear all the affront to she chastity ; but she patience be perhaps ti out , for this be a virtue which be very apt to be fatigue by exercise . have succeed beyond she hope in she inquiry , return with much triumph , and , at the appointed hour , make a faithful report to , who be much surprize at the relation ; for he have hear of the extraordinary part and improvement of this girl , whom he intend to have give in marriage , together with a small living , to a neighbouring curate . he concern , therefore , on this occasion , be at least equal to the satisfaction which appear in , and to many reader may seem much more reasonable . bless herself , and say , " for she part , she should never hereafter entertain a good opinion of any woman . " for before this have the happiness of be much in she good graces also . the prudent housekeeper be again dispatch to bring the unhappy culprit before , in order , not as it be hope by some , and expect by all , to be send to the house of correction , but to receive wholesome admonition and reproof ; which those who relish that kind of instructive writing may peruse in the next chapter . chapter vii . contain such grave matter , that the reader can not laugh once through the whole chapter , unless peradventure he should laugh at the author . when appear , take she into he study , and speak to she as follow : " you know , child , it be in my power as a magistrate , to punish you very rigorously for what you have do ; and you will , perhaps , be the more apt to fear I should execute that power , because you have in a manner lay you sins at my door . " but , perhaps , this be one reason which hath determi I to act in a milder manner with you : for , as no private resentment should ever influence a magistrate , I will be so far from consider you have deposit the infant in my house as a aggravation of you offence , that I will suppose , in you favour , this to have proceed from a natural affection to you child , since you might have some hope to see it thus better provide for than be in the power of yourself , or its wicked father , to provide for it . I should indeed have be highly offended with you have you expose the little wretch in the manner of some inhuman mother , who seem no less to have abandon they humanity , than to have part with they chastity . it be the other part of you offence , therefore , upon which I intend to admonish you , I mean the violation of you chastity ;-- a crime , however lightly it may be treat by debauched person , very heinous in itself , and very dreadful in its consequence . " the heinous nature of this offence must be sufficientely apparent to every , inasmuch as it be commit
commit in defiance of the law of we religion , and of the express command of who foun that religion . " and here its consequence may well be argue to be dreadful ; for what can be more so , than to incur the divine displeasure , by the breach of the divine command ; and that in a instance against which the highest vengeance be specifically denounce ? " but these thing , though too little , I be afraid , regard , be so plain , that mankind , however they may want to be remind , can never need information on this head . a hint , therefore , to awake you sense of this matter , shall suffice ; for I would inspire you with repentance , and not drive you to desperation . " there be other consequence , not indeed so dreadful or replete with horror as this ; and yet such , as , if attentively consider , must , one would think , deter all of you sex at least from the commission of this crime . " for by it you be render infamous , and drive , like leper of old , out of society ; at least , from the society of all but wick and reprobate person ; for no other will associate with you . " if you have fortune , you be hereby render incapable of enjoy they ; if you have none , you be disable from acquire any , nay almost of procure you sustenance ; for no persons of character will receive you into they house . thus you be often drive by necessity itself into a state of shame and misery , which unavoidably end in the destruction of both body and soul . " can any pleasure compensate these evils ? can any temptation have sophistry and delusion strong enough to persuade you to so simple a bargain ? or can any carnal appetite so overpower you reason , or so totally lay it asleep , as to prevent you fly with affright and terror from a crime which carry such punishment always with it ? " how base and mean must that woman be , how void of that dignity of mind , and decent pride , without which we be not worthy the name of human creature , who can bear to level herself with the lowest animal , and to sacrifice all that be great and noble in she , all she heavenly part , to a appetite which she hath in common with the vilest branch of the creation ! for no woman , sure , will plead the passion of love for a excuse . this would be to own herself the mere tool and bubble of the man . love , however barbarously we may corrupt and pervert its meaning , as it be a laudable , be a rational passion , and can never be violent but when reciprocal ; for though the Scripture bid we love we enemy , it mean not with that fervent love which we naturally bear towards we friend ; much less that we should sacrifice to they we life , and what ought to be dearer to we , we innocence . now in what light , but that of a enemy , can a reasonable woman regard the man who solicit she to entail on herself all the misery I have describe to you , and who would purchase to himself a short , trivial , contemptible pleasure , so greatly at she expense ! for , by the law of custom , the whole shame , with all its dreadful consequence , fall intirely upon she . can love , which always seek the good of its object , attempt to betray a woman into a bargain where she be so greatly to be the loser ? if such corrupter , therefore , should have the impudence to pretend a real affection for she , ought not the woman to regard he not only as a enemy , but as the worst of all enemy , a false , design , treacherous , pretend friend , who intend not only to debauch she body , but she understand at the same time ? " here express great concern , pause a moment , and then proceed : " I have talk thus to you , child , not to insult you for what be past and irrevocable , but to caution and strengthen you for the future . should I have take this trouble , but from some opinion of you good sense , notwithstand the dreadful slip you have make ; and from some hope of you hearty repentance , which be found on the openness and sincerity of you confession . if these do not deceive I , I will take care to convey you from this scene of you shame , where you shall , by be unknown , avoid the punishment which , as I have say , be allot to you crime in this world ; and I hope , by repentance , you will avoid the much heavier sentence denounce against it in the other . be a good girl the rest of you day , and want shall be no motive to you go astray ; and , believe I , there be more pleasure , even in this world , in a innocent and virtuous life , than in one debauch and vicious . " as to you child , let no thought concern it molest you ; I will provide for it in a better manner than you can ever hope . and now nothing remain but that you inform I who be the wicked man that seduce you ; for my anger against he will be much greater than you have experience on this occasion .
. " now lift she eye from the ground , and with a modest look and decent voice thus begin :-- " to know you , sir , and not love you goodness , would be a argument of total want of sense or goodness in any one . in I it would amount to the highest ingratitude , not to feel , in the most sensible manner , the great degree of goodness you have be pleased to exert on this occasion . as to my concern for what be past , I know you will spare my blush the repetition . my future conduct will much better declare my sentiment than any profession I can now make . I beg leave to assure you , sir , that I take you advice much kinder than you generous offer with which you conclude it ; for , as you be pleased to say , sir , it be a instance of you opinion of my understanding . " -- here she tear flow apace , she stop a few moment , and then proceed thus :--" indeed , sir , you kindness overcome I ; but I will endeaavor to deserve this good opinion : for if I have the understanding you be so kindly pleased to allow I , such advice can not be throw away upon I . I thank you , sir , heartily , for you intend kindness to my poor helpless child : he be innocent , and I hope will live to be grateful for all the favour you shall show he . but now , sir , I must on my knee entreat you not to persist in ask I to declare the father of my infant . I promise you faithfully you shall one day know ; but I be under the most solemn tie and engagement of honour , as well as the most religious vow and protestation , to conceal he name at this time . and I know you too well , to think you would desire I should sacrifice either my honour or my religion . " , whom the least mention of those sacred word be sufficient to stagger , hesitat a moment before he reply , and then tell she , she have do wrong to enter into such engagement to a villain ; but since she have , he could not insist on she break they . he say , it be not from a motive of vain curiosity he have inquire , but in order to punish the fellow ; at least , that he might not ignorantly confer favour on the undeserving . as to these point , satisfie he by the most solemn assurance , that the man be entirely out of he reach ; and be neither subject to he power , nor in any probability of become a object of he goodness . the ingenuity of this behaviour have gain so much credit with this worthy man , that he easily believe what she tell he ; for as she have disdain to excuse herself by a lie , and have hazard he further displeasure in she present situation , rather than she would forfeit she honour or integrity by betraie another , he have but little apprehension that she would be guilty of falsehood towards himself . he therefore dismiss she with assurance that he would very soon remove she out of the reach of that obloquy she have incur ; conclude with some additional document , in which he recommend repentance , say , " consider , child , there be one still to reconcile yourself to , whose favour be of much greater importance to you than mine . " chapter viii . a dialogue between and ; contain more amusement , but less instruction , than the former . when have retire to he study with , as hath be see , , with the good housekeeper , have betake themselves to a post next adjoin to the say study ; whence , through the conveyance of a keyhole , they suck in at they ear the instructive lecture deliver by , together with the answer of , and indeed every other particular which pass in the last chapter . this hole in she brother 's study - door be indeed as well know to , and have be as frequently apply to by she , as the famous hole in the wall be by Thisbe of old . this serve to many good purpose . for by such mean become often acquainted with she brother 's inclination , without give he the trouble of repea they to she . it be true , some inconvenience attend this intercourse , and she have sometimes reason to cry out with , in , " o , wick , wick wall ! " for as be a justice of peace , certain thing occur in examination concern bastard , and such like , which be apt to give great offence to the chaste ear of virgin , especially when they approach the age of forty , as be the case of . however , she have , on such occasion , the advantage of concealing she blush from the eyes of man ; and non apparentibus , et non existentibus theadey est ratio -- in , " when a woman be not see to blush , she doth not blush at all . " both the good woman keep strict silence during the whole scene between and the girl ; but as soon as it be end , and that gentleman be out of hearing , could not help exclaim against the clemency of she master , and especially against he suffer she to conceal the father of the child , which she swore she would have out of she before the sun set . at these word
word discompose she feature with a smile ( a thing very unusual to she ) . not that I would have my reader imagine , that this be one of those wanton smile which would have you conceive come from , when he call she the laughter - love goddess ; nor be it one of those smile which shoot from the stage - box , and which Venus would quit she immortality to be able to equal . no , this be rather one of those smile which might be suppose to have come from the dimple cheek of the , or from one of the miss , she sister . with such a smile then , and with a voice sweet as the evening breeze of Boreas in the pleasant month of , gently reprove the curiosity of ; a vice with which it seem the latter be too much taint , and which the former inveigh against with great bitterness , add , " that , among all she fault , she thank she enemy could not accuse she of pry into the affair of other people . " she then proceed to commend the honour and spirit with which have act . she say , she could not help agree with she brother , that there be some merit in the sincerity of she confession , and in she integrity to she lover : that she have always think she a very good girl , and doubt not but she have be seduce by some rascal , who have be infinitely more to blame than herself , and very probably have prevail with she by a promise of marriage , or some other treacherous proceeding . this behaviour of greatly surprise ; for this well - breed woman seldom open she lip , either to she master or he sister , till she have first sound they inclination , with which she sentiment be always consonant . here , however , she think she might have launch forth with safety ; and the sagacious reader will not perhaps accuse she of want of sufficient forecast in so do , but will rather admire with what wonderful celerity she tacke about , when she find herself steer a wrong course . " Nay , madam , " say this able woman , and truly great politician , " I must own I can not help admir the girl 's spirit , as well as you ladyship . and , as you ladyship say , if she be deceive by some wicked man , the poor wretch be to be pitie . and to be sure , as you ladyship say , the girl hath always appear like a good , honest , plain girl , and not vain of she face , forsooth , as some wanton hussey in the neighbourhood be . " " you say true , , " say . " if the girl have be one of those vain trollop , of which we have too many in the parish , I should have condemn my brother for he lenity towards she . I see two farmers ' daughter at church , the other day , with bare neck . I protest they shock I . if wench will hang out lure for fellow , it be no matter what they suffer . I detest such creature ; and it would be much better for they that they face have be sea with the smallpox ; but I must confess , I never see any of this wanton behaviour in poor : some artful villain , I be convinced , hath betrayed , nay perhaps force she ; and I pity the poor wretch with all my heart . " approve all these sentiment , and the dialogue conclude with a general and bitter invective against beauty , and with many compassionate consideration for all honest plain girl who be delude by the wicked art of deceitful man . chapter ix . contain matter which will surprize the reader . return home well pleased with the reception she have meet with from , whose indulgence to she she industriously make public ; partly perhaps as a sacrifice to she own pride , and partly from the more prudent motive of reconcile she neighbour to she , and silence they clamour . but though this latter view , if she indeed have it , may appear reasonable enough , yet the event do not answer she expectation ; for when she be conven before the justice , and it be universally apprehend that the house of correction would have be she fate , though some of the young woman cry out " it be good enough for she , " and divert themselves with the thought of she beat hemp in a silk gow ; yet there be many other who begin to pity she condition : but when it be know in what manner have behave , the tide turn against she . one say , " I will assure you , madam hath have good luck . " a second cry , " see what it be to be a favourite ! " a third , " ay , this come of she learn . " every person make some malicious comment or other on the occasion , and reflecte on the partiality of the justice . the behaviour of these people may appear impolitic and ungrateful to the reader , who consider the power and benevolence of . but as to he power , he never use it ; and as to he benevolence , he exert so much , that he have thereby disoblige all he neighbour ; for it be a secret well know to great man , that , by conferr a obligation , they do not always procure a friend , but be certain of create many enemie
enemie . be , however , by the care and goodness of , soon remove out of the reach of reproach ; when malice be no longer able to vent it be rage on she , begin to seek another object of its bitterness , and this be no less than , himself ; for a whisper soon go abroad , that he himself be the father of the foundl child . this supposition so well reconcile he conduct to the general opinion , that it meet with universal assent ; and the outcry against he lenity soon begin to take another turn , and be change into a invective against he cruelty to the poor girl . very grave and good woman exclaim against man who beget child , and then disown they . be there want some , who , after the departure of , insinuate that she be spirite away with a design too black to be mention , and who give frequent hint that a legal inquiry ink to be make into the whole matter , and that some people should be force to produce the girl . these calumny might have probably produce ill consequence , at the least might have occasion some trouble , to a person of a more doubtful and suspicious character than be bless with ; but in he case they have no such effect ; and , be heartily despise by he , they serve only to afford a innocent amusement to the good gossip of the neighbourhood . but as we can not possibly divine what complection we reader may be of , and as it will be some time before he will hear any more of , we think proper to give he a very early intimation , that be , and will hereafter appear to be , absolutely innocent of any criminal intention whatever . he have indeed commit no other than a error in politics , by tempering justice with mercy , and by refuse to gratify the good - natured disposition of the mob , [ * ] with a object for they compassion to work on in the person of poor , whom , in order to pity , they desire to have see sacrifice to ruin and infamy , by a shameful correction in . [ *] whenever this word occur in we writings , it intend person without virtue or sense , in all station ; and many of the highest rank be often mean by it . so far from comply with this they inclination , by which all hope of reformation would have be abolish , and even the gate shut against she if she own inclination should ever hereafter lead she to chuse the road of virtue , rather choose to encourage the girl to return thither by the only possible means ; for too true I be afraid it be , that many woman have become abandoned , and have sunk to the last degree of vice , by be unable to retrieve the first slip . this will be , I be afraid , always the case while they remain among they former acquaintance ; it be therefore wisely do by , to remove to a place where she might enjoy the pleasure of reputation , after have taste the ill consequence of lose it . to this place therefore , wherever it be , we will wish she a good journey , and for the present take leave of she , and of the little foundl she child , have matter of much higher importance to communicate to the reader . chapter x . the hospitality of ; with a short sketch of the character of two brother , a doctor and a captain , who be entertain by that gentleman . neither 's house , nor he heart , be shut against any part of mankind , but they be both more particularly open to man of merit . to say the truth , this be the only house in the kingdom where you be sure to gain a dinner by deserve it . above all other , man of genius and learn share the principal place in he favour ; and in these he have much discernment : for though he have miss the advantage of a learn education , yet , be blest with vast natural ability , he have so well profit by a vigorous though late application to letter , and by much conversation with man of eminence in this way , that he be himself a very competent judge in most kind of literature . it be no wonder that in a age when this kind of merit be so little in fashion , and so slenderly provide for , person possess of it should very eagerly flock to a place where they be sure of be receive with great complaisance ; indeed , where they might enjoy almost the same advantage of a liberal fortune as if they be entitle to it in they own right ; for be not one of those generous person who be ready most bountifully to bestow meat , drink , and lod on man of wit and learn , for which they expect no other return but entertainment , instruction , flattery , and subserviency ; in a word , that such person should be enrol in the number of domestic , without wear they master 's cloathes , or receive wage . on the contrary , every person in this house be perfect master of he own time : and as he might at he pleasure satisfy all he appetite within the restriction only of law , virtue , and religion ; so he might , if he health require , or he inclination prompt he to temperance , or even to abstinence , absent himself from any meal , or retire from
from they , whenever he be so disposed , without even a sollicitation to the contrary : for , indeed , such sollicitation from superior always saavor very strongly of command . but all here be free from such impertinence , not only those whose company be in all other place esteem a favour from they equality of fortune , but even those whose indigent circumstance make such a eleemosynary abode convenient to they , and who be therefore less welcome to a great man 's table because they stand in need of it . among other of this kind be , a gentleman who have the misfortune of lose the advantage of great talents by the obstinacy of a father , who would breed he to a profession he dislike . in obedience to this obstinacy the doctor have in he youth be oblige to study physic , or rather to say he study it ; for in reality book of this kind be almost the only one with which he be unacquainted ; and unfortunately for he , the doctor be master of almost every other science but that by which he be to get he bread ; the consequence of which be , that the doctor at the age of forty have no bread to eat . such a person as this be certain to find a welcome at 's table , to whom misfortunes be ever a recommendation , when they be derive from the folly or villany of other , and not of the unfortunate person himself . besides this negative merit , the doctor have one positive recommendation ; -- this be a great appearance of religion . whether he religion be real , or consist only in appearance , I shall not presume to say , as I be not possess of any touchstone which can distinguish the true from the false . if this part of he character pleased , it delighte . she engage he in many religious controversy ; on which occasion she constantly express great satisfaction in the doctor 's knowledge , and not much less in the compliment which he frequently bestow on she own . to say the truth , she have read much divinity , and have puzzl more than one of the neighbour curate . indeed , she conversation be so pure , she look so sage , and she whole deportment so grave and solemn , that she seem to deserve the name of saint equally with she nameake , or with any other female in the kalendar . as sympathy of all kind be apt to beget love , so experience teach we that none have a more direct tendency this way than those of a religious kind between person of different sex . the doctor find himself so agreeable to , that he now begin to lament a unfortunate accident which have happene to he about ten year before ; namely , he marriage with another woman , who be not only still alive , but , what be worse , kny to be so by . this be a fatal bar to that happiness which he otherwise see sufficient probability of obtaining with this young lady ; for as to criminal indulgence , he certainly never think of they . this be owe either to he religion , as be most probable , or to the purity of he passion , which be fix on those thing which matrimony only , and not criminal correspondence , could put he in possession of , or could give he any title to . he have not long ruminate on these matters , before it occur to he memory that he have a brother who be under no such unhappy incapacity . this brother he make no doubt would succeed ; for he discern , as he think , a inclination to marriage in the lady ; and the reader perhaps , when he hear the brother 's qualifications , will not blame the confidence which he entertaine of he success . this gentleman be about thirty - five year of age . he be of a middle size , and what be call well - build . he have a scar on he forehead , which do not so much injure he beauty as it denote he valour ( for he be a half - pay officer ) . he have good tooth , and something affable , when he please , in he smile ; though naturally he countenance , as well as he air and voice , have much of roughness in it : yet he could at any time deposit this , and appear all gentleness and good - humour . he be not ungenteel , nor entirely devoid of wit , and in he youth have abound in sprightliness , which , though he have lately put on a more serious character , he could , when he please , resume . he have , as well as the doctor , a academic education ; for he father have , with the same paternal authority we have mention before , decree he for holy order ; but as the old gentleman die before he be ordain , he choose the church military , and prefer the king 's commission to the bishop 's . he have purchase the post of lieutenant of dragoon , and afterwards come to be a captain ; but have quarrell with he colonel , be by he interest oblige to sell ; from which time he have entirely rusticate himself , have betaken himself to study the Scripture , and be not a little suspect of a inclination to methodism . it seem , therefore , not unlikely that such a person should succeed with a lady of so saint - like a disposition , and whose inclination be no otherwise engage than to the
the marriage state in general ; but why the doctor , who certainly have no great friendship for he brother , should for he sake think of make so ill a return to the hospitality of , be a matter not so easy to be account for . be it that some nature delight in evil , as other be think to delight in virtue ? or be there a pleasure in be accessory to a theft when we can not commit it ourselves ? or lastly ( which experience seem to make probable ) , have we a satisfaction in aggrandize we family , even though we have not the least love or respect for they ? whether any of these motive operate on the doctor , we will not determine ; but so the fact be . he send for he brother , and easily find means to introduce he at 's as a person who intend only a short visit to himself . the captain have not be in the house a week before the doctor have reason to felicitate himself on he discernment . the captain be indeed as great a master of the art of love as be formerly . he have besides receive proper hint from he brother , which he fail not to improve to the best advantage . chapter xi . contain many rule , and some example , concern fall in love : description of beauty , and other more prudential inducement to matrimony . it hath be observ , by wise man or woman , I forget which , that all person be doom to be in love once in they life . no particular season be , as I remember , assign for this ; but the age at which be arrive , seem to I as proper a period as any to be fix on for this purpose : it often , indeed , happen much earlier ; but when it doth not , I have observe it seldom or never fail about this time . moreover , we may remark that at this season love be of a more serious and steady nature than what sometimes show itself in the younger part of life . the love of girl be uncertain , capricious , and so foolish that we can not always discover what the young lady would be at ; nay , it may almost be doubt whether she always know this herself . now we be never at a loss to discern this in woman about forty ; for as such grave , serious , and experience lady well know they own meaning , so it be always very easy for a man of the least sagacity to discover it with the utmost certainty . be a example of all these observation . she have not be many time in the captain 's company before she be seize with this passion . do she go pining and mo about the house , like a puny , foolish girl , ignorant of she distemper : she feel , she know , and she enjoy , the pleasing sensation , of which , as she be certain it be not only innocent but laudable , she be neither afraid nor asham . and to say the truth , there be , in all point , great difference between the reasonable passion which woman at this age conceive towards man , and the idle and childish like of a girl to a boy , which be often fix on the outside only , and on thing of little value and no duration ; as on cherry - cheek , small , lily - white hand , sloe - black eye , flow lock , downy chin , dapper shape ; nay , sometimes on charms more worthless than these , and less the party 's own ; such be the outward ornament of the person , for which man be beholden to the taylor , the laceman , the periwig - maker , the hatter , and the milliner , and not to nature . such a passion girls may well be asham , as they generally be , to own either to themselves or other . the love of be of another kind . the captain owed nothing to any of these fop - maker in he dress , nor be he person much more beholden to nature . both he dress and person be such as , have they appear in a assembly or a drawing - room , would have be the contempt and ridicule of all the fine lady there . the former of these be indeed neat , but plain , coarse , ill - fancie , and out of fashion . as for the latter , we have expressly describe it above . so far be the skin on he cheek from be cherry - colour , that you could not discern what the natural colour of he cheek be , they be totally overgrow by a black beard , which ascend to he eye . he shape and limb be indeed exactely proportion , but so large that they denote the strength rather of a ploughman than any other . he shoulder be broad beyond all size , and the calf of he leg larger than those of a common chairman . in short , he whole person want all that elegance and beauty which be the very reverse of clumsy strength , and which so agreeably set off most of we fine gentleman ; be partly owe to the high blood of they ancestor , viz. , blood make of rich sauces and generous wine , and partly to a early town education . though be a woman of the greatest delicacy of taste , yet such be the charms of the 's conversation , that she totally overlook the defect
defect of he person . she imagine , and perhaps very wisely , that she should enjoy more agreeable minute with the captain than with a much prettier fellow ; and forego the consideration of please she eye , in order to procure herself much more solid satisfaction . the captain no sooner perceive the passion of , in which discovery he be very quick - sighted , than he faithfully return it . the lady , no more than she lover , be remarkable for beauty . I would attempt to draw she picture , but that be do already by a more able master , himself , to whom she sit many year ago , and hath be lately exhibit by that gentleman in he print of a winter 's morning , of which she be no improper emblem , and may be see walking ( for walk she doth in the print ) to church , with a starve foot - boy behind carry she prayer - book . the captain likewise very wisely prefer the more solid enjoyment he expect with this lady , to the fleeting charms of person . he be one of those wise man who regard beauty in the other sex as a very worthless and superficial qualification ; or , to speak more truly , who rather chuse to possess every convenience of life with a ugly woman , than a handsome one without any of those convenience . and have a very good appetite , and but little nicety , he fancie he should play he part very well at the matrimonial banquet , without the sauce of beauty . to deal plainly with the reader , the captain , ever since he arrival , at least from the moment he brother have propose the match to he , long before he have discover any flattering symptom in , have be greatly enamoure ; that be to say , of 's house and garden , and of he lands , tenement , and hereditament ; of all which the captain be so passionately fond , that he would most probably have contract marriage with they , have he be oblige to have take the witch of into the bargain . as , therefore , have declare to the doctor that he never intend to take a second wife , as he sister be he nearest relation , and as the doctor have fish out that he intention be to make any child of hers he heir , which indeed the law , without he interposition , would have do for he ; the doctor and he brother think it a act of benevolence to give being to a human creature , who would be so plentifully provide with the most essential means of happiness . the whole thought , therefore , of both the brother be how to engage the affections of this amiable lady . but fortune , who be a tender parent , and often doth more for she favourite offspring than either they deserve or wish , have be so industrious for the captain , that whilst he be lay schem to execute he purpose , the lady conceive the same desire with himself , and be on she side contrive how to give the proper encouragement , without appear too forward ; for she be a strict observer of all rule of decorum . in this , however , she easily succeed ; for as the be always on the look - out , no glance , gesture , or word escape he . the satisfaction which the receive from the kind behaviour of , be not a little abate by he apprehension of ; for , notwithstand he disinterested profession , the captain imagine he would , when he come to act , follow the example of the rest of the world , and refuse he consent to a match so disadvantageous , in point of interest , to he sister . from what oracle he receive this opinion , I shall leave the reader to determine : but however he come by it , it strangely perplex he how to regulate he conduct so as at once to convey he affection to the lady , and to conceal it from she brother . he at length resolve to take all private opportunity of make he address ; but in the presence of to be as reserve and as much upon he guard as be possible ; and this conduct be highly approve by the brother . he soon find means to make he address , in express term , to he mistress , from whom he receive a answer in the proper form , viz . : the answer which be first make some thousand of year ago , and which hath be hand down by tradition from mother to daughter ever since . if I be to translate this into , I should render it by these two word , : a phrase likewise of immemorial use on another occasion . the captain , however he come by he knowledge , perfectly well understand the lady , and very soon after repeat he application with more warmth and earnestness than before , and be again , accord to due form , reject ; but as he have increase in the eagerness of he desire , so the lady , with the same propriety , decrease in the violence of she refusal . not to tire the reader , by lead he through every scene of this courtship ( which , though in the opinion of a certain great author , it be the pleasantest scene of life to the actor , be , perhaps , as dull and tiresome as any whatever to the audience ) , the captain make he advance in form , the citadel be defend in form , and at
at length , in proper form , surrendere at discretion . during this whole time , which fill the space of near a month , the preserve great distance of behaviour to he lady in the presence of the brother ; and the more he succeed with she in private , the more reserved be he in public . and as for the lady , she have no sooner secure she lover than she behave to he before company with the highest degree of indifference ; so that must have have the insight of the ( or perhaps some of he worse quality ) to have entertaine the least suspicion of what be go forward . chapter xii . contain what the reader may , perhaps , expect to find in it . in all bargain , whether to fight or to marry , or concern any other such business , little previous ceremony be require to bring the matter to a issue when both party be really in earnest . this be the case at present , and in less than a month the and he lady be man and wife . the great concern now be to break the matter to ; and this be undertake by the doctor . one day , then , as be walk in he garden , the doctor come to he , and , with great gravity of aspect , and all the concern which he could possibly affect in he countenance , say , " I be come , sir , to impart a affair to you of the utmost consequence ; but how shall I mention to you what it almost distract I to think off ! " he then launch forth into the most bitter invective both against man and woman ; accuse the former of have no attachment but to they interest , and the latter of be so addicte to vicious inclination that they could never be safely trust with one of the other sex . " could I , " say he , " sir , have suspect that a lady of such prudence , such judgment , such learn , should indulge so indiscreet a passion ! or could I have imagine that my brother -- why do I call he so ? he be no longer a brother of mine ---- " " indeed but he be , " say , " and a brother of mine too . " " bless I , sir ! " say the doctor , " do you know the shocking affair ? " " look 'ee , , " answer the good man , " it hath be my constant maxim in life to make the best of all matters which happen . my sister , though many year younger than I , be at least old enough to be at the age of discretion . have he impos on a child , I should have be more averse to have forgiven he ; but a woman upward of thirty must certainly be suppose to know what will make she most happy . she hath marry a gentleman , though perhaps not quite she equal in fortune ; and if he hath any perfection in she eye which can make up that deficiency , I see no reason why I should object to she choice of she own happiness ; which I , no more than herself , imagine to consist only in immense wealth . I might , perhaps , from the many declaration I have make of comply with almost any proposal , have expect to have be consult on this occasion ; but these matters be of a very delicate nature , and the scruple of modesty , perhaps , be not to be overcome . as to you brother , I have really no anger against he at all . he hath no obligation to I , nor do I think he be under any necessity of ask my consent , since the woman be , as I have say , _sui juris , and of a proper age to be entirely answerable only , to herself for she conduct . " the doctor accuse of too great lenity , repeat he accusation against he brother , and declare that he should never more be bring either to see , or to own he for he relation . he then launch forth into a panegyric on 's goodness ; into the highest encomium on he friendship ; and conclude by say , he should never forgive he brother for have put the place which he bear in that friendship to a hazard . thus answer : " have I conceive any displeasure against you brother , I should never have carry that resentment to the innocent : but I assure you I have no such displeasure . you brother appear to I to be a man of sense and honour . I do not disapprove the taste of my sister ; nor will I doubt but that she be equally the object of he inclination . I have always think love the only foundation of happiness in a married state , as it can only produce that high and tender friendship which should always be the cement of this union ; and , in my opinion , all those marriage which be contract from other motive be greatly criminal ; they be a profanation of a most holy ceremony , and generally end in disquiet and misery : for surely we may call it a profanation to convert this most sacr institution into a wicked sacrifice to lust or avarice : and what better can be say of those match to which man be induce merely by the consideration of a beautiful person , or a great fortune ? " to deny that beauty be a agreeable object to the eye , and even
even worthy some admiration , would be false and foolish . beautiful be a epithet often use in , and always mention with honour . it be my own fortune to marry a woman whom the world think handsome , and I can truly say I like she the better on that account . but to make this the sole consideration of marriage , to lust after it so violently as to overlook all imperfection for its sake , or to require it so absolutely as to reject and disdain religion , virtue , and sense , which be qualitie in they nature of much higher perfection , only because a elegance of person be want : this be surely inconsistent , either with a wise man or a good . and it be , perhaps , be too charitable to conclude that such person mean anything more by they marriage than to please they carnal appetite ; for the satisfaction of which , we be teach , it be not ordain . " in the next place , with respect to . worldly prudence , perhaps , exact some consideration on this head ; nor will I absolutely and altogether condemn it . as the world be constitute , the demand of a married state , and the care of posterity , require some little regard to what we call circumstance . yet this provision be greatly increase , beyond what be really necessary , by folly and vanity , which create abundantly more wants than nature . Equipage for the wife , and large fortune for the child , be by custom enrol in the list of necessaries ; and to procure these , everything truly solid and sweet , and virtuous and religious , be neglect and overlook . " and this in many degree ; the last and greatest of which seem scarce distinguishable from madness ;-- I mean where person of immense fortunes contract themselves to those who be , and must be , disagreeable to they -- to fool and knave -- in order to increase a estate already larger even than the demand of they pleasure . surely such person , if they will not be think mad , must own , either that they be incapable of taste the sweet of the tenderest friendship , or that they sacrifice the greatest happiness of which they be capable to the vain , uncertain , and senseless law of vulgar opinion , which owe as well they force as they foundation to folly . " here conclude he sermon , to which have listen with the profoundest attention , though it cost he some pain to prevent now and then a small discomposure of he muscle . he now praise every period of what he have hear with the warmth of a young divine , who hath the honour to dine with a bishop the same day in which he lordship hath mount the pulpit . chapter xiii . which conclude the first book ; with a instance of ingratitude , which , we hope , will appear unnatural . the reader , from what hath be say , may imagine that the reconciliation ( if indeed it could be so call ) be only matter of form ; we shall therefore pass it over , and hasten to what must surely be think matter of substance . the doctor have acquaint he brother with what have past between and he ; and add with a smile , " I promise you I pay you off ; nay , I absolutely desire the good gentleman not to forgive you : for you know after he have make a declaration in you favour , I might with safety venture on such a request with a person of he temper ; and I be willing , as well for you sake as for my own , to prevent the least possibility of a suspicion . " take not the least notice of this , at that time ; but he afterwards make a very notable use of it . one of the maxim which the devil , in a late visit upon , leave to he disciple , be , when once you be get up , to kick the stool from under you . in plain , when you have make you fortune by the good office of a friend , you be advise to discard he as soon as you can . whether the act by this maxim , I will not positively determine : so far we may confidently say , that he action may be fairly derive from this diabolical principle ; and indeed it be difficult to assign any other motive to they : for no sooner be he possess of , and reconcile to , than he begin to show a coldness to he brother which increase daily ; till at length it grow into rudeness , and become very visible to every one . the doctor remonstrate to he privately concern this behaviour , but could obtain no other satisfaction than the follow plain declaration : " if you dislike anything in my brother 's house , sir , you know you be at liberty to quit it . " this strange , cruel , and almost unaccountable ingratitude in the captain , absolutely break the poor doctor 's heart ; for ingratitude never so thoroughly pierce the human breast as when it proceed from those in whose behalf we have be guilty of transgression . Reflection on great and good action , however they be receive or return by those in whose favour they be perform , always administer some comfort to we ; but what consolation shall we receive under so bite a calamity as the ungrateful behaviour of we friend , when we wounded conscience at the same time fly in we face , and upbraids we
we will have spot it in the service of one so worthless ! Allworthy himself speak to the captain in he brother 's behalf , and desire to know what offence the doctor have commit ; when the hard - hear villain have the baseness to say that he should never forgive he for the injury which he have endeavoure to do he in he favour ; which , he say , he have pump out of he , and be such a cruelty that it ought not to be forgive . speak in very high term upon this declaration , which , he say , become not a human creature . he express , indeed , so much resentment against a unforgiving temper , that the captain at last pretend to be convince by he argument , and outwardly profess to be reconcile . as for the bride , she be now in she honeymoon , and so passionately fond of she new husband that he never appear to she to be in the wrong ; and he displeasure against any person be a sufficient reason for she dislike to the same . the captain , at 's instance , be outwardly , as we have say , reconcile to he brother ; yet the same rancour remain in he heart ; and he find so many opportunity of give he private hint of this , that the house at last grew insupportable to the poor doctor ; and he choose rather to submit to any inconvenience which he might encounter in the world , than longer to bear these cruel and ungrateful insult from a brother for whom he have do so much . he once intend to acquaint with the whole ; but he could not bring himself to submit to the confession , by which he must take to he share so great a portion of guilt . besides , by how much the worse man he represent he brother to be , so much the greater would he own offence appear to , and so much the greater , he have reason to imagine , would be he resentment . he feign , therefore , some excuse of business for he departure , and promise to return soon again ; and take leave of he brother with so well - dissemble content , that , as the play he part to the same perfection , remain well satisfied with the truth of the reconciliation . the doctor go directly to , where he die soon after of a broken heart ; a distemper which kill many more than be generally imagined , and would have a fair title to a place in the bill of mortality , do it not differ in one instance from all other disease -- viz. , that no physician can cure it . now , upon the most diligent enquiry into the former live of these two brother , I find , besides the curse and hellish maxe of policy above mention , another reason for the captain 's conduct : the captain , besides what we have before say of he , be a man of great pride and fierceness , and have always treat he brother , who be of a different complexion , and greatly deficient in both these quality , with the utmost air of superiority . the doctor , however , have much the larger share of learning , and be by many repute to have the better understanding . this the know , and could not bear ; for though envy be at best a very malignant passion , yet be its bitterness greatly heighten by mixing with contempt towards the same object ; and very much afraid I be , that whenever a obligation be join to these two , indignation and not gratitude will be the product of all three . . contain scenes of in of ; and during the first two year after the and . I . show what kind of a history this be ; what it be like , and what it be not like . though we have properly enough entitle this we work , a history , and not a life ; nor a apology for a life , as be more in fashion ; yet we intend in it rather to pursue the method of those writer , who profess to disclose the revolution of country , than to imitate the painful and voluminous historian , who , to preserve the regularity of he series , think himself oblige to fill up as much paper with the detail of month and year in which nothing remarkable happen , as he employ upon those notable aera when the greatest scene have be transact on the human stage . such history as these do , in reality , very much resemble a newspaper , which consist of just the same number of word , whether there be any news in it or not . they may likewise be compare to a stage coach , which perform constantly the same course , empty as well as full . the writer , indeed , seem to think himself oblige to keep even pace with time , whose amanuensis he be ; and , like he master , travels as slowly through centurie of monkish dulness , when the world seem to have be asleep , as through that bright and busy age so nobly distinguished by the excellent latin poet -- confligendum venientibus undique poenis , cum belli trepido concussa tumultu Horrida contremuere sub altis aetheris auri ; in dubioque fuit sub utrorum regna cadendum omnibus humanis esset , terraque marique ._ of which we wish we could give we reader a more adequate translation than that by -- when dreadful Carthage fright Rome with arm , and all the world be shook with fierce alarm ; whilst undecide
undecide yet , which part should fall , which nation rise the glorious lord of all . now it be we purpose , in the ensue page , to pursue a contrary method . when any extraordinary scene present itself ( as we trust will often be the case ) , we shall spare no pain nor paper to open it at large to we reader ; but if whole year should pass without produce anything worthy he notice , we shall not be afraid of a chasm in we history ; but shall hasten on to matter of consequence , and leave such period of time totally unobserved . these be indeed to be consider as blank in the grand lottery of time . we therefore , who be the register of that lottery , shall imitate those sagacious person who deal in that which be draw at , and who never trouble the public with the many blank they dispose of ; but when a great prize happen to be draw , the newspaper be presently fill with it , and the world be sure to be inform at whose office it be sell : indeed , commonly two or three different office lay claim to the honour of have dispose of it ; by which , I suppose , the adventurer be give to understand that certain broker be in the secret of , and indeed of she cabinet council . my reader then be not to be surprize , if , in the course of this work , he shall find some chapter very short , and other altogether as long ; some that contain only the time of a single day , and other that comprise year ; in a word , if my history sometimes seem to stand still , and sometimes to fly . for all which I shall not look on myself as accountable to any court of critical jurisdiction whatever : for as I be , in reality , the founder of a new province of writing , so I be at liberty to make what law I please therein . and these law , my reader , whom I consider as my subject , be bound to believe in and to obey ; with which that they may readily and cheerfully comply , I do hereby assure they that I shall principally regard they ease and advantage in all such institution : for I do not , like a _jure divino_ tyrant , imagine that they be my slave , or my commodity . I be , indeed , set over they for they own good only , and be create for they use , and not they for mine . nor do I doubt , while I make they interest the great rule of my writings , they will unanimously concur in support my dignity , and in render I all the honour I shall deserve or desire . . religious caution against show too much favour to bastard ; and a great discovery make by . eight month after the celebration of the nuptial between and , a young lady of great beauty , merit , and fortune , be , by reason of a fright , deliver of a fine boy . the child be indeed to all appearance perfect ; but the midwife discover it be bear a month before it be full time . though the birth of a heir by he beloved sister be a circumstance of great joy to , yet it do not alienate he affections from the little foundling , to whom he have be godfather , have give he own name of , and whom he have hitherto seldom fail of visiting , at least once a day , in he nursery . he tell he sister , if she please , the new - born infant should be breed up together with little ; to which she consent , though with some little reluctance : for she have truly a great complacence for she brother ; and hence she have always behave towards the foundling with rather more kindness than lady of rigid virtue can sometimes bring themselves to show to these child , who , however innocent , may be truly call the living monument of incontinence . the captain could not so easily bring himself to bear what he condemn as a fault in . he give he frequent hint , that to adopt the fruit of sin , be to give countenance to it . he quote several text ( for he be well read in ) , such as , he visit the sins of the father upon the child ; and the fathers have eat sour grape , and the child 's tooth be set on edge_,&c . Whence he argue the legality of punish the crime of the parent on the bastard . he say , " though the law do not positively allow the destroy such base - bear child , yet it hold they to be the child of nobody ; that the consider they as the child of nobody ; and that at the best , they ought to be bring up to the lowest and vilest office of the commonwealth . " answer to all this , and much more , which the captain have urge on this subject , " that , however guilty the parent might be , the child be certainly innocent : that as to the text he have quote , the former of they be a particular denunciation against the , for the sin of idolatry , of relinquishing and hate they heavenly ; and the latter be parabolically spoken , and rather intend to denote the certain and necessary consequence of sin , than any express judgment against it . but to represent the Almighty as avenge the sins of the guilty on the
the innocent , be indecent , if not blasphemous , as it be to represent he act against the first principles of natural justice , and against the original notion of right and wrong , which he himself have implant in we minds ; by which we be to judge not only in all matters which be not reveal , but even of the truth of revelation itself . he say he know many hold the same principles with the captain on this head ; but he be himself firmly convince to the contrary , and would provide in the same manner for this poor infant , as if a legitimate child have have fortune to have be find in the same place . " while the captain be take all opportunity to press these and such like argument , to remove the little foundling from 's , of whose fondness for he he begin to be jealous , have make a discovery , which , in its event , threaten at least to prove more fatal to poor than all the reasoning of the captain . whether the insatiable curiosity of this good woman have carry she on to that business , or whether she do it to confirm herself in the good graces of , who , notwithstand she outward behaviour to the foundling , frequently abuse the infant in private , and she brother too , for he fondness to it , I will not determine ; but she have now , as she conceive , fully detect the father of the foundling . now , as this be a discovery of great consequence , it may be necessary to trace it from the fountain - head . we shall therefore very minutely lay open those previous matter by which it be produce ; and for that purpose we shall be obliged to reveal all the secret of a little family with which my reader be at present entirely unacquainted ; and of which the oeconomy be so rare and extraordinary , that I fear it will shock the utmost credulity of many married person . chapter iii . the description of a domestic government founde upon rule directly contrary to those of . my reader may please to remember he hath be inform that have live some year with a certain schoolmaster , who have , at she earnest desire , instruct she in , in which , to do justice to she genius , she have so improve herself , that she be become a better scholar than she master . indeed , though this poor man have undertake a profession to which learn must be allow necessary , this be the least of he commendation . he be one of the best - natured fellow in the world , and be , at the same time , master of so much pleasantry and humour , that he be repute the wit of the country ; and all the neighbouring gentleman be so desirous of he company , that as denying be not he talent , he spend much time at they house , which he might , with more emolument , have spend in he school . it may be imagine that a gentleman so qualified and so dispose , be in no danger of become formidable to the learn seminary of or . to speak plainly , he scholar be divide into two class : in the upper of which be a young gentleman , the son of a neighbour squire , who , at the age of seventeen , be just enter into he Syntaxis ; and in the lower be a second son of the same gentleman , who , together with seven parish - boy , be learn to read and write . the stipend arising hence would hardly have indulge the schoolmaster in the luxuries of life , have he not add to this office those of clerk and barber , and have not add to the whole a annuity of ten pound , which the poor man receive every , and with which he be enable to cheer he heart during that sacred festival . among he other treasure , the pedagogue have a wife , whom he have marry out of 's kitchen for she fortune , viz. , twenty pound , which she have there amass . this woman be not very amiable in she person . whether she sit to my friend , or no , I will not determine ; but she exactly resemble the young woman who be pour out she mistress 's tea in the third picture of the 's . she be , besides , a profest follower of that noble sect foun by Xantippe of old ; by means of which she become more formidable in the school than she husband ; for , to confess the truth , he be never master there , or anywhere else , in she presence . though she countenance do not denote much natural sweetness of temper , yet this be , perhaps , somewhat sour by a circumstance which generally poison matrimonial felicity ; for child be rightly call the pledge of love ; and she husband , though they have be marry nine year , have give she no such pledge ; a default for which he have no excuse , either from age or health , be not yet thirty year old , and what they call a jolly brisk young man . hence arise another evil , which produce no little uneasiness to the poor pedagogue , of whom she maintain so constant a jealousy , that he durst hardly speak to one woman in the parish ; for the least degree of civility , or even correspondence , with any female , be sure to bring he wife upon she back , and he own . in order to
to guard herself against matrimonial injury in she own house , as she keep one maid - servant , she always take care to chuse she out of that order of female whose face be take as a kind of security for they virtue ; of which number , as the reader hath be before inform , be one . as the face of this young woman might be call pretty good security of the before - mention kind , and as she behaviour have be always extremely modest , which be the certain consequence of understanding in woman ; she have pass above four year at 's ( for that be the schoolmaster 's name ) without create the least suspicion in she mistress . Nay , she have be treat with uncommon kindness , and she mistress have permit to give she those instruction which have be before commemorate . but it be with jealousy as with the gout : when such distemper be in the blood , there be never any security against they break out ; and that often on the slightest occasion , and when least suspect . thus it happen to , who have submit four year to she husband 's teach this young woman , and have suffer she often to neglect she work , in order to pursue she learn . for , pass by one day , as the girl be read , and she master lean over she , the girl , I know not for what reason , suddenly start up from she chair : and this be the first time that suspicion ever enter into the head of she mistress . this do not , however , at that time discover itself , but lay lurk in she mind , like a concealed enemy , who wait for a reinforcement of additional strength before he openly declare himself and proceed upon hostile operation : and such additional strength soon arrive to corroborate she suspicion ; for not long after , the husband and wife be at dinner , the master say to he maid , mihi aliquid potum :_ upon which the poor girl smile , perhaps at the badness of the , and , when she mistress cast she eye on she , blush , possibly with a consciousness of have laugh at she master . , upon this , immediately fall into a fury , and discharge the trencher on which she be eat , at the head of poor , cry out , " you impudent whore , do you play trick with my husband before my face ? " and at the same instant rise from she chair with a knife in she hand , with which , most probably , she would have execute very tragical vengeance , have not the girl take the advantage of be nearer the door than she mistress , and avoid she fury by run away : for , as to the poor husband , whether surprize have render he motionless , or fear ( which be full as probable ) have restrain he from venturing at any opposition , he sit sta and trembl in he chair ; nor do he once offer to move or speak , till he wife , return from the pursuit of , make some defensive measure necessary for he own preservation ; and he likewise be obliged to retreat , after the example of the maid . this good woman be , no more than Othello , of a disposition to make a life of jealousy and follow still the change of the moon with fresh suspicion -- with she , as well as he , -- to be once in , once to be resolvd -- she therefore order immediately to pack up she alls and begone , for that she be determine she should not sleep that night within she wall . have profit too much by experience to interpose in a matter of this nature . he therefore have recourse to he usual receipt of patience , for , though he be not a great adept in , he remember , and well understand , the advice contain in these word --_ fit quod bene fertur onus in : a burden become lightest when it be well borne -- which he have always in he mouth ; and of which , to say the truth , he have often occasion to experience the truth . offer to make protestation of she innocence ; but the tempest be too strong for she to be hear . she then betake herself to the business of packing , for which a small quantity of brown paper suffice , and , have receive she small pittance of wage , she return home . the schoolmaster and he consort pass they time unpleasantly enough that evening , but something or other happen before the next morning , which a little abate the fury of ; and she at length admit she husband to make he excuse : to which she give the readier belief , as he have , instead of desire she to recall , profess a satisfaction in she be dismiss , say , she be grow of little use as a servant , spend all she time in reading , and be become , moreover , very pert and obstinate ; for , indeed , she and she master have lately have frequent dispute in literature ; in which , as hath be say , she be become greatly he superior . this , however , he would by no means allow ; and as he call she persist in the right , obstinacy , he begin to hate she with no small inveteracy . iv. contain one of the most bloody battle , or rather duel , that be ever record in domestic history . for the reason mention in
in the preceding chapter , and from some other matrimonial concession , well know to most husband , and which , like the secret of freemasonry , should be divulge to none who be not member of that honourable fraternity , be pretty well satisfi that she have condemn she husband without cause , and endeavoure by act of kindness to make he amend for she false suspicion . she passion be indeed equally violent , whichever way they inclin ; for as she could be extremely angry , so could she be altogether as fond . but though these passion ordinarily succeed each other , and scarce twenty - four hour ever pass in which the pedagogue be not , in some degree , the object of both ; yet , on extraordinary occasion , when the passion of anger have rage very high , the remission be usually longer : and so be the case at present ; for she continue longer in a state of affability , after this fit of jealousy be end , than she husband have ever know before : and , have it not be for some little exercise , which all the follower of Xantippe be obliged to perform daily , would have enjoy a perfect serenity of several month . perfect calm at sea be always suspect by the experienced mariner to be the forerunner of a storm , and I know some person , who , without be generally the devotee of superstition , be apt to apprehend that great and unusual peace or tranquillity will be attend with its opposite . for which reason the antient use , on such occasion , to sacrifice to the goddess , a deity who be think by they to look with a invidious eye on human felicity , and to have a peculiar delight in overturn it . as we be very far from believe in any such heathan goddess , or from encourage any superstition , so we wish ----, or some other such philosopher , would bestir himself a little , in order to find out the real cause of this sudden transition from good to bad fortune , which hath be so often remark , and of which we shall proceed to give a instance ; for it be we province to relate fact , and we shall leave cause to person of much higher genius . have always take great delight in know and descant on the action of other . hence there have be , in all age and nation , certain place set apart for public rendezvous , where the curious might meet and satisfy they mutual curiosity . among these , the barber 's shop have justly borne the pre-eminence . among the Greek , barber ' news be a proverbial expression ; and , in one of he epistle , make honourable mention of the barber in the same light . those of be know to be no wise inferior to they or predecessor . you there see foreign affair discuss in a manner little inferior to that with which they be handle in the coffee - house ; and domestic occurrence be much more largely and freely treat in the former than in the latter . but this serve only for the man . now , whereas the female of this country , especially those of the lower order , do associate themselves much more than those of other nation , we polity would be highly deficient , if they have not some place set apart likewise for the indulgence of they curiosity , see they be in this no way inferior to the other half of the species . in enjoy , therefore , such place of rendezvous , the british fair ought to esteem themselves more happy than any of they foreign sister ; as I do not remember either to have read in history , or to have see in my travels , anything of the like kind . this place then be no other than the chandler 's shop , the known seat of all the news ; or , as it be vulgarly call , gossip , in every parish in . be one day at this assembly of female , be ask by one of she neighbour , if she have hear no news lately of ? to which she answer in the negative . upon this the other reply , with a smile , that the parish be very much oblige to she for have turn away as she do . , whose jealousy , as the reader well know , be long since cure , and who have no other quarrel to she maid , answer boldly , she do not know any obligation the parish have to she on that account ; for she believe have scarce leave she equal behind she . " no , truly , " say the gossip , " I hope not , though I fancy we have slut enow too . then you have not hear , it seem , that she hath be bring to bed of two bastard ? but as they be not bear here , my husband and the other overseer say we shall not be oblige to keep they . " " two bastard ! " answer hastily : " you surprize I ! I do not know whether we must keep they ; but I be sure they must have be beget here , for the wench hath not be nine month go away . " nothing can be so quick and sudden as the operations of the mind , especially when hope , or fear , or jealousy , to which the two other be but journeyman , set it to work . it occur instantly to she , that have scarce ever be out of she own house while she live
live with she . the leaning over the chair , the sudden start up , the , the smile , and many other thing , rush upon she all at once . the satisfaction she husband express in the departure of , appear now to be only dissemble ; again , in the same instant , to be real ; but yet to confirm she jealousy , proceed from satiety , and a hundr other bad cause . in a word , she be convince of she husband 's guilt , and immediately leave the assembly in confusion . as fair , who , though the youngest of the feline family , degenerate not in ferocity from the elder branch of she house , and though inferior in strength , be equal in fierceness to the noble tiger himself , when a little mouse , whom it hath long torment in sport , escape from she clutch for a while , fret , scold , growl , swear ; but if the trunk , or box , behind which the mouse lay hide be again remove , she fly like light on she prey , and , with envenom wrath , bite , scratch , mumble , and tear the little animal . not with less fury do fly on the poor pedagogue . she tongue , tooth , and hand , fall all upon he at once . he wig be in a instant torn from he head , he shirt from he back , and from he face descend five stream of blood , denote the number of claw with which nature have unhappily arm the enemy . act for some time on the defensive only ; indeed he attempt only to guard he face with he hand ; but as he find that he antagonist abate nothing of she rage , he think he might , at least , endeavou to disarm she , or rather to confine she arm ; in do which she cap fall off in the struggle , and she hair be too short to reach she shoulders , erect itself on she head ; she stay likewise , which be lace through one single hole at the bottom , burst open ; and she breast , which be much more redundant than she hair , hang down below she middle ; she face be likewise mark with the blood of she husband : she tooth gnash with rage ; and fire , such as sparkle from a smith 's forge , dart from she eyes . so that , altogether , this Amazonian heroine might have be a object of terror to a much bolder man than . he have , at length , the good fortune , by get possession of she arm , to render those weapon which she wear at the end of she finger useless ; which she no sooner perceive , than the softness of she sex prevail over she rage , and she presently dissolve in tear , which soon after conclude in a fit . that small share of sense which have hitherto preserve through this scene of fury , of the cause of which he be hithertoo ignorant , now utterly abandon he . he run instantly into the street , hallow out that he wife be in the agony of death , and beseech the neighbour to fly with the utmost haste to she assistance . several good woman obey he summon , who enter he house , and apply the usual remedy on such occasion , be at length , to the great joy of she husband , bring to herself . as soon as she have a little recollect she spirits , and somewhat compose herself with a cordial , she begin to inform the company of the manifold injury she have receive from she husband ; who , she say , be not contente to injure she in she bed ; but , upon she upbraid he with it , have treat she in the cruelest manner imaginable ; have tore she cap and hair from she head , and she stay from she body , give she , at the same time , several blow , the mark of which she should carry to the grave . the poor man , who bear on he face many more visible mark of the indignation of he wife , stand in silent astonishment at this accusation ; which the reader will , I believe , bear witness for he , have greatly exceed the truth ; for indeed he have not strike she once ; and this silence be interpret to be a confession of the charge by the whole court , they all begin at once , _una voce , to rebuke and revile he , repeat often , that none but a coward ever strike a woman . bear all this patiently ; but when he wife appeal to the blood on she face , as a evidence of he barbarity , he could not help lay claim to he own blood , for so it really be ; as he think it very unnatural , that this should rise up ( as we be teach that of a murdered person often doth ) in vengeance against he . to this the woman make no other answer , than that it be a pity it have not come from he heart , instead of he face ; all declare , that , if they husband should lift they hand against they , they would have they heart 's blood out of they body . after much admonition for what be past , and much good advice to for he future behaviour , the company at length depart , and leave the husband and wife to a personal conference together , in which soon learn the cause of all he suffering
suffering . v. contain much matter to exercise the judgment and reflection of the reader . I believe it be a true observation , that few secret be divulge to one person only ; but certainly , it would be next to a miracle that a fact of this kind should be know to a whole parish , and not transpire any farther . and , indeed , a very few day have past , before the country , to use a common phrase , rung of the schoolmaster of ; who be say to have beat he wife in the most cruel manner . Nay , in some place it be report he have murder she ; in other , that he have break she arm ; in other , she leg : in short , there be scarce a injury which can be do to a human creature , but what be somewhere or other affir to have receive from she husband . the cause of this quarrel be likewise variously report ; for as some people say that have catch she husband in bed with he maid , so many other reason , of a very different kind , go abroad . Nay , some transfer the guilt to the wife , and the jealousy to the husband . have long ago heard of this quarrel ; but , as a different cause from the true one have reach she ear , she think proper to conceal it ; and the rather , perhaps , as the blame be universally laid on ; and he wife , when she be servant to , have in something offended , who be not of a very forgiving temper . but , whose eye could see object at a distance , and who could very well look forward a few year into futurity , have perceive a strong likelihood of 's be hereafter she master ; and as she plainly discern that the captain bear no great goodwill to the little foundling , she fancie it would be render he a agreeable service , if she could make any discoveries that might lessen the affection which seem to have contract for this child , and which give visible uneasiness to the captain , who could not entirely conceal it even before Allworthy himself ; though he wife , who act she part much better in public , frequently recommend to he she own example , of connive at the folly of she brother , which , she say , she at least as well perceive , and as much resent , as any other possibly could . have therefore , by accident , get a true scent of the above story , -- though long after it have happen , fail not to satisfy herself thoroughly of all the particular ; and then acquaint the captain , that she have at last discovered the true father of the little bastard , which she be sorry , she say , to see she master lose he reputation in the country , by take so much notice of . the captain chide she for the conclusion of she speech , as a improper assurance in judging of she master 's action : for if he honour , or he understanding , would have suffer the captain to make a alliance with , he pride would by no means have admit it . and to say the truth , there be no conduct less polintic , than to enter into any confederacy with you friend 's servants against they master : for by these mean you afterwards become the slave of these very servants ; by whom you be constantly liable to be betrayed . and this consideration , perhaps it be , which prevent from be more explicit with , or from encourage the abuse which she have bestow on . but though he declare no satisfaction to at this discovery , he enjoy not a little from it in he own mind , and resolve to make the best use of it he be able . he keep this matter a long time conceal within he own breast , in hope that might hear it from some other person ; but , whether she resent the captain 's behaviour , or whether he cunning be beyond she , and she fear the discovery might displease he , never afterwards open she lip about the matter . I have think it somewhat strange , upon reflection , that the housekeeper never acquaint with this news , as woman be more inclined to communicate all piece of intelligence to they own sex , than to ours . the only way , as it appear to I , of solve this difficulty , be , by imput it to that distance which be now grow between the lady and the housekeeper : whether this arise from a jealousy in , that show too great a respect to the foundling ; for while she be endeavour to ruin the little infant , in order to ingratiate herself with the captain , she be every day more and more commend it before , as he fondness for it every day increase . this , notwithstand all the care she take at other time to express the direct contrary to , perhaps offend that delicate lady , who certainly now hate ; and though she do not , or possibly could not , absolutely remove she from she place , she find , however , the means of make she life very uneasy . this , at length , so resent , that she very openly show all manner of respect and fondness to little , in opposition to . the captain , therefore , find the story in danger of perishing , at last take a opportunity to reveal it himself . he be one day engage
engage with in a discourse on charity : in which the captain , with great learning , prove to , that the word charity in nowhere mean beneficence or generosity . " the religion , " he say , " be institute for much nobler purpose , than to enforce a lesson which many heathan philosopher have teach we long before , and which , though it might perhaps be call a moral virtue , savoure but little of that sublime , - like disposition , that vast elevation of thought , in purity approach to angelic perfection , to be attaine , expresse , and feel only by . those , " he say , " come nearer to the Scripture meaning , who understand by it candour , or the forming of a benevolent opinion of we breth , and pass a favourable judgment on they action ; a virtue much higher , and more extensive in its nature , than a pitiful distribution of alm , which , though we would never so much prejudice , or even ruin we family , could never reach many ; whereas charity , in the other and truer sense , might be extend to all mankind . " he say , " consider who the disciple be , it would be absurd to conceive the doctrine of generosity , or give alm , to have be preach to they . and , as we could not well imagine this doctrine should be preach by its divine author to man who could not practise it , much less should we think it understand so by those who can practise it , and do not . " but though , " continue he , " there be , I be afraid , little merit in these benefaction , there would , I must confess , be much pleasure in they to a good mind , if it be not abate by one consideration . I mean , that we be liable to be impos upon , and to confer we choicest favour often on the undeserving , as you must own be you case in you bounty to that worthless fellow Partridge : for two or three such example must greatly lessen the inward satisfaction which a good man would otherwise find in generosity ; nay , may even make he timorous in bestowing , lest he should be guilty of support vice , and encourage the wick ; a crime of a very black dye , and for which it will by no means be a sufficient excuse , that we have not actually intend such a encouragement ; unless we have use the utmost caution in chuse the object of we beneficence . a consideration which , I make no doubt , hath greatly check the liberality of many a worthy and pious man . " answer , " he could not dispute with the captain in the language , and therefore could say nothing as to the true sense of the word which be translate charity ; but that he have always think it be interpret to consist in action , and that give alm constitute at least one branch of that virtue . " as to the meritorious part , " he say , " he readily agree with the captain ; for where could be the merit of barely discharge a duty ? which , " he say , " let the word charity have what construction it would , it sufficiently appear to be from the whole tenor of the . and as he think it a indispensable duty , enjoin both by the law , and by the law of nature itself ; so be it withal so pleasant , that if any duty could be say to be its own reward , or to pay we while we be discharge it , it be this . " to confess the truth , " say he , " there be one degree of generosity ( of charity I would have call it ) , which seem to have some show of merit , and that be , where , from a principle of benevolence and Christian love , we bestow on another what we really want ourselves ; where , in order to lessen the distress of another , we condescmend to share some part of they , by give what even we own necessity can not well spare . this be , I think , meritorious ; but to relieve we breth only with we superfluity ; to be charitable ( I must use the word ) rather at the expense of we coffer than ourselves ; to save several family from misery rather than hang up a extraordinary picture in we house or gratify any other idle ridiculous vanity -- this seem to be only be human creature . Nay , I will venture to go farther , it be be in some degree epicure : for what could the greatest epicure wish rather than to eat with many mouth instead of one ? which I think may be predicate of any one who know that the bread of many be owing to he own largess . " as to the apprehension of bestow bounty on such as may hereafter prove unworthy object , because many have prove such ; surely it can never deter a good man from generosity . I do not think a few or many example of ingratitude can justify a man 's harden he heart against the distress of he fellow - creature ; nor do I believe it can ever have such effect on a truly benevolent mind . nothing less than a persuasion of universal depravity can lock up the charity of a good man ; and this persuasion must lead he , I think , either into atheism , or enthusiasm ; but surely it be
be unfair to argue such universal depravity from a few vicious individual ; nor be this , I believe , ever do by a man , who , upon search he own mind , find one certain exception to the general rule . " he then conclude by ask , " who that be , whom he have call a worthless fellow ? " " I mean , " say the captain , " Partridge the barber , the schoolmaster , what do you call he ? , the father of the little child which you find in you bed . " Allworthy exprest great surprize at this account , and the captain as great at he ignorance of it ; for he say he have know it above a month : and at length recollect with much difficulty that he be tell it by . upon this , be immediately summon ; who have confirm what the have say , be by , by and with the captain 's advice , dispatch to , to inform herself of the truth of the fact : for the exprest great dislike at all hasty proceedings in criminal matter , and say he would by no means have take any resolution either to the prejudice of the child or its father , before he be satisfied that the latter be guilty ; for though he have privately satisfied himself of this from one of 's neighbour , yet he be too generous to give any such evidence to . chapter vi . the trial of , the schoolmaster , for incontinency ; the evidence of he wife ; a short reflection on the wisdom of we law ; with other grave matter , which those will like best who understand they most . it may be wonder that a story so well know , and which have furnish so much matter of conversation , should never have be mention to himself , who be perhaps the only person in that country who have never hear of it . to account in some measure for this to the reader , I think proper to inform he , that there be no one in the kingdom less interested in oppose that doctrine concern the meaning of the word charity , which hath be see in the preceding chapter , than we good man . indeed , he be equally intitle to this virtue in either sense ; for as no man be ever more sensible of the want , or more ready to relieve the distress of other , so none could be more tender of they character , or slower to believe anything to they disadvantage . scandal , therefore , never find any access to he table ; for as it hath be long since observe that you may know a man by he companion , so I will venture to say , that , by attend to the conversation at a great man 's table , you may satisfy yourself of he religion , he politics , he taste , and indeed of he entire disposition : for though a few odd fellow will utter they own sentiment in all place , yet much the greater part of mankind have enough of the courtier to accommodate they conversation to the taste and inclination of they superior . but to return to , who , have execute she commission with great dispatch , though at fifteen mile distance , bring back such a confirmation of the schoolmaster 's guilt , that determine to send for the criminal , and examine he _viva voce _. , therefore , be summon to attend , in order to he defence ( if he could make any ) against this accusation . at the time appoint , before himself , at paradise - hall , come as well the said Partridge , with , he wife , as Wilkins he accuser . and now be seat in the chair of justice , be bring before he . have hear he accusation from the mouth of , he plead not guilty , make many vehement protestation of he innocence . be then examine , who , after a modest apology for be oblige to speak the truth against she husband , relate all the circumstance with which the reader hath already be acquaint ; and at last concluded with she husband 's confession of he guilt . whether she have forgive he or no , I will not venture to determine ; but it be certain she be a unwilling witness in this cause ; and it be probable from certain other reason , would never have be bring to depose as she do , have not , with great art , fished all out of she at she own house , and have she not indeed make promise , in 's name , that the punishment of she husband should not be such as might anywise affect he family . Partridge still persist in assert he innocence , though he admit he have make the above -mentioned confession ; which he however endeavoure to account for , by protest that he be force into it by the continue importunity she use : who vow , that , as she be sure of he guilt , she would never leave torment he till he have own it ; and faithfully promise , that , in such case , she would never mention it to he more . hence , he say , he have be induce falsely to confess himself guilty , though he be innocent ; and that he believe he should have confest a murder from the same motive . could not bear this imputation with patience ; and have no other remedy in the present place but tear , she call forth a plentiful assistance from they , and then address herself to , she
she say ( or rather cry ) , " May it please you worship , there never be any poor woman so injured as I be by that base man ; for this be not the only instance of he falsehood to I . no , may it please you worship , he hath injure my bed many be the good time and often . I could have put up with he drunkenness and neglect of he business , if he have not break one of the sacred commandment . besides , if it have be out of door I have not matter it so much ; but with my own servant , in my own house , under my own roof , to defile my own chaste bed , which to be sure he hath , with he beastly stink whore . yes , you villain , you have defile my own bed , you have ; and then you have charge I with bullock you into own the truth . it be very likely , a not please you worship , that I should bullock he ? I have mark enow about my body to show of he cruelty to I . if you have be a man , you villain , you would have scorn to injure a woman in that manner . but you can not half a man , you know it . have you be half a husband to I . you need run after whore , you need , when I be sure -- and since he provoke I , I be ready , a n't please you worship , to take my bodily oath that I find they a - bed together . what , you have forget , I suppose , when you beat I into a fit , and make the blood run down my forehead , because I only civilly tax you with adultery ! but I can prove it by all my neighbour . you have almost break my heart , you have , you have . " here interrupt , and beg she to be pacify , promise she that she should have justice ; then turn to , who stand aghast , one half of he wit be hurrie away by surprize and the other half by fear , he say he be sorry to see there be so wick a man in the world . he assure he that he prevaricat and lie backward and forward be a great aggravation of he guilt ; for which the only atonement he could make be by confession and repentance . he exhort he , therefore , to begin by immediately confess the fact , and not to persist in deny what be so plainly prove against he even by he own wife . here , reader , I beg you patience a moment , while I make a just compliment to the great wisdom and sagacity of we law , which refuse to admit the evidence of a wife for or against she husband . this , say a certain learned author , who , I believe , be never quote before in any but a law - book , would be the means of create a eternal dissension between they . it would , indeed , be the means of much perjury , and of much whipping , fine , imprison , transport , and hang . stand a while silent , till , be bid to speak , he say he have already speak the truth , and appeal to for he innocence , and lastly to the girl herself , whom he desire he worship immediately to send for ; for he be ignorant , or at least pretend to be so , that she have leave that part of the country . , whose natural love of justice , join to he coolness of temper , make he always a most patient magistrate in hear all the witness which a accuse person could produce in he defence , agree to defer he final determination of this matter till the arrival of , for whom he immediately dispatch a messenger ; and then have recommend peace between and he wife ( though he address himself chiefly to the wrong person ) , he appoint they to attend again the third day ; for he have send a whole day 's journey from he own house . at the appointed time the party all assemble , when the messenger return bring word , that be not to be find ; for that she have leave she habitation a few day before , in company with a recruiting officer . then declare that the evidence of such a slut as she appear to be would have deserve no credit ; but he say he could not help think that , have she be present , and would have declare the truth , she must have confirm what so many circumstance , together with he own confession , and the declaration of he wife that she have catch she husband in the fact , do sufficiently prove . he therefore once more exhort Partridge to confess ; but he still avow he innocence , declare himself satisfied of he guilt , and that he be too bad a man to receive any encouragement from he . he therefore deprive he of he annuity , and recommend repentance to he on account of another world , and industry to maintain himself and he wife in this . there be not , perhaps , many more unhappy person than poor Partridge . he have lose the best part of he income by the evidence of he wife , and yet be dailly upbraide by she for have , among other thing , be the occasion of deprive she of that benefit ; but such be he fortune , and he
he be oblige to submit to it . though I call he poor Partridge in the last paragraph , I would have the reader rather impute that epithet to the compassion in my temper than conceive it to be any declaration of he innocence . whether he be innocent or not will perhaps appear hereafter ; but if the historic muse hath entrust I with any secret , I will by no means be guilty of discover they till she shall give I leave . here therefore the reader must suspend he curiosity . certain it be that , whatever be the truth of the case , there be evidence more than sufficient to convict he before ; indeed , much less would have satisfi a bench of justice on a order of bastardy ; and yet , notwithstand the positiveness of , who would have take the sacrament upon the matter , there be a possibility that the schoolmaster be entirely innocent : for though it appear clear on compare the time when depart from with that of she delivery that she have there conceive this infant , yet it by no means follow of necessity that must have be its father ; for , to omit other particular , there be in the same house a lad near eighteen , between whom and there have subsist sufficient intimacy to find a reasonable suspicion ; and yet , so blind be jealousy , this circumstance never once enter into the head of the enraged wife . whether repent or not , accord to 's advice , be not so apparent . certain it be that he wife repent heartily of the evidence she have give against he : especially when she find have deceive she , and refuse to make any application to on she behalf . she have , however , somewhat better success with , who be , as the reader must have perceive , a much better - tempered woman , and very kindly undertake to solicit she brother to restore the annuity ; in which , though good - nature might have some share , yet a stronger and more natural motive will appear in the next chapter . these solicitation be nevertheless unsuccessful : for though do not think , with some late writer , that mercy consist only in punishing offender ; yet he be as far from think that it be proper to this excellent quality to pardon great criminal wantonly , without any reason whatever . any doubtfulness of the fact , or any circumstance of mitigation , be never disregarde : but the petition of a offender , or the intercession of other , do not in the least affect he . in a word , he never pardon because the offender himself , or he friend , be unwilling that he should be punish . and he wife be therefore both oblige to submit to they fate ; which be indeed severe enough : for so far be he from double he industry on the account of he lessened income , that he do in a manner abandon himself to despair ; and as he be by nature indolent , that vice now increase upon he , by which mean he lose the little school he have ; so that neither he wife nor himself would have have any bread to eat , have not the charity of some good interpose , and provide they with what be just sufficient for they sustenance . as this support be convey to they by a unknown hand , they imagine , and so , I doubt not , will the reader , that himself be they secret benefactor ; who , though he would not openly encourage vice , could yet privately relieve the distress of the vicious themselves , when these become too exquisite and disproportionate to they demerit . in which light they wretchedness appear now to Fortune herself ; for she at length take pity on this miserable couple , and considerably lessen the wretch state of , by put a final end to that of he wife , who soon after catch the small - pox , and die . the justice which have execute on Partridge at first meet with universal approbation ; but no sooner have he feel its consequence , than he neighbour begin to relent , and to compassionate he case ; and presently after , to blame that as rigour and severity which they before call justice . they now exclaim against punishing in cold blood , and sang forth the praise of mercy and forgiveness . these cry be considerably increase by the death of , which , though owe to the distemper above mention , which be no consequence of poverty or distress , many be not asham to impute to 's severity , or , as they now term it , cruelty . Partridge have now lose he wife , he school , and he annuity , and the unknown person have now discontinue the last - mention charity , resolve to change the scene , and leave the country , where he be in danger of starving , with the universal compassion of all he neighbour . chapter vii . a short sketch of that felicity which prudent couple may extract from hatre : with a short apology for those people who overlook imperfection in they friend . though the captain have effectually demolish poor Partridge , yet have he not reap the harvest he hope for , which be to turn the foundling out of 's house . on the contrary , that gentleman grow every day fonder of little , as if he intend to counterbalance he severity to the father with extraordinary fondness and affection towards the son . this a good deal sour the captain 's temper , as do all the other daily instance
instance of 's generosity ; for he look on all such largess to be diminution of he own wealth . in this , we have say , he do not agree with he wife ; nor , indeed , in anything else : for though a affection place on the understanding be , by many wise person , think more durable than that which be found on beauty , yet it happen otherwise in the present case . Nay , the understanding of this couple be they principal bone of contention , and one great cause of many quarrel , which from time to time arise between they ; and which at last ended , on the side of the lady , in a sovereign contempt for she husband ; and on the husband 's , in a utter abhorrence of he wife . as these have both exercise they talents chiefly in the study of divinity , this be , from they first acquaintance , the most common topic of conversation between they . the captain , like a well - breed man , have , before marriage , always give up he opinion to that of the lady ; and this , not in the clumsy awkward manner of a conceited blockhead , who , while he civilly yield to a superior in a argument , be desirous of be still kny to think himself in the right . the captain , on the contrary , though one of the proudest fellow in the world , so absolutely yield the victory to he antagonist , that she , who have not the least doubt of he sincerity , retire always from the dispute with a admiration of she own understanding and a love for he . but though this complacence to one whom the thoroughly despise , be not so uneasy to he as it would have be have any hope of preferment make it necessary to show the same submission to a , or to some other of great reputation in the science , yet even this cost he too much to be endure without some motive . , therefore , have remove all such motive , he grow weary of this condescension , and begin to treat the opinion of he wife with that haughtiness and insolence , which none but those who deserve some contempt themselves can bestow , and those only who deserve no contempt can bear . when the first torrent of tenderness be over , and when , in the calm and long interval between the fits , reason begin to open the eye of the lady , and she see this alteration of behaviour in the captain , who at length answer all she argument only with pish and pshaw , she be far from endure the indignity with a tame submission . indeed , it at first so highly provoke she , that it might have produce some tragical event , have it not take a more harmless turn , by fill she with the utmost contempt for she husband 's understanding , which somewhat qualifie she hatre towards he ; though of this likewise she have a pretty moderate share . the captain 's hatre to she be of a purer kind : for as to any imperfection in she knowledge or understanding , he no more despise she for they , than for she not be six foot high . in he opinion of the female sex , he exceed the moroseness of himself : he look on a woman as on a animal of domestic use , of somewhat higher consideration than a cat , since she office be of rather more importance ; but the difference between these two be , in he estimation , so small , that , in he marriage contract with 's lands and tenement , it would have be pretty equal which of they he have take into the bargain . and yet so tender be he pride , that it feel the contempt which he wife now begin to express towards he ; and this , add to the surfeit he have before take of she love , create in he a degree of disgust and abhorrence , perhaps hardly to be exceed . one situation only of the married state be exclude from pleasure : and that be , a state of indifference : but as many of my reader , I hope , know what a exquisite delight there be in conveying pleasure to a belove object , so some few , I be afraid , may have experience the satisfaction of torment one we hate . it be , I apprehend , to come at this latter pleasure , that we see both sex often give up that ease in marriage which they might otherwise possess , though they mate be never so disagreeable to they . hence the wife often put on fit of love and jealousy , nay , even deny herself any pleasure , to disturb and prevent those of she husband ; and he again , in return , put frequent restraint on himself , and stay at home in company which he dislike , in order to confine he wife to what she equally detest . hence , too , must flow those tear which a widow sometimes so plentifully shed over the ash of a husband with whom she lead a life of constant disquiet and turbulency , and whom now she can never hope to torment any more . but if ever any couple enjoy this pleasure , it be at present experience by the and he lady . it be always a sufficient reason to either of they to be obstinate in any opinion , that the other have previously assert the contrary . if the one propose any amusement , the other constantly object to it : they never
never love or hate , commend or abuse , the same person . and for this reason , as the look with a evil eye on the little foundling , he wife begin now to caress it almost equally with she own child . the reader will be apt to conceive , that this behaviour between the husband and wife do not greatly contribute to 's repose , as it ten so little to that serene happiness which he have design for all three from this alliance ; but the truth be , though he might be a little disappointed in he sanguine expectation , yet he be far from be acquaint with the whole matter ; for , as the be , from certain obvious reason , much on he guard before he , the lady be oblige , for fear of she brother 's displeasure , to pursue the same conduct . in fact , it be possible for a third person to be very intimate , nay even to live long in the same house , with a marry couple , who have any tolerable discretion , and not even guess at the sour sentiment which they bear to each other : for though the whole day may be sometimes too short for hatred , as well as for love ; yet the many hour which they naturally spend together , apart from all observer , furnish people of tolerable moderation with such ample opportunity for the enjoyment of either passion , that , if they love , they can support be a few hour in company without toy , or if they hate , without spitte in each other 's face . it be possible , however , that see enough to render he a little uneasy ; for we be not always to conclude , that a wise man be not hurt , because he doth not cry out and lament himself , like those of a childish or effeminate temper . but indeed it be possible he might see some fault in the captain without any uneasiness at all ; for man of true wisdom and goodness be contente to take person and thing as they be , without complain of they imperfection , or attempt to amend they . they can see a fault in a friend , a relation , or a acquaintance , without ever mention it to the party themselves , or to any other ; and this often without lessen they affection . indeed , unless great discernment be temper with this overlook disposition , we ought never to contract friendship but with a degree of folly which we can deceive ; for I hope my friend will pardon I when I declare , I know none of they without a fault ; and I should be sorry if I could imagine I have any friend who could not see mine . forgiveness of this kind we give and demand in turn . it be a exercise of friendship , and perhaps none of the least pleasant . and this forgiveness we must bestow , without desire of amendment . there be , perhaps , no surer mark of folly , than a attempt to correct the natural infirmity of those we love . the finest composition of human nature , as well as the finest china , may have a flaw in it ; and this , I be afraid , in either case , be equally incurable ; though , nevertheless , the pattern may remain of the highest value . upon the whole , then , certainly see some imperfection in the captain ; but as this be a very artful man , and eternally upon he guard before he , these appear to he no more than blemish in a good character , which he goodness make he overlook , and he wisdom prevent he from discovering to the captain himself . very different would have be he sentiment have he discover the whole ; which perhaps would in time have be the case , have the husband and wife long continue this kind of behaviour to each other ; but this kind Fortune take effectual means to prevent , by force the captain to do that which render he again dear to he wife , and restore all she tenderness and affection towards he . chapter viii . a receipt to regain the lose affections of a wife , which hath never be know to fail in the most desperate case . the captain be make large amend for the unpleasant minute which he pass in the conversation of he wife ( and which be as few as he could contrive to make they ) , by the pleasant meditation he enjoy when alone . these meditation be entirely employ on 's fortune ; for , first , he exercise much thought in calculating , as well as he could , the exact value of the whole : which calculation he often see occasion to alter in he own favour : and , secondly and chiefly , he please himself with intend alteration in the house and garden , and in project many other scheme , as well for the improvement of the estate as of the grandeur of the place : for this purpose he apply himself to the study of architecture and gardening , and read over many book on both these subject ; for these sciences , indeed , employ he whole time , and form he only amusement . he at last complete a most excellent plan : and very sorry we be , that it be not in we power to present it to we reader , since even the luxury of the present age , I believe , would hardly match it . it have , indeed , in a superlative degree , the two principal ingredient which serve
serve to recommend all great and noble design of this nature ; for it require a immoderate expense to execute , and a vast length of time to bring it to any sort of perfection . the former of these , the immense wealth of which the captain suppose possess , and which he think himself sure of inheriting , promise very effectually to supply ; and the latter , the soundness of he own constitution , and he time of life , which be only what be call middle - age , remove all apprehension of he not live to accomplish . nothing be want to enable he to enter upon the immediate execution of this plan , but the death of ; in calculating which he have employ much of he own algebra , besides purchase every book extant that treat of the value of life , reversion , &c . from all which he satisfy himself , that as he have every day a chance of this happening , so have he more than a even chance of it be happene within a few year . but while the captain be one day busy in deep contemplation of this kind , one of the most unlucky as well as unseasonable accident happen to he . the utmost malice of could , indeed , have contrive nothing so cruel , so mal - a -propo , so absolutely destructive to all he scheme . in short , not to keep the reader in long suspense , just at the very instant when he heart be exult in meditations on the happiness which would accrue to he by 's death , he himself -- die of a apoplexy . this unfortunately befel the captain as he be take he evening walk by himself , so that nobody be present to lend he any assistance , if indeed , any assistance could have preserve he . he take , therefore , measure of that proportion of soil which be now become adequate to all he future purpose , and he lay dead on the ground , a great ( though not a living ) example of the truth of that observation of Horace : _Tu secanda marmora Loca sub ipsum funus ; et sepulchri Immemor , tstruis domo ._ which sentiment I shall thus give to the reader : " you provide the noblest material for building , when a pickaxe and a spade be only necessary : and build house of five hundr by a hundred foot , forget that of six by two . " chapter ix . a proof of the infallibility of the foregoing receipt , in the lamentation of the widow ; with other suitable decoration of death , such as physician , & c. , and a epitaph in the true stile . , he sister , and another lady , be assemble at the accustomed hour in the supper - room , where , have wait a considerable time longer than usual , first declare he begin to grow uneasy at the captain 's stay ( for he be always most punctual at he meal ) ; and give order that the bell should be ring without the door , and especially towards those walk which the captain be will not to use . all these summon prove ineffectual ( for the captain have , by perverse accident , betake himself to a new walk that evening ) , declare she be seriously frightened . upon which the other lady , who be one of she most intimate acquaintance , and who well know the true state of she affections , endeavoure all she could to pacify she , tell she -- to be sure she could not help be uneasy ; but that she should hope the best . that , perhaps the sweetness of the evening have intice the captain to go farther than he usual walk : or he might be detain at some neighbour 's . answer , no ; she be sure some accident have befall he ; for that he would never stay out without send she word , as he must know how uneasy it would make she . the other lady , have no other argument to use , betake herself to the entreaty usual on such occasion , and beg she not to frighten herself , for it might be of very ill consequence to she own health ; and , fill out a very large glass of wine , advise , and at last prevaile with she to drink it . now return into the parlour ; for he have be himself in search after the captain . he countenance sufficientely show the consternation he be under , which , indeed , have a good deal deprive he of speech ; but as grief operate variously on different mind , so the same apprehension which depresse he voice , elevate that of . she now begin to bewail herself in very bitter term , and flood of tear accompany she lamentation ; which the lady , she companion , declare she could not blame , but at the same time dissuad she from indulging ; attempt to moderate the grief of she friend by philosophical observation on the many disappointment to which human life be daily subject , which , she say , be a sufficient consideration to fortify we mind against any accident , how sudden or terrible soever . she say she brother 's example ought to teach she patience , who , though indeed he could not be suppose as much concerned as herself , yet be , doubtless , very uneasy , though he resignation to the will have restrain he grief within due bounds . " not my brother , " say ; " I alone be the object of you pity . what be the terrors of friendship
friendship to what a wife feel on these occasion ? oh , he be lose ! somebody hath murder he -- I shall never see he more ! " -- here a torrent of tear have the same consequence with what the suppression have occasion to , and she remain silent . at this interval a servant come run in , out of breath , and cry out , the captain be find ; and , before he could proceed farther , he be follow by two more , bear the dead body between they . here the curious reader may observe another diversity in the operation of grief : for as have be before silent , from the same cause which have make he sister vociferous ; so do the present sight , which draw tear from the gentleman , put a entire stop to those of the lady ; who first give a violent scream , and presently after fall into a fit . the room be soon full of servant , some of whom , with the lady visitant , be employ in care of the wife ; and other , with , assist in carry off the captain to a warm bed ; where every method be try , in order to restore he to life . and glad should we be , could we inform the reader that both these body have be attend with equal success ; for those who undertake the care of the lady succeed so well , that , after the fit have continue a decent time , she again revive , to they great satisfaction : but as to the captain , all experiment of bleeding , chafing , drop , & c. , prove ineffectual . , that inexorable judge , have pass sentence on he , and refuse to grant he a reprieve , though two doctor who arrive , and be fee would at one and the same instant , be he counsel . these two doctor , whom , to avoid any malicious application , we shall distinguish by the name of . and , have feel he pulse ; to wit , . he right arm , and . he leave ; both agree that he be absolutely dead ; but as to the distemper , or cause of he death , they differ ; . hold that he die of a apoplexy , and . of a epilepsy . hence arise a dispute between the learned man , in which each deliver the reason of they several opinion . these be of such equal force , that they serve both to confirm either doctor in he own sentiment , and make not the least impression on he adversary . to say the truth , every physician almost hath he favourite disease , to which he ascribe all the victory obtain over human nature . the gout , the rheumatism , the stone , the gravel , and the consumption , have all they several patron in the faculty ; and none more than the nervous fever , or the fever on the spirits . and here we may account for those disagreement in opinion , concern the cause of a patient 's death , which sometimes occur , between the most learn of the college ; and which have greatly surprize that part of the world who have be ignorant of the fact we have above assert . the reader may perhaps be surprize , that , instead of endeavouring to revive the patient , the learn gentleman should fall immediately into a dispute on the occasion of he death ; but in reality all such experiment have be make before they arrival : for the captain be put into a warm bed , have he vein scarified , he forehead chaf , and all sort of strong drop apply to he lip and nostril . the physician , therefore , find themselves anticipat in everything they order , be at a loss how to apply that portion of time which it be usual and decent to remain for they fee , and be therefore necessitated to find some subject or other for discourse ; and what could more naturally present itself than that before mention ? we doctor be about to take they leave , when , have give over the captain , and acquiesce in the , begin to enquire after he sister , whom he desire they to visit before they departure . this lady be now recover of she fit , and , to use the common phrase , as well as could be expect for one in she condition . the doctor , therefore , all previous ceremony be comply with , as this be a new patient , attend , accord to desire , and laid hold on each of she hand , as they have before do on those of the corpse . the case of the lady be in the other extreme from that of she husband : for as he be past all the assistance of physic , so in reality she require none . there be nothing more unjust than the vulgar opinion , by which physician be misrepresent , as friend to death . on the contrary , I believe , if the number of those who recover by physic could be opposed to that of the martyr to it , the former would rather exceed the latter . Nay , some be so cautious on this head , that , to avoid a possibility of kill the patient , they abstain from all methods of curing , and prescribe nothing but what can neither do good nor harm . I have hear some of these , with great gravity , deliver it as a maxim , " that nature should be leave to do she own work , while the physician stand by
by as it be to clap she on the back , and encourage she when she doth well . " so little then do we doctor delight in death , that they discharge the corpse after a single fee ; but they be not so disgust with they living patient ; concern whose case they immediately agree , and fall to prescrib with great diligence . whether , as the lady have at first persuade she physicians to believe she ill , they have now , in return , persuade she to believe herself so , I will not determine ; but she continue a whole month with all the decoration of sickness . during this time she be visit by physician , attend by nurse , and receive constant message from she acquaintance to enquire after she health . at length the decent time for sickness and immoderate grief be expire , the doctor be discharge , and the lady begin to see company ; be alte only from what she be before , by that colour of sadness in which she have dress she person and countenance . the captain be now inter , and might , perhaps , have already make a large progress towards , have not the friendship of take care to preserve he memory , by the follow epitaph , which be write by a man of as great genius as integrity , and one who perfectly well know the captain . here lie , in expectation of a , the body of . London have the Honour of this birth , Oxford of this Education . he part be a Honour to he profession and to he country : he life , to and . he be a , a , a , a most kind , a , a , and a good man . this , the MONUMENT of and of she affection . . contain the Most memorable transaction which pass in the family of , from the time when arrive at the age of , till he Attain the age of . in this the concern the education of . I . contain little or nothing . the reader will be pleased to remember , that , at the beginning of the second book of this history , we give he a hint of we intention to pass over several large period of time , in which nothing happen worthy of be record in a chronicle of this kind . in so do , we do not only consult we own dignity and ease , but the good and advantage of the reader : for besides that by these means we prevent he from throw away he time , in reading without either pleasure or emolument , we give he , at all such season , a opportunity of employ that wonderful sagacity , of which he be master , by fill up these vacant spaces of time with he own conjecture ; for which purpose we have take care to qualify he in the preceding page . for instance , what reader but know that feel , at first , for the loss of he friend , those emotion of grief , which on such occasion enter into all man whose heart be not compose of flint , or they head of as solid material ? again , what reader doth not know that philosophy and religion in time moderat , and at last extinguished , this grief ? the former of these teache the folly and vanity of it , and the latter correcte it as unlawful , and at the same time assuage it , by raise future hope and assurance , which enable a strong and religious mind to take leave of a friend , on he deathbed , with little less indifference than if he be prepare for a long journey ; and , indeed , with little less hope of see he again . nor can the judicious reader be at a greater loss on account of , who , he may be assure , conduct herself through the whole season in which grief be to make its appearance on the outside of the body , with the strictest regard to all the rule of custom and decency , suit the alteration of she countenance to the several alteration of she habit : for as this change from weed to black , from black to grey , from grey to white , so do she countenance change from dismal to sorrowful , from sorrowful to sad , and from sad to serious , till the day come in which she be allow to return to she former serenity . we have mention these two , as example only of the task which may be impos on reader of the lowest class . much higher and harder exercise of judgament and penetration may reasonably be expect from the upper graduate in criticism . many notable discoveries will , I doubt not , be make by such , of the transaction which happen in the family of we worthy man , during all the year which we have think proper to pass over : for though nothing worthy of a place in this history occur within that period , yet do several incidents happen of equal importance with those report by the daily and weekly historian of the age ; in read which great number of person consume a considerable part of they time , very little , I be afraid , to they emolument . now , in the conjecture here propose , some of the most excellent faculty of the mind may be employ to much advantage , since it be a more useful capacity to be able to foretel the action of man , in any circumstance , from they character , than to judge of they character from they action . the
the former , I own , require the greater penetration ; but may be accomplish by true sagacity with no less certainty than the latter . as we be sensible that much the greatest part of we reader be very eminently possess of this quality , we have leave they a space of twelve year to exert it in ; and shall now bring forth we heroe , at about fourteen year of age , not question that many have be long impatient to be introduce to he acquaintance . . the heroe of this great history appear with very bad omen . a little tale of so low a kind that some may think it not worth they notice . a word or two concern a squire , and more relate to a gamekeeper and a schoolmaster . as we determine , when we first sit down to write this history , to flatter no man , but to guide we pen throughout by the direction of truth , we be oblige to bring we heroe on the stage in a much more disadvantageous manner than we could wish ; and to declare honestly , even at he first appearance , that it be the universal opinion of all 's family that he be certainly bear to be hang . indeed , I be sorry to say there be too much reason for this conjecture ; the lad have from he earliest year discover a propensity to many vex , and especially to one which hath as direct a tendency as any other to that fate which we have just now observe to have be prophetically denounce against he : he have be already convict of three robbery , viz. , of rob a orchard , of steal a duck out of a farmer 's yard , and of picking 's pocket of a ball . the vice of this young man be , moreover , heighten by the disadvantageous light in which they appear when opposed to the virtue of master , he companion ; a youth of so different a cast from little , that not only the family but all the neighbourhood resound he praise . he be , indeed , a lad of a remarkable disposition ; sober , discreet , and pious beyond he age ; quality which gain he the love of every one who know he : while be universally dislike ; and many express they wonder that would suffer such a lad to be educated with he nephew , lest the moral of the latter should be corrupt by he example . a incident which happen about this time will set the character of these two lad more fairly before the discerning reader than be in the power of the longest dissertation . , who , bad as he be , must serve for the heroe of this history , have only one friend among all the servants of the family ; for as to , she have long since give he up , and be perfectly reconcile to she mistress . this friend be the gamekeeper , a fellow of a loose kind of disposition , and who be think not to entertain much stricter notion concern the difference of _meum_ and _tuum_ than the young gentleman himself . and hence this friendship give occasion to many sarcastical remark among the domestic , most of which be either proverb before , or at least be become so now ; and , indeed , the wit of they all may be comprise in that short latin proverb , " yo_Noscitu a socio ;_ " which , I think , be thus express in , " you may know he by the company he keep . " to say the truth , some of that atrocious wickedness in , of which we have just mention three example , might perhaps be derive from the encouragement he have receive from this fellow , who , in two or three instance , have be what the law call a accessary after the fact : for the whole duck , and great part of the apple , be convert to the use of the gamekeeper and he family ; though , as alone be discover , the poor lad bore not only the whole smart , but the whole blame ; both which fall again to he lot on the follow occasion . Contiguous to 's estate be the manor of one of those gentleman who be call preserver of the game . this species of man , from the great severity with which they revenge the death of a hare or partridge , might be think to cultivate the same superstition with the in ; many of whom , we be tell , dedicate they whole life to the preservation and protection of certain animal ; be it not that we , while they preserve they from other enemie , will most unmercifully slaughter whole horse - load themselves ; so that they stand clearly acquit of any such heathenish superstition . I have , indeed , a much better opinion of this kind of man than be entertain by some , as I take they to answer the order of , and the good purpose for which they be ordained , in a more ample manner than many other . now , as tell we that there be a set of human being Fruges consumere nato ,_ " bear to consume the fruit of the earth ; " so I make no manner of doubt but that there be other _Feras consumere nati,_ " bear to consume the beasts of the field ; " or , as it be commonly call , the game ; and none , I believe , will deny but that those squire fulfil this end of they creation . go one day a shooting with the gamekeeper ; when
when happen to spre a covey of partridge near the border of that manor over which , to fulfil the wise purpose of , have plan one of the game consumer , the bird fly into it , and be mark ( as it be call ) by the two sportsman , in some furze bushes , about two or three hundred pace beyond 's dominion . have give the fellow strict order , on pain of forfeit he place , never to trespass on any of he neighbour ; no more on those who be less rigid in this matter than on the lord of this manor . with regard to other , indeed , these order have not be always very scrupulously keep ; but as the disposition of the gentleman with whom the partridge have take sanctuary be well know , the gamekeeper have never yet attempt to invake he territory . have he do it now , have not the younger sportsman , who be excessively eager to pursue the fly game , over - persuade he ; but be very importunate , the other , who be himself kee enough after the sport , yield to he persuasion , enter the manor , and shoot one of the partridge . the gentleman himself be at that time on horse - back , at a little distance from they ; and hear the gun go off , he immediately make towards the place , and discover poor ; for the gamekeeper have leapt into the thickest part of the furze - brake , where he have happily conceal himself . the gentleman have search the lad , and find the partridge upon he , denounce great vengeance , swear he would acquaint . he be as good as he word : for he ride immediately to he house , and complain of the trespass on he manor in as high term and as bitter language as if he house have be break open , and the most valuable furniture stole out of it . he add , that some other person be in he company , though he could not discover he ; for that two gun have be discharge almost in the same instant . and , say he , " we have find only this partridge , but the know what mischief they have do . " at he return home , be presently conven before . he own the fact , and alledge no other excuse but what be really true , viz. , that the covey be originally spring in 's own manor . be then interrogate who be with he , which declare he be resolve to know , acquaint the culprit with the circumstance of the two gun , which have be depose by the squire and both he servants ; but stoutly persist in asserting that he be alone ; yet , to say the truth , he hesitate a little at first , which would have confirm 's belief , have what the squire and he servants say want any further confirmation . the gamekeeper , be a suspect person , be now send for , and the question put to he ; but he , rely on the promise which have make he , to take all upon himself , very resolutely deny be in company with the young gentleman , or indeed have see he the whole afternoon . then turn towards , with more than usual anger in he countenance , and advise he to confess who be with he ; repeat , that he be resolve to know . the lad , however , still maintain he resolution , and be dismiss with much wrath by , who tell he he should have to the next morning to consider of it , when he should be question by another person , and in another manner . poor spend a very melancholy night ; and the more so , as he be without he usual companion ; for be go abroad on a visit with he mother . fear of the punishment he be to suffer be on this occasion he least evil ; he chief anxiety be , lest he constancy should fail he , and he should be bring to betray the gamekeeper , whose ruin he know must now be the consequence . do the gamekeeper pass he time much better . he have the same apprehension with the youth ; for whose honou he have likewise a much tenderer regard than for he skin . in the morning , when attend the reverend , the person to whom have commit the instruction of the two boy , he have the same question put to he by that gentleman which he have be ask the evening before , to which he return the same answer . the consequence of this be , so severe a whipping , that it possibly fall little short of the torture with which confession be in some country extort from criminal . bear he punishment with great resolution ; and though he master ask he , between every stroke , whether he would not confess , he be contente to be flead rather than betray he friend , or break the promise he have make . the gamekeeper be now relieve from he anxiety , and himself begin to be concerned at 's suffering : for besides that , be highly enrage that he be not able to make the boy say what he himself please , have carry he severity much beyond the good man 's intention , this latter begin now to suspect that the squire have be mistake ; which he extreme eagerness and anger seem to make probable ; and as for what the servants have say in confirmation of they master 's account , he lay no great stress upon that . now
now , as cruelty and injustice be two idea of which could by no means support the consciousness a single moment , he send for , and after many kind and friendly exhortation , say , " I be convince , my dear child , that my suspicion have wrong you ; I be sorry that you have be so severely punish on this account . " and at last give he a little horse to make he amend ; again repeat he sorrow for what have past . 's guilt now fly in he face more than any severity could make it . he could more easily bear the lash of , than the generosity of . the tear burst from he eye , and he fall upon he knee , cry , " oh , sir , you be too good to I . indeed you be . indeed I do not deserve it . " and at that very instant , from the fulness of he heart , have almost betrayed the secret ; but the good genius of the gamekeeper suggest to he what might be the consequence to the poor fellow , and this consideration seal he lip . do all he could to persuade from show any compassion or kindness to the boy , say , " he have persist in a untruth ; " and give some hint , that a second whipping might probably bring the matter to light . but absolutely refuse to consent to the experiment . he say , the boy have suffer enough already for conceal the truth , even if he be guilty , see that he could have no motive but a mistaken point of honour for so do . " ! " cry , with some warmth , " mere stubbornness and obstinacy ! can honou teach any one to tell a lie , or can any honour exist independent of religion ? " this discourse happen at table when dinner be just end ; and there be present , , and a third gentleman , who now enter into the debate , and whom , before we proceed any further , we shall briefly introduce to we reader 's acquaintance . chapter iii . the character of the philosopher , and of the divine ; with a dispute concerning ---- the name of this gentleman , who have then reside some time at 's house , be . he natural part be not of the first rate , but he have greatly improve they by a learned education . he be deeply read in the antient , and a profest master of all the work of and . upon which great models he have principally form himself ; sometimes accord with the opinion of the one , and sometimes with that of the other . in moral he be a profest Platonist , and in religion he inclin to be a Aristotelian . but though he have , as we have say , form he moral on the Platonic model , yet he perfectly agree with the opinion of , in consider that great man rather in the quality of a philosopher or a speculatist , than as a legislator . this sentiment he carry a great way ; indeed , so far , as to regard all virtue as matter of theory only . this , it be true , he never affirm , as I have hear , to any one ; and yet upon the least attention to he conduct , I can not help think it be he real opinion , as it will perfectly reconcile some contradiction which might otherwise appear in he character . this gentleman and scarce ever meet without a disputation ; for they tenet be indeed diametrically opposite to each other . Square hold human nature to be the perfection of all virtue , and that vice be a deviation from we nature , in the same manner as deformity of body be . Thwackum , on the contrary , maintain that the human mind , since the fall , be nothing but a sink of iniquity , till purify and redeem by . in one point only they agree , which be , in all they discourse on morality never to mention the word goodness . the favourite phrase of the former , be the natural beauty of virtue ; that of the latter , be the divine power of . the former measure all action by the unalterable rule of right , and the eternal fitness of thing ; the latter decide all matters by authority ; but in do this , he always use the scripture and they commentator , as the lawyer doth he upon , where the comment be of equal authority with the text . after this short introduction , the reader will be pleased to remember , that the parson have conclude he speech with a triumphant question , to which he have apprehend no answer ; viz. , can any honour exist independent on religion ? to this answer ; that it be impossible to discourse philosophically concern word , till they meaning be first establish : that there be scarce any two word of a more vague and uncertain signification , than the two he have mention ; for that there be almost as many different opinion concern honour , as concern religion . " but , " say he , " if by honou you mean the true natural beauty of virtue , I will maintain it may exist independent of any religion whatever . , " add he , " you yourself will allow it may exist independent of all but one : so will a , a , and all the maintainer of all the different sect in the world . " reply , this be argue with the usual malice of all the
the enemy to the true Church . he say , he doubt not but that all the infidel and heretick in the world would , if they could , confine honou to they own absurd error and damnable deception ; " but honour , " say he , " be not therefore manifold , because there be many absurd opinion about it ; nor be religion manifold , because there be various sect and heresy in the world . when I mention religion , I mean the religion ; and not only the religion , but the Protestant religion ; and not only the Protestant religion , but the of . and when I mention honou , I mean that mode of which be not only consistent with , but dependent upon , this religion ; and be consistent with and dependent upon no other . now to say that the honour I here mean , and which be , I think , all the honour I could be suppose to mean , will uphold , much less dictate a untruth , be to assert a absurdity too shock to be conceive . " " I purposely avoid , " say , " draw a conclusion which I think evident from what I have say ; but if you perceive it , I be sure you have not attempt to answer it . however , to drop the article of religion , I think it be plain , from what you have say , that we have different idea of honou ; or why do we not agree in the same term of its explanation ? I have assert , that true honour and true virtue be almost synonymous term , and they be both found on the unalterable rule of right , and the eternal fitness of thing ; to which a untruth be absolutely repugnant and contrary , it be certain that true honou can not support a untruth . in this , therefore , I think we be agree ; but that this honour can be say to be founde on religion , to which it be antecedent , if by religion be mean any positive law -- " " I agree , " answer , with great warmth , " with a man who assert honou to be antecedent to religion ! , do I agree --? " he be proceed when Mr Allworthy interpose , tell they very coldly , they have both mistake he meaning ; for that he have say nothing of true honour .--It be possible , however , he would not have easily quiet the disputant , who be grow equally warm , have not another matter now fall out , which put a final end to the conversation at present . iv. contain a necessary apology for the author ; and a childish incident , which perhaps require a apology likewise . before I proceed farther , I shall beg leave to obviate some misconstruction into which the zeal of some few reader may lead they ; for I would not willingly give offence to any , especially to man who be warm in the cause of virtue or religion . I hope , therefore , no man will , by the grossest misunderstanding or perversion of my meaning , misrepresent I , as endeavour to cast any ridicule on the greatest perfection of human nature ; and which do , indeed , alone purify and ennoble the heart of man , and raise he above the brute creation . this , reader , I will venture to say ( and by how much the better man you be yourself , by so much the more will you be inclin to believe I ) , that I would rather have bury the sentiment of these two person in eternal oblivion , than have do any injury to either of these glorious cause . on the contrary , it be with a view to they service , that I have take upon I to record the life and action of two of they false and pretend champion . a treacherous friend be the most dangerous enemy ; and I will say boldly , that both religion and virtue have receive more real discredit from hypocrite than the wittiest profligate or infidel could ever cast upon they : nay , farther , as these two , in they purity , be rightly call the band of civil society , and be indeed the greatest of blessing ; so when poisone and corrupt with fraud , pretence , and affectation , they have become the worst of civil curse , and have enable man to perpetrate the most cruel mischief to they own species . indeed , I doubt not but this ridicule will in general be allow : my chief apprehension be , as many true and just sentiment often come from the mouth of these persons , lest the whole should be take together , and I should be conceive to ridicule all alike . now the reader will be pleased to consider , that , as neither of these man be fool , they could not be suppose to have holden none but wrong principle , and to have utter nothing but absurdity ; what injustice , therefore , must I have do to they character , have I select only what be bad ! and how horribly wretch and maim must they argument have appear ! upon the whole , it be not religion or virtue , but the want of they , which be here expose . have not Thwackum too much neglect virtue , and , religion , in the composition of they several system , and have not both utterly discard all natural goodness of heart , they have never be represent as the object of derision in this history ; in which we will now proceed
proceed . this matter then , which put a end to the debate mention in the last chapter , be no other than a quarrel between and , the consequence of which have be a bloody nose to the former ; for though master , notwithstand he be the younger , be in size above the other 's match , yet be much he superior at the noble art of boxing . , however , cautiously avoid all engagement with that youth ; for besides that be a inoffensive lad amidst all he roguery , and really love , be always the second of the latter , would have be sufficient to deter he . but well say a certain author , no man be wise at all hour ; it be therefore no wonder that a boy be not so . a difference arise at play between the two lad , master call a beggarly bastard . upon which the latter , who be somewhat passionate in he disposition , immediately cause that phenomenon in the face of the former , which we have above remember . master now , with he blood run from he nose , and the tear gallop after from he eye , appear before he uncle and the tremendous Thwackum . in which court a indictment of assault , battery , and wounding , be instantly prefer against ; who in he excuse only plead the provocation , which be indeed all the matter that have omit . it be indeed possible that this circumstance might have escape he memory ; for , in he reply , he positively insist , that he have make use of no such appellation ; add , " forbid such naughty word should ever come out of he mouth ! " , though against all form of law , rejoin in affirmance of the word . upon which master say , " it be no wonder . those who will tell one fib , will hardly stick at another . if I have tell my master such a wicked fib as you have do , I should be asham to show my face . " " what fib , child ? " cry pretty eagerly . " why , he tell you that nobody be with he a shooting when he kill the partridge ; but he know " ( here he burst into a flood of tear ) , " yes , he know , for he confess it to I , that the gamekeeper be there . Nay , he say -- yes you do -- deny it if you can , that you would not have confest the truth , though master have cut you to piece . " at this the fire flash from 's eye , and he cry out in triumph -- " oh ! ho ! this be you mistaken notion of honou ! this be the boy who be not to be whip again ! " but , with a more gentle aspect , turn towards the lad , and say , " be this true , child ? how come you to persist so obstinately in a falsehood ? " say , " he scorn a lie as much as any one : but he think he honou engage he to act as he do ; for he have promise the poor fellow to conceal he : which , " he say , " he think himself farther oblige to , as the gamekeeper have beg he not to go into the gentleman 's manor , and have at last gone himself , in compliance with he persuasion . " he say , " this be the whole truth of the matter , and he would take he oath of it ; " and conclude with very passionately begge " to have compassion on the poor fellow 's family , especially as he himself only have be guilty , and the other have be very difficultly prevail on to do what he do . indeed , sir , " say he , " it could hardly be call a lie that I tell ; for the poor fellow be entirely innocent of the whole matter . I should have go alone after the bird ; nay , I do go at first , and he only follow I to prevent more mischief . do , pray , sir , let I be punish ; take my little horse away again ; but pray , sir , forgive poor . " hesitate a few moment , and then dismiss the boy , advise they to live more friendly and peaceably together . v. the opinion of the divine and the philosopher concern the two boy ; with some reason for they opinion , and other matters . it be probable , that by disclose this secret , which have be communicate in the utmost confidence to he , young preserve he companion from a good lashing ; for the offence of the bloody nose would have be of itself sufficient cause for to have proceed to correction ; but now this be totally absorb in the consideration of the other matter ; and with regard to this , declare privately , he think the boy deserve reward rather than punishment , so that 's hand be withheld by a general pardon . Thwackum , whose meditation be full of birch , exclaim against this weak , and , as he say he would venture to call it , wick lenity . to remit the punishment of such crime be , he say , to encourage they . he enlarge much on the correction of child , and quote many text from , and other ; which be to be find in so many other book , shall not be find here . he then apply himself to the vice of lie
lie , on which head he be altogether as learn as he have be on the other . say , he have be endeavour to reconcile the behaviour of with he idea of perfect virtue , but could not . he own there be something which at first sight appear like fortitude in the action ; but as fortitude be a virtue , and falsehand a vice , they could by no means agree or unite together . he add , that as this be in some measure to confound virtue and vice , it might be worth 's consideration , whether a larger castigation might not be laid on upon the account . as both these learn man concur in censuring , so be they no less unanimous in applaud . to bring truth to light , be by the parson assert to be the duty of every religious man ; and by the philosopher this be declare to be highly conformable with the rule of right , and the eternal and unalterable fitness of thing . all this , however , weigh very little with . he could not be prevail on to sign the warrant for the execution of . there be something within he own breast with which the invincible fidelity which that youth have preserve , correspond much better than it have do with the religion of , or with the virtue of . he therefore strictly order the former of these gentleman to abstain from laying violent hand on Tom for what have past . the pedagogue be oblige to obey those order ; but not without great reluctance , and frequent muttering that the boy would be certainly spoiled . towards the gamekeeper the good man behave with more severity . he presently summon that poor fellow before he , and after many bitter remonstrance , pay he he wage , and dismist he from he service ; for rightly observe , that there be a great difference between be guilty of a falsehood to excuse yourself , and to excuse another . he likewise urge , as the principal motive to he inflexible severity against this man , that he have basely suffer to undergo so heavy a punishment for he sake , whereas he ought to have prevent it by make the discovery himself . when this story become public , many people differ from and , in judge the conduct of the two lad on the occasion . master be generally call a sneaking rascal , a poor -spirited wretch , with other epithet of the like kind ; whilst be honoure with the appellation of a brave lad , a jolly dog , and a honest fellow . indeed , he behaviour to much ingratiate he with all the servants ; for though that fellow be before universally dislike , yet he be no sooner turn away than he be as universally pitie ; and the friendship and gallantry of be celebrate by they all with the highest applause ; and they condemn master Blifil as openly as they durst , without incurr the danger of offend he mother . for all this , however , poor smart in the flesh ; for though have be inhibit to exercise he arm on the foregoing account , yet , as the proverb say , it be easy to find a stick , &c . so be it easy to find a rod ; and , indeed , the not be able to find one be the only thing which could have keep any long time from chastise poor . have the bare delight in the sport be the only inducement to the pedagogue , it be probable master would likewise have have he share ; but though have give he frequent order to make no difference between the lad , yet be altogether as kind and gentle to this youth , as he be harsh , nay even barbarous , to the other . to say the truth , have greatly gain he master 's affection ; partly by the profound respect he always show he person , but much more by the decent reverence with which he receive he doctrine ; for he have get by heart , and frequently repeat , he phrase , and maintain all he master 's religious principle with a zeal which be surprize in one so young , and which greatly endear he to the worthy preceptor . , on the other hand , be not only deficient in outward token of respect , often forget to pull off he hat , or to bow at he master 's approach ; but be altogether as unmindful both of he master 's precept and example . he be indeed a thoughtless , giddy youth , with little sobriety in he manners , and less in he countenance ; and would often very impudently and indecently laugh at he companion for he serious behaviour . have the same reason for he preference of the former lad ; for show no more regard to the learn discourse which this gentleman would sometimes throw away upon he , than to those of . he once venture to make a jest of the rule of right ; and at another time say , he believe there be no rule in the world capable of make such a man as he father ( for so suffer himself to be call ) . master , on the contrary , have address enough at sixteen to recommend himself at one and the same time to both these opposite . with one he be all religion , with the other he be all virtue . and when both be present , he be profoundly silent , which both interpret in he favour and in they own . be contente with flattering both these gentleman to they face ; he take frequent occasion of
of praise they behind they back to ; before whom , when they two be alone , and he uncle commend any religious or virtuous sentiment ( for many such come constantly from he ) he seldom fail to ascribe it to the good instruction he have receive from either or ; for he know he uncle repeat all such compliment to the persons for whose use they be mean ; and he find by experience the great impressions which they make on the philosopher , as well as on the divine : for , to say the truth , there be no kind of flattery so irresistible as this , at second hand . the young gentleman , moreover , soon perceive how extremely grateful all those panegyric on he instructor were to himself , as they so loudly resound the praise of that singular plan of education which he have lay down ; for this worthy man have observe the imperfect institution of we public school , and the many vice which boy be there liable to learn , have resolve to educate he nephew , as well as the other lad , whom he have in a manner adopt , in he own house ; where he think they moral would escape all that danger of be corrupt to which they would be unavoidably expose in any public school or university . have , therefore , determined to commit these boy to the tuition of a private tutor , be recommend to he for that office , by a very particular friend , of whose understanding have a great opinion , and in whose integrity he place much confidence . this Thwackum be fellow of a college , where he almost entirely reside ; and have a great reputation for learning , religion , and sobriety of manners . and these be doubtless the qualifications by which 's friend have be induce to recommend he ; though indeed this friend have some obligation to 's family , who be the most considerable person in a borough which that gentleman represent in parliament . Thwackum , at he first arrival , be extremely agreeable to ; and indeed he perfectly answer the character which have be give of he . upon longer acquaintance , however , and more intimate conversation , this worthy man see infirmity in the tutor , which he could have wish he to have be without ; though as those see greatly overbalance by he good quality , they do not incline to part with he : nor would they indeed have justifi such a proceeding ; for the reader be greatly mistaken , if he conceive that appear to in the same light as he doth to he in this history ; and he be as much deceive , if he imagine that the most intimate acquaintance which he himself could have have with that divine , would have inform he of those thing which we , from we inspiration , be enable to open and discover . of reader who , from such conceit as these , condemn the wisdom or penetration of , I shall not scruple to say , that they make a very bad and ungrateful use of that knowledge which we have communicate to they . these apparent error in the doctrine of serve greatly to palliate the contrary error in that of , which we good man no less saw and condemn . he think , indeed , that the different exuberancy of these gentleman would correct they different imperfection ; and that from both , especially with he assistance , the two lad would derive sufficient precept of true religion and virtue . if the event happen contrary to he expectation , this possibly proceed from some fault in the plan itself ; which the reader hath my leave to discover , if he can : for we do not pretend to introduce any infallible character into this history ; where we hope nothing will be find which hath never yet be see in human nature . to return therefore : the reader will not , I think , wonder that the different behaviour of the two lad above commemorate , produce the different effect of which he hath already see some instance ; and besides this , there be another reason for the conduct of the philosopher and the pedagogue ; but this be matter of great importance , we shall reveal it in the next chapter . chapter vi . contain a better reason still for the before - mention opinion . it be to be know then , that those twill learn personage , who have lately make a considerable figure on the theatre of this history , have , from they first arrival at 's house , take so great a affection , the one to he virtue , the other to he religion , that they have meditate the closest alliance with he . for this purpose they have cast they eye on that fair widow , whom , though we have not for some time make any mention of she , the reader , we trust , hath not forgot . be indeed the object to which they both aspire . it may seem remarkable , that , of four person whom we have commemorate at 's house , three of they should fix they inclination on a lady who be never greatly celebrate for she beauty , and who be , moreover , now a little descende into the vale of year ; but in reality bosom friend , and intimate acquaintance , have a kind of natural propensity to particular females at the house of a friend -- viz. , to he grandmother , mother , sister , daughter , aunt , niece , or cousin , when they be rich ; and to he wife , sister ,
, daughter , niece , cousin , mistress , or servant-maid , if they should be handsome . we would not , however , have we reader imagine , that person of such character as be support by and , would undertake a matter of this kind , which hath be a little censured by some rigid moralist , before they have thoroughly examine it , and consider whether it be ( as Shakespear phrasis it ) " stuff of ' th ' conscience , " or no . be encourage to the undertaking by reflect that to covet you neighbour 's sister be nowhere forbidden : and he know it be a rule in the construction of all law , that " _Expressum facit cessare tacitum ._ " the sense of which be , " when a lawgiver set down plainly he whole meaning , we be prevent from make he mean what we please ourselves . " as some instance of woman , therefore , be mention in the divine law , which forbid we to covet we neighbour 's goods , and that of a sister omit , he conclude it to be lawful . and as to , who be in he person what be call a jolly fellow , or a widow 's man , he easily reconcile he choice to the eternal fitness of thing . now , as both of these gentleman be industrious in take every opportunity of recommend themselves to the widow , they apprehend one certain method be , by give she son the constant preference to the other lad ; and as they conceive the kindness and affection which show the latter , must be highly disagreeable to she , they doubt not but the lay hold on all occasion to degrade and vilify he , would be highly pleasing to she ; who , as she hate the boy , must love all those who do he any hurt . in this Thwackum have the advantage ; for while could only scarify the poor lad 's reputation , he could flea he skin ; and , indeed , he consider every lash he give he as a compliment pay to he mistress ; so that he could , with the utmost propriety , repeat this old flogging line , " Castigo the non quod odio habeam , s quod_ . I chastise thee not out of hatred , but out of love . " and this , indeed , he often have in he mouth , or rather , accord to the old phrase , never more properly apply , at he finger 's end . for this reason , principally , the two gentleman concur , as we have see above , in they opinion concern the two lad ; this be , indeed , almost the only instance of they concurring on any point ; for , beside the difference of they principle , they have both long ago strongly suspect each other 's design , and hat one another with no little degree of inveteracy . this mutual animosity be a good deal increase by they alternate success ; for know what they would be at long before they imagine it ; or , indeed , intend she should : for they proceed with great caution , lest she should be offend , and acquaint . but they have no reason for any such fear ; she be well enough pleased with a passion , of which she intend none should have any fruit but herself . and the only fruit she design for herself be , flattery and courtship ; for which purpose she soothe they by turn , and a long time equally . she be , indeed , rather inclin to favour the parson 's principles ; but 's person be more agreeable to she eye , for he be a comely man ; whereas the pedagogue do in countenance very nearly resemble that gentleman , who , in the 's , be see correcte the lady in . whether have be surfeit with the sweet of marriage , or disgust by its bitter , or from what other cause it proceed , I will not determine ; but she could never be bring to listen to any second proposal . however , she at last converse with with such a degree of intimacy that malicious tongue begin to whisper thing of she , to which , as well for the sake of the lady , as that they be highly disagreeable to the rule of right and the fitness of thing , we will give no credit , and therefore shall not blot we paper with they . the pedagogue , ' tis certain , whip on , without get a step nearer to he journey 's end . indeed he have commit a great error , and that discover much sooner than himself . ( as , perhaps , the reader may have formerly guess ) be not over and above pleased with the behaviour of she husband ; nay , to be honest , she absolutely hate he , till he death at last a little reconcile he to she affections . it will not be therefore greatly wonder at , if she have not the most violent regard to the offspring she have by he . and , in fact , she have so little of this regard , that in he infancy she seldom see she son , or take any notice of he ; and hence she acquiesce , after a little reluctance , in all the favour which shower on the foundling ; whom the good man call he own boy , and in all thing put on a entire equality with master Blifil . this acquiescence in be consider by the neighbour , and by the family , as a mark of she condescension to
to she brother 's humour , and she be imagine by all other , as well as and , to hate the foundling in she heart ; nay , the more civility she show he , the more they conceive she detest he , and the surer scheme she be lay for he ruin : for as they think it she interest to hate he , it be very difficult for she to persuade they she do not . Thwackum be the more confirm in he opinion , as she have more than once slily cause he to whip , when , who be a enemy to this exercise , be abroad ; whereas she have never give any such order concern young . and this have likewise impos upon . in reality , though she certainly hate she own son -- of which , however monstrous it appear , I be assure she be not a singular instance -- she appear , notwithstand all she outward compliance , to be in she heart sufficiently displease with all the favour show by to the foundling . she frequently complain of this behind she brother 's back , and very sharply censure he for it , both to and ; nay , she would throw it in the tooth of himself , when a little quarrel , or miff , as it be vulgarly call , arise between they . however , when grow up , and give token of that gallantry of temper which greatly recommend man to woman , this disinclination which she have discover to he when a child , by degree abate , and at last she so evidently demonstrate she affection to he to be much stronger than what she bear she own son , that it be impossible to mistake she any longer . she be so desirous of often see he , and discover such satisfaction and delight in he company , that before he be eighteen year old he be become a rival to both and ; and what be worse , the whole country begin to talk as loudly of she inclination to , as they have before do of that which she have show to : on which account the philosopher conceive the most implacable hatred for we poor heroe . chapter vii . in which the author himself make he appearance on the stage . though be not of himself hasty to see thing in a disadvantageous light , and be a stranger to the public voice , which seldom reach to a brother or a husband , though it ring in the ear of all the neighbourhood ; yet be this affection of to , and the preference which she too visibly give he to she own son , of the utmost disadvantage to that youth . for such be the compassion which inhabit 's mind , that nothing but the steel of justice could ever subdue it . to be unfortunate in any respect be sufficient , if there be no demerit to counterpoise it , to turn the scale of that good man 's pity , and to engage he friendship and he benefaction . when therefore he plainly see master be absolutely detest ( for that he be ) by he own mother , he begin , on that account only , to look with a eye of compassion upon he ; and what the effect of compassion be , in good and benevolent mind , I need not here explain to most of my reader . Henceforward he see every appearance of virtue in the youth through the magnifying end , and view all he fault with the glass invert , so that they become scarce perceptible . and this perhaps the amiable temper of pity may make commendable ; but the next step the weakness of human nature alone must excuse ; for he no sooner perceive that preference which give to , than that poor youth ( however innocent ) begin to sink in he affections as he rise in hers . this , it be true , would of itself alone never have be able to eradicate from he bosom ; but it be greatly injuriious to he , and prepare 's mind for those impressions which afterwards produce the mighty event that will be contain hereafter in this history ; and to which , it must be confest , the unfortunate lad , by he own wantonness , wildness , and want of caution , too much contribute . in record some instance of these , we shall , if rightly understand , afford a very useful lesson to those well - dispose youths who shall hereafter be we reader ; for they may here find , that goodness of heart , and openness of temper , though these may give they great comfort within , and administer to a honest pride in they own mind , will by no means , ala ! do they business in the world . Prudence and circumspection be necessary even to the best of man . they be indeed , as it be , a guard to , without which she can never be safe . it be not enough that you designs , nay , that you action , be intrinsically good ; you must take care they shall appear so . if you inside be never so beautiful , you must preserve a fair outside also . this must be constantly look to , or malice and envy will take care to blacke it so , that the sagacity and goodness of a will not be able to see through it , and to discern the beauty within . let this , my young reader , be you constant maxim , that no man can be good enough to enable he to neglect the rule of prudence ; nor will Virtue herself look
look beautiful , unless she be bedeck with the outward ornament of decency and decorum . and this precept , my worthy disciple , if you read with due attention , you will , I hope , find sufficiently enforce by example in the follow page . I ask pardon for this short appearance , by way of chorus , on the stage . it be in reality for my own sake , that , while I be discover the rock on which innocence and goodness often split , I may not be misunderstood to recommend the very means to my worthy reader , by which I intend to show they they will be undone . and this , as I could not prevail on any of my actor to speak , I myself be oblige to declare . chapter viii . a childish incident , in which , however , be see a good - natured disposition in . the reader may remember that give a little horse , as a kind of smart - money for the punishment which he imagine he have suffer innocently . this horse keep above half a year , and then ride he to a neighbour fair , and sell he . at he return , be question by what he have do with the money for which the horse be sell , he frankly declare he would not tell he . " Oho ! " say , " you will not ! then I will have it out of you br -- h ; " that be the place to which he always apply for information on every doubtful occasion . be now mount on the back of a footman , and everything prepare for execution , when , enter the room , give the criminal a reprieve , and take he with he into another apartment ; where , be alone with , he put the same question to he which Thwackum have before ask he . answer , he could in duty refuse he nothing ; but as for that tyrannical rascal , he would never make he any other answer than with a cudgel , with which he hope soon to be able to pay he for all he barbarity . very severely reprimand the lad for he indecent and disrespectful expression concern he master ; but much more for he avow a intention of revenge . he threaten he with the entire loss of he favour , if he ever hear such another word from he mouth ; for , he say , he would never support or befriend a reprobate . by these and the like declaration , he extort some compunction from , in which that youth be not over-sincere ; for he really meditate some return for all the smarting favour he have receive at the hand of the pedagogue . he be , however , bring by to express a concern for he resentment against ; and then the good man , after some wholesome admonition , permit he to proceed , which he do as follow :-- " indeed , my dear sir , I love and honour you more than all the world : I know the great obligation I have to you , and should detest myself if I think my heart be capable of ingratitude . could the little horse you give I speak , I be sure he could tell you how fond I be of you present ; for I have more pleasure in feed he than in ride he . indeed , sir , it go to my heart to part with he ; nor would I have sell he upon any other account in the world than what I do . you yourself , sir , I be convince , in my case , would have do the same : for none ever so sensibly feel the misfortunes of other . what would you feel , dear sir , if you think yourself the occasion of they ? indeed , sir , there never be any misery like theirs . " " like whose , child ? " say : " what do you mean ? " " oh , sir ! " answer , " you poor gamekeeper , with all he large family , ever since you discard he , have be perish with all the misery of cold and hunger : I could not bear to see these poor wretch nake and starve , and at the same time know myself to have be the occasion of all they suffering . I could not bear it , sir ; upon my soul , I could not . " [ here the tear run down he cheek , and he thus proceed . ] " it be to save they from absolute destruction I part with you dear present , notwithstand all the value I have for it : I sell the horse for they , and they have every farthing of the money . " now stand silent for some moment , and before he speak the tear start from he eyes . he at length dismiss with a gentle rebuke , advise he for the future to apply to he in casis of distress , rather than to use extraordinary means of relieive they himself . this affair be afterward the subject of much debate between and . Thwackum hold , that this be fly in 's face , who have intend to punish the fellow for he disobedience . he say , in some instance , what the world call charity appear to he to be oppose the will of the , which have mark some particular person for destruction ; and that this be in like manner act in opposition to ; conclude , as usual , with a hearty recommendation of birch . argue strongly on the other side ,
, in opposition perhaps to , or in compliance with , who seem very much to approve what have do . as to what he urge on this occasion , as I be convince most of my reader will be much abler advocate for poor , it would be impertinent to relate it . indeed it be not difficult to reconcile to the rule of right a action which it would have be impossible to deduce from the rule of wrong . chapter ix . contain a incident of a more heinous kind , with the comment of and . it hath be observ by some man of much greater reputation for wisdom than myself , that misfortune seldom come single . a instance of this may , I believe , be see in those gentleman who have the misfortune to have any of they roguery detect ; for here discovery seldom stop till the whole be come out . thus it happen to poor ; who be no sooner pardoned for sell the horse , than he be discover to have some time before sell a fine Bible which give he , the money arise from which sale he have dispose of in the same manner . this Bible master have purchase , though he have already such another of he own , partly out of respect for the book , and partly out of friendship to , be unwilling that the should be sell out of the family at half - price . he therefore deposit the say half - price himself ; for he be a very prudent lad , and so careful of he money , that he have lay up almost every penny which he have receive from . some people have be not to be able to read in no book but they own . on the contrary , from the time when be first possess of this , he never use any other . Nay , he be see reading in it much oftener than he have before be in he own . now , as he frequently ask to explain difficult passage to he , that gentleman unfortunately take notice of 's name , which be write in many part of the book . this bring on a inquiry , which oblige to discover the whole matter . be resolve a crime of this kind , which he call sacrilege , should not go unpunished . he therefore proceed immediately to castigation : and not contente with that he acquaint , at they next meeting , with this monstrous crime , as it appear to he : inveigh against tom in the most bitter term , and like he to the buyer and seller who be drive out of the temple . see this matter in a very different light . he say , he could not perceive any higher crime in sell one book than in sell another . that to sell be strictly lawful by all law both divine and human , and consequently there be no unfitness in it . he tell , that he great concern on this occasion bring to he mind the story of a very devout woman , who , out of pure regard to religion , steal 's from a lady of she acquaintance . this story cause a vast quantity of blood to rush into the parson 's face , which of itself be none of the palest ; and he be go to reply with great warmth and anger , have not , who be present at this debate , interpose . that lady declare herself absolutely of 's side . she argue , indeed , very learnedly in support of he opinion ; and conclude with say , if have be guilty of any fault , she must confess she own son appear to be equally culpable ; for that she could see no difference between the buyer and the seller ; both of whom be alike to be drive out of the temple . have declare she opinion , put a end to the debate . 's triumph would almost have stopt he word , have he need they ; and , who , for reason before - mention , durst not venture at disoblige the lady , be almost choak with indignation . as to , he say , since the boy have be already punish he would not deliver he sentiment on the occasion ; and whether he be or be not angry with the lad , I must leave to the reader 's own conjecture . after this , a action be brotch against the gamekeeper by ( the gentleman in whose manor the partridge be kill ) , for depredation of the like kind . this be a most unfortunate circumstance for the fellow , as it not only of itself threaten he ruin , but actually prevent from restore he to he favour : for as that gentleman be walk out one evening with and young , the latter slily draw he to the habitation of ; where the family of that poor wretch , namely , he wife and child , be find in all the misery with which cold , hunger , and nakedness , can affect human creature : for as to the money they have receive from , former debt have consum almost the whole . such a scene as this could not fail of affect the heart of . he immediately give the mother a couple of guinea , with which he bid she cloath she child . the poor woman burst into tear at this goodness , and while she be thanke he , could not refrain from express she gratitude to ; who have , she say , long preserve both she and hers from starving . " we have not , " say she , " have a
a morsel to eat , nor have these poor child have a rag to put on , but what he goodness hath bestow on we . " for , indeed , besides the horse and the , have sacrifice a night - gown , and other thing , to the use of this distressed family . on they return home , make use of all he eloquence to display the wretchedness of these people , and the penitence of himself ; and in this he succeed so well , that say , he think the man have suffer enough for what be past ; that he would forgive he , and think of some means of provide for he and he family . be so delighted with this news , that , though it be dark when they return home , he could not help go back a mile , in a shower of rain , to acquaint the poor woman with the glad tiding ; but , like other hasty divulger of news , he only bring on himself the trouble of contradict it : for the ill fortune of make use of the very opportunity of he friend 's absence to overturn all again . chapter x . in which master and appear in different light . master fall very short of he companion in the amiable quality of mercy ; but he as greatly exceed he in one of a much higher kind , namely , in justice : in which he follow both the precept and example of and ; for though they would both make frequent use of the word mercy , yet it be plain that in reality hold it to be inconsistent with the rule of right ; and be for do justice , and leave mercy to heaven . the two gentleman do indeed somewhat differ in opinion concern the object of this sublime virtue ; by which would probably have destroy one half of mankind , and the other half . master then , though he have keep silence in the presence of , yet , when he have better consider the matter , could by no means endure the thought of suffer he uncle to confer favour on the undeserving . he therefore resolve immediately to acquaint he with the fact which we have above slightly hint to the reader . the truth of which be as follow : the gamekeeper , about a year after he be dismiss from 's service , and before 's sell the horse , be in want of bread , either to fill he own mouth or those of he family , as he pass through a field belong to espy a hare sitting in she form . this hare he have basely and barbarously knock on the head , against the law of the land , and no less against the law of sportsman . the higgler to whom the hare be sell , be unfortunately take many month after with a quantity of game upon he , be obliged to make he peace with the squire , by become evidence against some poacher . and now be pitch upon by he , as be a person already obnoxious to , and one of no good fame in the country . he be , besides , the best sacrifice the higgler could make , as he have supply he with no game since ; and by this mean the witness have a opportunity of screening he better customer : for the squire , be charme with the power of punish , whom a single transgression be sufficient to ruin , make no further enquiry . have this fact be truly laid before , it might probably have do the gamekeeper very little mischief . but there be no zeal blinder than that which be inspire with the love of justice against offender . master have forget the distance of the time . he vari likewise in the manner of the fact : and by the hasty addition of the single letter be he considerably alte the story ; for he say that have wired hare . these alteration might probably have be set right , have not unluckily insist on a promise of secrecy from before he reveal the matter to he ; but by that mean the poor gamekeeper be condemn without have a opportunity to defend himself : for as the fact of kill the hare , and of the action bring , be certainly true , have no doubt concern the rest . short -live then be the joy of these poor people ; for the next morning declare he have fresh reason , without assign it , for he anger , and strictly forbad to mention any more : though as for he family , he say he would endeaavor to keep they from starving ; but as to the fellow himself , he would leave he to the law , which nothing could keep he from breaking . could by no means divine what have incense , for of master Blifil he have not the least suspicion . however , as he friendship be to be ti out by no disappointment , he now determi to try another method of preserve the poor gamekeeper from ruin . be lately grow very intimate with . he have so greatly recommend himself to that gentleman , by leap over five - barr gate , and by other act of sportsmanship , that the squire have declare would certainly make a great man if he have but sufficient encouragement . he often wish he have himself a son with such part ; and one day very solemnly assert at a drinking bout , that should hunt a pack of hound for a thousand pound of he money , with any huntsman in the whole country . by such kind of talents he
he have so ingratiate himself with the squire , that he be a most welcome guest at he table , and a favourite companion in he sport : everything which the squire hold most dear , to wit , he gun , dog , and horse , were now as much at the command of , as if they have be he own . he resolve therefore to make use of this favour on behalf of he friend , whom he hope to introduce into 's family , in the same capacity in which he have before serve . the reader , if he consider that this fellow be already obnoxious to , and if he consider farther the weighty business by which that gentleman 's displeasure have be incur , will perhaps condemn this as a foolish and desperate undertake ; but if he should totally condemn young Jones on that account , he will greatly applaud he for strengthen himself with all imaginable interest on so arduous a occasion . for this purpose , then , apply to 's daughter , a young lady of about seventeen year of age , whom she father , next after those necessary implement of sport just before mention , love and esteem above all the world . now , as she have some influence on the squire , so have some little influence on she . but this be the intend heroine of this work , a lady with whom we ourselves be greatly in love , and with whom many of we reader will probably be in love too , before we part , it be by no means proper she should make she appearance at the end of a book . . contain the time of a year . I . contain five page of paper . as truth distinguish we writing from those idle romance which be fill with monster , the productions , not of nature , but of distemper brain ; and which have be therefore recommend by a eminent critic to the sole use of the pastry - cook ; so , on the other hand , we would avoid any resemblance to that kind of history which a celebrate poet seem to think be no less calculate for the emolument of the brewer , as the read it should be always attend with a tankard of good ale -- while -- history with she comrade ale , Sooth the sad series of she serious tale for as this be the liquor of modern historian , nay , perhaps they muse , if we may believe the opinion of , who attribute inspiration to ale , it ought likewise to be the potation of they reader , since every book ought to be read with the same spirit and in the same manner as it be writ . thus the famous author of tell a learn bishop , that the reason he lordship could not taste the excellence of he piece be , that he do not read it with a fiddle in he hand ; which instrument he himself have always have in he own , when he compose it . that we work , therefore , might be in no danger of be like to the labour of these historian , we have take every occasion of intersperse through the whole sundry simile , description , and other kind of poetical embellishment . these be , indeed , design to supply the place of the say ale , and to refresh the mind , whenever those slumber , which in a long work be apt to invade the reader as well as the writer , shall begin to creep upon he . without interruption of this kind , the best narrative of plain matter of fact must overpower every reader ; for nothing but the ever last watchfulness , which have ascribe only to Jove himself , can be proon against a newspaper of many volume . we shall leave to the reader to determine with what judgment we have choose the several occasion for insert those ornamental part of we work . surely it will be allow that none could be more proper than the present , where we be about to introduce a considerable character on the scene ; no less , indeed , than the heroine of this heroic , historical , prosaic poem . here , therefore , we have think proper to prepare the mind of the reader for she reception , by fill it with every pleasing image which we can draw from the face of nature . and for this method we plead many precedent . first , this be a art well know to , and much practise by , we tragick poet , who seldom fail to prepare they audience for the reception of they principal character . thus the heroe be always introduce with a flourish of drum and trumpet , in order to rouse a martial spirit in the audience , and to accommodate they ear to bombast and fustian , which 's blind man would not have grossly er in like to the sound of a trumpet . again , when lover be come forth , soft music often conduct they on the stage , either to soothe the audience with the softness of the tender passion , or to lull and prepare they for that gentle slumber in which they will most probably be compose by the ensue scene . and not only the poets , but the master of these poets , the manager of playhouse , seem to be in this secret ; for , besides the aforesaid kettle - drum , & c. , which denote the heroe 's approach , he be generally usher on the stage by a large troop of half a dozen scene - shifter ; and how necessary these be imagine to he
he appearance , may be conclude from the follow theatrical story :-- be at dinner at a ale - house border on the theatre , when he be summon to go on the stage . the heroe , be unwilling to quit he shoulder of mutton , and as unwilling to draw on himself the indignation of ( he brother - manager ) for make the audience wait , have bribe these he harbinger to be out of the way . while , therefore , be thunder out , " where be the carpenter to walk on before King ? " that monarch very quietly eat he mutton , and the audience , however impatient , be obliged to entertain themselves with music in he absence . to be plain , I much question whether the politician , who hath generally a good nose , hath not scent out somewhat of the utility of this practice . I be convince that awful magistrate my lord - mayor contract a good deal of that reverence which attend he through the year , by the several pageant which precede he pomp . Nay , I must confess , that even I myself , who be not remarkably liable to be captivate with show , have yield not a little to the impressions of much preceding state . when I have see a man strutt in a procession , after other whose business be only to walk before he , I have conceive a higher notion of he dignity than I have feel on see he in a common situation . but there be one instance , which come exactly up to my purpose . this be the custom of send on a basket- woman , who be to precede the pomp at a coronation , and to strow the stage with flower , before the great personage begin they procession . the antient would certainly have invoke the goddess for this purpose , and it would have be no difficulty for they priests , or politician to have persuade the people of the real presence of the deity , though a plain mortal have personate she and perform she office . but we have no such design of imposing on we reader ; and therefore those who object to the heathe theology , may , if they please , change we goddess into the above -mentioned basket- woman . we intention , in short , be to introduce we heroine with the utmost solemnity in we power , with a elevation of stile , and all other circumstance proper to raise the veneration of we reader .-- indeed we would , for certain cause , advise those of we male reader who have any heart , to read no farther , be we not well assure , that how amiable soever the picture of we heroine will appear , as it be really a copy from nature , many of we fair countrywoman will be find worthy to satisfy any passion , and to answer any idea of female perfection which we pencil will be able to raise . and now , without any further preface , we proceed to we next chapter . . a short hint of what we can do in the sublime , and a description of western . Hush be every ruder breath . may the heathe ruler of the wind confine in iron chain the boisterous limb of noisy Boreas , and the sharp - point nose of bitter - bite . do thou , sweet , rise from thy fragrant bed , mount the western sky , and lead on those delicious gale , the charms of which call forth the lovely from she chamber , perfume with pearly dew , when on the 1st of , she birth - day , the blooming maid , in loose attire , gently trip it over the verdant mead , where every flower rise to do she homage , till the whole field become enamell , and colour contmend with sweet which shall ravish she most . so charme may she now appear ! and you the feathered chorister of nature , whose sweetest note not even can excell , tune you melodious throat to celebrate she appearance . from love proceed you music , and to love it return . Awake therefore that gentle passion in every swain : for lo ! adorn with all the charms in which nature can array she ; bedeck with beauty , youth , sprightliness , innocence , modesty , and tenderness , breathe sweetness from she rosy lip , and dart brightness from she sparkling eye , the lovely come ! reader , perhaps thou hast see the statue of the _. perhaps , too , thou hast see the gallery of beauty at . thou may 'st remember each bright of the galaxy , and all the toast of the Kit - cat . or , if they reign be before thy time , at least thou hast see they daughter , the no less dazzling beautie of the present age ; whose name , should we here insert , we apprehend they would fill the whole volume . now if thou hast see all these , be not afraid of the rude answer which once give to a man who have see many thing . no . if thou hast see all these without know what beauty be , thou hast no eye ; if without feel its power , thou hast no heart . yet be it possible , my friend , that thou mayest have see all these without be able to form a exact idea of ; for she do not exactly resemble any of they . she be most like the picture of : and , I have hear , more still to the famious dutchess of ; but most of all she resemble
resemble one whose image never can depart from my breast , and whom , if thou dost remember , thou hast then , my friend , a adequate idea of . but lest this should not have be thy fortune , we will endeaavor with we utmost skill to describe this paragon , though we be sensible that we highest ability be very inadequate to the task . , then , the only daughter of , be a middle - size woman ; but rather inclin to tall . she shape be not only exact , but extremely delicate : and the nice proportion of she arm promise the truest symmetry in she limb . she hair , which be black , be so luxuriant , that it reach she middle , before she cut it to comply with the modern fashion ; and it be now curl so gracefully in she neck , that few could believe it to be she own . if envy could find any part of the face which demand less commendation than the rest , it might possibly think she forehead might have be higher without prejudice to she . she eyebrow be full , even , and arch beyond the power of art to imitate . she black eye have a lustre in they , which all she softness could not extinguish . she nose be exactly regular , and she mouth , in which be two row of ivory , exactly answer 's description in those line :-- she lip be red , and one be thin , ' to that be next she ching . some bee have sting it newly . she cheek be of the oval kind ; and in she right she have a dimple , which the least smile discover . she ching have certainly its share in form the beauty of she face ; but it be difficult to say it be either large or small , though perhaps it be rather of the former kind . she complexion have rather more of the lily than of the rose ; but when exercise or modesty increase she natural colour , no vermilion could equal it . then one might indeed cry out with the celebrate : -- she pure and eloquent blood speak in she cheek , and so distinctly wrotch that one might almost say she body think . she neck be long and finely turn : and here , if I be not afraid of offend she delicacy , I might justly say , the highest beautie of the famious medicis_ be outdone . here be whiteness which no lily , ivory , nor alabaster could match . the finest cambric might indeed be suppose from envy to cover that bosom which be much whiter than itself .-- it be indeed , _Nitor splenden Pario marmore purius _. a gloss shin beyond the purest brightness of Parian marble . such be the outside of ; nor be this beautiful frame disgrace by a inhabitant unworthy of it . she mind be every way equal to she person ; nay , the latter borrow some charms from the former ; for when she smile , the sweetness of she temper diffuse that glory over she countenance which no regularity of feature can give . but as there be no perfection of the mind which do not discover themselves in that perfect intimacy to which we intend to introduce we reader with this charming young creature , so it be needless to mention they here : nay , it be a kind of tacit affront to we reader 's understanding , and may also rob he of that pleasure which he will receive in form he own judgment of she character . it may , however , be proper to say , that whatever mental accomplishment she have derive from nature , they be somewhat improve and cultivate by art : for she have be educate under the care of a aunt , who be a lady of great discretion , and be thoroughly acquaint with the world , have live in she youth about the court , whence she have retire some year since into the country . by she conversation and instruction , be perfectly well breed , though perhaps she want a little of that ease in she behaviour which be to be acquire only by habit , and live within what be call the polite circle . but this , to say the truth , be often too dearly purchase ; and though it hath charms so inexpressible , that the french , perhaps , among other quality , mean to express this , when they declare they know not what it be ; yet its absence be well compensate by innocence ; nor can good sense and a natural gentility ever stand in need of it . chapter iii . wherein the history go back to commemorate a trifling incident that happen some year since ; but which , trifl as it be , have some future consequence . the amiable be now in she eighteenth year , when she be introduce into this history . she father , as hath be say , be fonder of she than of any other human creature . to she , therefore , apply , in order to engage she interest on the behalf of he friend the gamekeeper . but before we proceed to this business , a short recapitulation of some previous matters may be necessary . though the different temper of and of do not admit of a very intimate correspondence , yet they liv upon what be call a decent footing together ; by which mean the young people of both family have be acquaint from they infancy ; and as they be all near of the same age , have be frequent playmate together . the gaiety of 's temper
temper suite better with , than the grave and sober disposition of . and the preference which she give the former of these , would often appear so plainly , that a lad of a more passionate turn than master Blifil be , might have show some displeasure at it . as he do not , however , outwardly express any such disgust , it would be a ill office in we to pay a visit to the inmost recess of he mind , as some scandalous people search into the most secret affair of they friend , and often pry into they closet and cupboard , only to discover they poverty and meanness to the world . however , as person who suspect they have give other cause of offence , be apt to conclude they be offended ; so impute a action of master Blifil to he anger , which the superior sagacity of and discern to have arisen from a much better principle . , when very young , have present with a little bird , which he have take from the nest , have nurse up , and teach to s . of this bird , , then about thirteen year old , be so extremely fond , that she chief business be to feed and tend it , and she chief pleasure to play with it . by these mean little , for so the bird be call , be become so tame , that it would feed out of the hand of its mistress , would perch upon the finger , and lie contente in she bosom , where it seem almost sensible of its own happiness ; though she always keep a small string about its leg , nor would ever trust it with the liberty of fly away . one day , when and he whole family dine at 's , , be in the garden with little , and observe the extreme fondness that she show for she little bird , desire she to trust it for a moment in he hand . presently comply with the young gentleman 's request , and after some previous caution , deliver he she bird ; of which he be no sooner in possession , than he slipt the string from its leg and toss it into the air . the foolish animal no sooner perceive itself at liberty , than forget all the favour it have receive from , it fly directly from she , and perch on a bough at some distance . , see she bird go , scream out so loud , that , who be at a little distance , immediately run to she assistance . he be no sooner inform of what have happen , than he curse for a pitiful malicious rascal ; and then immediately stripp off he coat he apply himself to climb the tree to which the bird escape . have almost recover he little nameake , when the branch on which it be perch , and that hang over a canal , break , and the poor lad plump over head and ear into the water . 's concern now change its object . and as she apprehend the boy 's life be in danger , she scream ten time louder than before ; and indeed master Blifil himself now second she with all the vociferation in he power . the company , who be sit in a room next the garden , be instantly alarmed , and come all forth ; but just as they reach the canal , ( for the water be luckily pretty shallow in that part ) arrive safely on shore . fall violently on poor , who stand drop and shiver before he , when desire he to have patience ; and turn to , say , " pray , child , what be the reason of all this disturbance ? " master answer , " indeed , uncle , I be very sorry for what I have do ; I have be unhappily the occasion of it all . I have 's bird in my hand , and think the poor creature languish for liberty , I own I could not forbear give it what it desire ; for I always think there be something very cruel in confin anything . it seem to be against the law of nature , by which everything hath a right to liberty ; nay , it be even unchristian , for it be not do what we would be do by ; but if I have imagine would have be so much concerned at it , I be sure I never would have do it ; nay , if I have know what would have happen to the bird itself : for when , who clim up that tree after it , fall into the water , the bird take a second flight , and presently a nasty hawk carry it away . " poor , who now first heard of she little 's fate ( for she concern for have prevent she perceive it when it happen ) , she a shower of tear . these endeavoure to assuage , promise she a much finer bird : but she declare she would never have another . she father chide she for crying so for a foolish bird ; but could not help tell young , if he be a son of he , he backside should be well flead . now return to she chamber , the two young gentleman be send home , and the rest of the company return to they bottle ; where a conversation ensue on the subject of the bird , so curious , that we think it deserve a chapter by itself . iv. contain such very deep and grave matter , that some reader , perhaps , may not relish it .
. have no sooner light he pipe , than , address himself to , he thus begin : " , I can not help congratulate you on you nephew ; who , at a age when few lad have any idea but of sensible object , be arrive at a capacity of distinguishing right from wrong . to confine anything , seem to I against the law of nature , by which everything hath a right to liberty . these be he word ; and the impression they have make on I be never to be eradicate . can any man have a higher notion of the rule of right , and the eternal fitness of thing ? I can not help promise myself , from such a dawn , that the meridian of this youth will be equal to that of either the elder or the . " here hastily interrupt , and spill some of he wine , and swallow the rest with great eagerness , answer , " from another expression he make use of , I hope he will resemble much better man . the law of nature be a jargon of word , which mean nothing . I know not of any such law , nor of any right which can be derive from it . to do as we would be do by , be indeed a motive , as the boy well express himself ; and I be glad to find my instruction have borne such good fruit . " " if vanity be a thing fit , " say , " I might indulge some on the same occasion ; for whence only he can have lear not he notion of right or wrong , I think be pretty apparent . if there be no law of nature , there be no right nor wrong . " " how ! " say the parson , " do you then banish revelation ? be I talk with a deist or a atheist ? " " drink about , " say western . " Pox of you law of nature ! I do not know what you mean , either of you , by right and wrong . to take away my girl 's bird be wrong , in my opinion ; and my neighbour may do as he please ; but to encourage boy in such practice , be to breed they up to the gallow . " answer , " that he be sorry for what he nephew have do , but could not consent to punish he , as he act rather from a generous than unworthy motive . " he say , " if the boy have steal the bird , none would have be more ready to vote for a severe chastisement than himself ; but it be plain that be not he design : " and , indeed , it be as apparent to he , that he could have no other view but what he have himself avow . ( for as to that malicious purpose which suspect , it never once enter into the head of . ) he at length conclude with again blame the action as inconsiderate , and which , he say , be pardonable only in a child . have deliver he opinion so openly , that if he be now silent , he must submit to have he judgment censure . he say , therefore , with some warmth , " that have too much respect to the dirty consideration of property . that in pass we judgment on great and mighty action , all private regards should be laid aside ; for by adhere to those narrow rule , the have be condemn of ingratitude , and the elder of parricide . " " and if they have be hange too for those crime , " cry , " they would have have no more than they desert . a couple of heathenish villain ! heaven be praise we have no Brutuse now - a - day ! I wish , , you would desist from fill the mind of my pupil with such antichristian stuff ; for the consequence must be , while they be under my care , it be be well scour out of they again . there be you disciple almost spoil already . I overhear he the other day dispute with master Blifil that there be no merit in faith without work . I know that be one of you tenet , and I suppose he have it from you . " " do not accuse I of spoil he , " say . " who teach he to laugh at whatever be virtuous and decent , and fit and right in the nature of thing ? he be you own scholar , and I disclaim he . no , no , be my boy . yoing as he be , that lad 's notion of moral rectitude I defy you ever to eradicate . " put on a contemptuous sneer at this , and reply , " ay , ay , I will venture he with you . he be too well grounde for all you philosophical cant to hurt . no , no , I have take care to instil such principle into he - - " " and I have instil principle into he too , " cry . " what but the sublime idea of virtue could inspire a human mind with the generous thought of give liberty ? and I repeat to you again , if it be a fit thing to be proud , I might claim the honour of have infus that idea." -- " and if pride be not forbidden , " say , " I might boast of have teach he that duty which he himself assign as he motive . " " so between you both
both , " say the squire , " the young gentleman hath be teach to rob my daughter of she bird . I find I must take care of my partridge - mew . I shall have some virtuous religious man or other set all my partridge at liberty . " then slapp a gentleman of the law , who be present , on the back , he cry out , " what say you to this , ? be not this against law ? " the lawyer with great gravity deliver himself as follow :-- " if the case be put of a partridge , there can be no doubt but a action would lie ; for though this be _ferae natura , yet be reclaim , property vest : but be the case of a singing bird , though reclaim , as it be a thing of base nature , it must be consider as _nullius in bonis . in this case , therefore , I conceive the plaintiff must be non-suited ; and I should disadvise the bring any such action . " " well , " say the squire , " if it be _nullus bonus _, let we drink about , and talk a little of the state of the nation , or some such discourse that we all understand ; for I be sure I do not understand a word of this . it may be learn and sense for atch I know : but you shall never persuade I into it . Pox! you have neither of you mention a word of that poor lad who deserve to be commend : to venture break he neck to oblige my girl be a generous - spirited action : I have learn enough to see that . d -- and I , here be 's health ! I shall love the boy for it the longest day I have to live . " thus be the debate interrupt ; but it would probably have be soon resume , have not presently call for he coach , and carry off the two combatant . such be the conclusion of this adventure of the bird , and of the dialogue occasion by it ; which we could not help recount to we reader , though it happen some year before that stage or period of time at which we history be now arrive . chapter v. contain matter accommodate to every taste . " Parva leve capiunt animo -- small thing affect light mind , " be the sentiment of a great master of the passion of love . and certain it be , that from this day begin to have some little kindness for , and no little aversion for he companion . many accident from time to time improve both these passion in she breast ; which , without we recount , the reader may well conclude , from what we have before hinte of the different temper of these lad , and how much the one suite with she own inclination more than the other . to say the truth , , when very young , discern that , through a idle , thoughtless , ratt rascal , be nobody 's enemy but he own ; and that master , though a prudent , discreet , sober young gentleman , be at the same time strongly attach to the interest only of one single person ; and who that single person be the reader will be able to divine without any assistance of ours . these two characters be not always receive in the world with the different regard which seem severally due to either ; and which one would imagine mankind , from self - interest , should show towards they . but perhaps there may be a political reason for it : in find one of a truly benevolent disposition , man may very reasonably suppose they have find a treasure , and be desirous of keep it , like all other good thing , to themselves . hence they may imagine , that to trumpet forth the praise of such a person , would , in the vulgar phrase , be cry Roast- meat , and call in partaker of what they intend to apply solely to they own use . if this reason do not satisfy the reader , I know no other means of accounting for the little respect which I have commonly see pay to a character which really do great honour to human nature , and be productive of the highest good to society . but it be otherwise with . she honoure , and scorn master , almost as soon as she know the meaning of those two word . have be absent upward of three year with she aunt ; during all which time she have seldom see either of these young gentleman . she dine , however , once , together with she aunt , at 's . this be a few day after the adventure of the partridge , before commemorate . hear the whole story at table , where she say nothing : nor indeed could she aunt get many word from she as she return home ; but she may , when undresse she , happen to say , " well , miss , I suppose you have see young master to - day ? " she answer with much passion , " I hate the name of master , as I do whatever be base and treacherous : and I wonder would suffer that old barbarous schoolmaster to punish a poor boy so cruelly for what be only the effect of he good - nature . " she then recount the story to she maid , and conclude with say , " do not you think he be a boy of noble spirit ? " this young lady be now return
return to she father ; who give she the command of he house , and place she at the upper end of he table , where ( who for he great love of hunting be become a great favourite of the squire ) often dine . young man of open , generous disposition be naturally inclin to gallantry , which , if they have good understanding , as be in reality 's case , exert itself in a obliging complacent behaviour to all woman in general . this greatly distinguished from the boisterous brutality of mere country squire on the one hand , and from the solemn and somewhat sullen deportment of master Blifil on the other ; and he begin now , at twenty , to have the name of a pretty fellow among all the woman in the neighbourhood . behave to with no particularity , unless perhaps by show she a higher respect than he pay to any other . this distinction she beauty , fortune , sense , and amiable carriage , seem to demand ; but as to design upon she person he have none ; for which we shall at present suffer the reader to condemn he of stupidity ; but perhaps we shall be able indifferently well to account for it hereafter . , with the highest degree of innocence and modesty , have a remarkable sprightliness in she temper . this be so greatly increase whenever she be in company with , that have he not be very young and thoughtless , he must have observe it : or have not 's thought be generally either in the field , the stable , or the dog - kennel , it might have perhaps create some jealousy in he : but so far be the good gentleman from entertain any such suspicion , that he give every opportunity with he daughter which any lover could have wish ; and this innocently improve to better advantage , by follow only the dictate of he natural gallantry and good - nature , than he might perhaps have do have he have the deepest design on the young lady . but indeed it can occasion little wonder that this matter escape the observation of other , since poor herself never remark it ; and she heart be irretrievably lose before she suspect it be in danger . matters be in this situation , when , one afternoon , find alone , begin , after a short apology , with a very serious face , to acquaint she that he have a favour to ask of she which he hope she goodness would comply with . though neither the young man 's behaviour , nor indeed he manner of open this business , be such as could give she any just cause of suspect he intend to make love to she ; yet whether whisper something into she ear , or from what cause it arise I will not determine ; certain it be , some idea of that kind must have intrude itself ; for she colou forsook she cheek , she limb tremble , and she tongue would have falter , have stop for a answer ; but he soon relieve she from she perplexity , by proceeding to inform she of he request ; which be to solicit she interest on behalf of the gamekeeper , whose own ruin , and that of a large family , must be , he say , the consequence of 's pursue he action against he . presently recover she confusion , and , with a smile full of sweetness , say , " be this the mighty favou you ask with so much gravity ? I will do it with all my heart . I really pity the poor fellow , and no longer ago than yesterday send a small matter to he wife . " this small matter be one of she gown , some linen , and ten shilling in money , of which have hear , and it have , in reality , put this solicitation into he head . we youth , now , embolden with he success , resolve to push the matter farther , and venture even to beg she recommendation of he to she father 's service ; protest that he think he one of the honestest fellow in the country , and extremely well qualifie for the place of a gamekeeper , which luckily then happen to be vacant . answer , " well , I will undertake this too ; but I can not promise you as much success as in the former part , which I assure you I will not quit my father without obtain . however , I will do what I can for the poor fellow ; for I sincerely look upon he and he family as object of great compassion . and now , , I must ask you a favour . " " a favour , madam ! " cry : " if you know the pleasure you have give I in the hope of receive a command from you , you would think by mention it you do confer the greatest favour on I ; for by this dear hand I would sacrifice my life to oblige you . " he then snatch she hand , and eagerly kiss it , which be the first time he lip have ever touch she . the blood , which before have forsake she cheek , now make she sufficient amend , by rush all over she face and neck with such violence , that they become all of a scarlet colour . she now first feel a sensation to which she have be before a stranger , and which , when she have leisure to reflect on it , begin to acquaint she with some secret , which the reader , if he doth
doth not already guess they , will know in due time . , as soon as she could speak ( which be not instantly ) , inform he that the favour she have to desire of he be , not to lead she father through so many dangers in hunting ; for that , from what she have hear , she be terribly frightene every time they go out together , and expect some day or other to see she father bring home with broken limb . she therefore beg he , for she sake , to be more cautious ; and as he well know would follow he , not to ride so madly , nor to take those dangerous leap for the future . promise faithfully to obey she command ; and after thanke she for she kind compliance with he request , take he leave , and depart highly charmed with he success . poor be charme too , but in a very different way . she sensation , however , the reader 's heart ( if he or she have any ) will better represent than I can , if I have as many mouth as ever poet wish for , to eat , I suppose , those many dainty with which he be so plentifully provide . it be 's custom every afternoon , as soon as he be drink , to hear he daughter play on the harpsichord ; for he be a great lover of music , and perhaps , have he live in town , might have pass for a connoisseur ; for he always accept against the finest composition of . he never relish any music but what be light and airy ; and indeed he most favourite tune be the , he be for , , and some other . he daughter , though she be a perfect mistress of music , and would never willingly have play any but 's , be so devoted to she father 's pleasure , that she learn all those tune to oblige he . however , she would now and then endeaavor to lead he into she own taste ; and when he require the repetition of he ballad , would answer with a " Nay , dear sir ; " and would often beg he to suffer she to play something else . this evening , however , when the gentleman be retire from he bottle , she play all he favourite three time over without any solicitation . this so please the good squire , that he start from he couch , give he daughter a kiss , and swore she hand be greatly improve . she take this opportunity to execute she promise to ; in which she succeed so well , that the squire declare , if she would give he t'other bout of , he would give the gamekeeper he deputation the next morning . be play again and again , till the charms of the music soothe western to sleep . in the morning do not fail to remind he of he engagement ; and he attorney be immediately send for , order to stop any further proceedings in the action , and to make out the deputation . 's success in this affair soon begin to ring over the country , and various be the censure pass upon it ; some greatly applaud it as a act of good nature ; other sneer , and say , " no wonder that one idle fellow should love another . " yong be greatly enrage at it . he have long hat in the same proportion as delighte in he ; not from any offence which he have ever receive , but from he great love to religion and virtue ;-- for have the reputation of a loose kind of a fellow . therefore represent this as fly in 's face ; and declare , with great concern , that it be impossible to find any other motive for do good to such a wretch . and likewise sung to the same tune . they be now ( especially the latter ) become greatly jealous of young with the widow ; for he now approach the age of twenty , be really a fine young fellow , and that lady , by she encouragement to he , see daily more and more to think he so . be not , however , move with they malice . he declare himself very well satisfi with what have do . he say the perseverance and integrity of he friendship be highly commendable , and he wish he could see more frequent instance of that virtue . but , who seldom greatly relish such spark as my friend , perhaps because they do not pay more ardent address to she , give now a very different turn to all he action , and show they to in a light far less agreeable than that gentleman 's goodness have hithertoo see they in . chapter vi . a apology for the insensibility of to all the charms of the lovely ; in which possibly we may , in a considerable degree , lower he character in the estimation of those man of wit and gallantry who approve the heroe in most of we modern comedy . there be two sort of people , who , I be afraid , have already conceive some contempt for my heroe , on account of he behaviour to . the former of these will blame he prudence in neglect a opportunity to possess himself of 's fortune ; and the latter will no less despise he for he backwardness to so fine a girl , who seem ready to fly into he arm , if he would open they to receive she . now , though I shall not perhaps be able absolutely to acquit he of
of either of these charge ( for want of prudence admit of no excuse ; and what I shall produce against the latter charge will , I apprehend , be scarce satisfactory ) ; yet , as evidence may sometimes be offer in mitigation , I shall set forth the plain matter of fact , and leave the whole to the reader 's determination . have somewhat about he , which , though I think writer be not thoroughly agree in its name , doth certainly inhabit some human breast ; whose use be not so properly to distinguish right from wrong , as to prompt and incite they to the former , and to restrain and withhold they from the latter . this somewhat may be indeed resemble to the famious trunk - maker in the playhouse ; for , whenever the person who be possess of it doth what be right , no ravished or friendly spectator be so eager or so loud in he applause : on the contrary , when he doth wrong , no critic be so apt to hiss and explode he . to give a higher idea of the principle I mean , as well as one more familiar to the present age ; it may be consider as sit on its throne in the mind , like the of this kingdom in he court ; where it preside , govern , direct , judge , acquit , and condemn accord to merit and justice , with a knowledge which nothing escape , a penetration which nothing can deceive , and a integrity which nothing can corrupt . this active principle may perhaps be say to constitute the most essential barrier between we and we neighbour the brute ; for if there be some in the human shape who be not under any such dominion , I choose rather to consider they as deserter from we to we neighbour ; among whom they will have the fate of deserter , and not be place in the first rank . we heroe , whether he derive it from or I will not determine , be very strongly under the guidance of this principle ; for though he do not always act rightly , yet he never do otherwise without feeling and suffering for it . it be this which teach he , that to repay the civility and little friendship of hospitality by rob the house where you have receive they , be to be the basest and meanest of thief . he do not think the baseness of this offence lessen by the height of the injury commit ; on the contrary , if to steal another 's plate deserve death and infamy , it seem to he difficult to assign a punishment adequate to the rob a man of he whole fortune , and of he child into the bargain . this principle , therefore , prevent he from any thought of make he fortune by such means ( for this , as I have say , be a active principle , and doth not content itself with knowledge or belief only ) . have he be greatly enamoure of , he possibly might have think otherwise ; but give I leave to say , there be great difference between run away with a man 's daughter from the motive of love , and do the same thing from the motive of theft . now , though this young gentleman be not insensible of the charms of ; though he greatly like she beauty , and esteem all she other qualifications , she have make , however , no deep impression on he heart ; for which , as it render he liable to the charge of stupidity , or at least of want of taste , we shall now proceed to account . the truth then be , he heart be in the possession of another woman . here I question not but the reader will be surprize at we long taciturnity as to this matter ; and quite at a loss to divine who this woman be , since we have hitherto not dropt a hint of any one likely to be a rival to ; for as to , though we have be oblige to mention some suspicions of she affection for , we have not hithertoo give the least latitude for imagining that he have any for she ; and , indeed , I be sorry to say it , but the youth of both sex be too apt to be deficient in they gratitude for that regard with which person more advanced in year be sometimes so kind to honour they . that the reader may be no longer in suspense , he will be pleased to remember , that we have often mention the family of ( commonly call , the gamekeeper ) , which consiste at present of a wife and five child . the second of these child be a daughter , whose name be , and who be esteem one of the handsomest girl in the whole country . Congreve well say there be in true beauty something which vulgar soul can not admire ; so can no dirt or rag hide this something from those soul which be not of the vulgar stamp . the beauty of this girl make , however , no impression on , till she grow towards the age of sixteen , when , who be near three year older , begin first to cast the eye of affection upon she . and this affection he have fix on the girl long before he could bring himself to attempt the possession of she person : for though he constitution urge he greatly to this , he principle no less forcibly restrain he . to debauch a young woman , however low she condition be , appear to he a
a very heinous crime ; and the good - will he bear the father , with the compassion he have for he family , very strongly corroborate all such sober reflection ; so that he once resolve to get the better of he inclination , and he actually abstain three whole month without ever go to 's house , or see he daughter . now , though be , as we have say , generally think a very fine girl , and in reality she be so , yet she beauty be not of the most amiable kind . it have , indeed , very little of feminine in it , and would have become a man at least as well as a woman ; for , to say the truth , youth and florid health have a very considerable share in the composition . be she mind more effeminate than she person . as this be tall and robust , so be that bold and forward . so little have she of modesty , that have more regard for she virtue than she herself . and as most probably she like as well as he like she , so when she perceive he backwardness she herself grow proportionably forward ; and when she see he have entirely desert the house , she find means of throw herself in he way , and behave in such a manner that the youth must have have very much or very little of the heroe if she endeavours have prove unsuccessful . in a word , she soon triumph over all the virtuous resolution of ; for though she behave at last with all decent reluctance , yet I rather chuse to attribute the triumph to she , since , in fact , it be she design which succeed . in the conduct of this matter , I say , so well play she part , that attribute the conquest entirely to himself , and consider the young woman as one who have yield to the violent attack of he passion . he likewise impute she yielding to the ungovernable force of she love towards he ; and this the reader will allow to have be a very natural and probable supposition , as we have more than once mention the uncommon comeliness of he person : and , indeed , he be one of the handsomest young fellow in the world . as there be some mind whose affection , like 's , be solely place on one single person , whose interest and indulgence alone they consider on every occasion ; regard the good and ill of all other as merely indifferent , any farther than as they contribute to the pleasure or advantage of that person : so there be a different temper of mind which borrow a degree of virtue even from self - love . such can never receive any kind of satisfaction from another , without love the creature to whom that satisfaction be owe , and without make its well - be in some sort necessary to they own ease . of this latter species be we heroe . he consider this poor girl as one whose happiness or misery he have cause to be dependent on himself . she beauty be still the object of desire , though greater beauty , or a fresher object , might have be more so ; but the little abatement which fruition have occasion to this be highly overbalance by the consideration of the affection which she visibly bear he , and of the situation into which he have bring she . the former of these create gratitude , the latter compassion ; and both , together with he desire for she person , raise in he a passion which might , without any great violence to the word , be call love ; though , perhaps , it be at first not very judiciously place . this , then , be the true reason of that insensibility which he have show to the charms of , and that behaviour in she which might have be reasonably enough interpret as a encouragement to he address ; for as he could not think of abandon he , poor and destitute as she be , so no more could he entertain a notion of betraie such a creature as . and surely , have he give the least encouragement to any passion for that young lady , he must have be absolutely guilty of one or other of those crime ; either of which would , in my opinion , have very justly subject he to that fate , which , at he first introduction into this history , I mention to have be generally predict as he certain destiny . chapter vii . be the shortest chapter in this book . she mother first perceive the alteration in the shape of ; and in order to hide it from she neighbour , she foolishly clothed she in that sack which have send she ; though , indeed , that young lady have little apprehension that the poor woman would have be weak enough to let any of she daughter wear it in that form . be charme with the first opportunity she ever have of show she beauty to advantage ; for though she could very well bear to contemplate herself in the glass , even when dress in rag ; and though she have in that dress conquer the heart of , and perhaps of some other ; yet she think the addition of finery would much improve she charms , and extend she conquest . , therefore , have dress herself out in this sack , with a new laced cap , and some other ornament which have give she , repair to church with she fan in she hand the very next . the great be deceive if
if they imagine they have appropriate ambition and vanity to themselves . these noble quality flourish as notably in a country church and churchyard as in the drawing - room , or in the closet . scheme have indeed be laid in the vestry which would hardly disgrace the conclave . here be a ministry , and here be a opposition . here be plot and circumvention , party and factions , equal to those which be to be find in court . nor be the woman here less practise in the highest feminine art than they fair superior in quality and fortune . here be prude and coquette . here be dress and ogl , falsehood , envy , malice , scandal ; in short , everything which be common to the most splendid assembly , or politest circle . let those of high life , therefore , no longer despise the ignorance of they inferior ; nor the vulgar any longer rail at the vice of they betters . have seat herself some time before she be know by she neighbour . and then a whisper run through the whole congregation , " who be she ? " but when she be discover , such sneering , gigl , titter , and laugh ensue among the woman , that be oblige to exert he authority to preserve any decency among they . chapter viii . a battle sung by the muse in the Homerican style , and which none but the classical reader can taste . have a estate in this parish ; and as he house stood at little greater distance from this church than from he own , he very often come to here ; and both he and the charming happen to be present at this time . be much pleased with the beauty of the girl , whom she pitie for she simplicity in have dress herself in that manner , as she see the envy which it have occasion among she equal . she no sooner come home than she send for the gamekeeper , and order he to bring he daughter to she ; say she would provide for she in the family , and might possibly place the girl about she own person , when she own maid , who be now go away , have leave she . poor be thunderstrike at this ; for he be no stranger to the fault in the shape of he daughter . he answer , in a stammering voice , " that he be afraid would be too awkward to wait on she ladyship , as she have never be at service . " " no matter for that , " say ; " she will soon improve . I be pleased with the girl , and be resolve to try she . " now repair to he wife , on whose prudent counsel he depend to extricate he out of this dilemma ; but when he come thither he find he house in some confusion . so great envy have this sack occasioned , that when and the other gentry be go from church , the rage , which have hithertoo be confine , burst into a uproar ; and , have vent itself at first in opprobrious word , laugh , hiss , and gesture , betake itself at last to certain missile weapon ; which , though from they plastic nature they threaten neither the loss of life or of limb , be however sufficiently dreadful to a well - dress lady . have too much spirit to bear this treatment tamely . have therefore -- but hold , as we be diffident of we own ability , let we here invite a superior power to we assistance . , then , whoever ye be , who love to s battle , and principally thou who whilom didst recound the slaughter in those field where and fight , if thou wert not starve with thy friend , assist I on this great occasion . all thing be not in the power of all . as a vast herd of cow in a rich farmer 's yard , if , while they be milk , they hear they calf at a distance , lament the robbery which be then commit , roar and bellow ; so roar forth the mob a hallaloo , make up of almost as many squall , scream , and other different sound as there be person , or indeed passion among they : some be inspire by rage , other alarme by fear , and other have nothing in they head but the love of fun ; but chiefly envy , the sister of , and he constant companion , rush among the crowd , and blow up the fury of the woman ; who no sooner come up to than they pelt she with dirt and rubbish . , have endeavoure in vain to make a handsome retreat , face about ; and lay hold of rag Bess , who advanc in the front of the enemy , she at one blow felle she to the ground . the whole army of the enemy ( though near a hundr in number ) , see the fate of they general , give back many pace , and retire behind a new - dug grave ; for the churchyard be the field of battle , where there be to be a funeral that very even . pursue she victory , and catch up a skull which lay on the side of the grave , discharge it with such fury , that have hit a taylor on the head , the two skull send equally forth a hollow sound at they meeting , and the taylor take presently measure of he length on the ground , where the skull lay side by side , and it be doubtful which
which be the more valuable of the two . then take a thigh - bone in she hand , fell in among the fly rank , and deal she blow with great liberality on either side , overthrow the carcass of many a mighty heroe and heroine . recount , of , the name of those who fall on this fatal day . first , feel on he hinder head the direful bone . the pleasant bank of sweetly - win have nourished , where he first learn the vocal art , with which , wander up and down at wake and fair , he cheer the rural nymph and swain , when upon the green they interweave the sprightly dance ; while he himself stand fiddling and jumpe to he own music . how little now avail he fiddle ! he thump the verdant floor with he carcass . next , old , the sowgelder , receive a blow in he forehead from we Amazonian heroine , and immediately fell to the ground . he be a swinging fat fellow , and fall with almost as much noise as a house . he tobacco - box drop at the same time from he pocket , which take up as lawful spoil . then of the tumble unfortunately over a tombstone , which catche hold of she ungartered stocking invert the order of nature , and give she heel the superiority to she head . , with young she lover , fall both to the ground ; where , oh perverse fate ! she salute the earth , and he the sky . , the smith 's son , be the next victim to she rage . he be a ingenious workman , and make excellent patten ; nay , the very patten with which he be knock down be he own workmanship . have he be at that time singe psalm in the church , he would have avoid a broken head . , the daughter of a farmer ; , himself a farmer ; , , , ; the three , whose father keep the sign of the ; , , and many other of inferior note , lay roll among the grave . not that the strenuous arm of reach all these ; for many of they in they flight overthrow each other . but now Fortune , fear she have act out of character , and have inclin too long to the same side , especially as it be the right side , hastily turn about : for now -- whom caress in he arm ; nor he alone , but half the parish besides ; so famous be she in the field of , nor indeed less in those of . the trophy of both these she husband always bear about on he head and face ; for if ever human head do by it be horn display the amorous glory of a wife , 's do ; nor do he well - scratch face less denote she talents ( or rather talon ) of a different kind . no longer bear this Amazon the shameful flight of she party . she stopt short , and , call aloud to all who fle , speak as follow : " ye man , or rather ye Somersetshire woman , be ye not asham thus to fly from a single woman ? but if no other will oppose she , I myself and here will have the honour of the victory . " have thus say , she fly at , and easily wrench the thigh - bone from she hand , at the same time claw off she cap from she head . then lay hold of the hair of with she left hand , she attack she so furiously in the face with the right , that the blood soon begin to trickle from she nose . be not idle this while . she soon remove the clout from the head of , and then fasten on she hair with one hand , with the other she cause another bloody stream to issue forth from the nostril of the enemy . when each of the combatant have borne off sufficient spoil of hair from the head of she antagonist , the next rage be against the garment . in this attack they exert so much violence , that in a very few minute they be both naked to the middle . it be lucky for the woman that the seat of fistycuff war be not the same with they as among man ; but though they may seem a little to deviate from they sex , when they go forth to battle , yet I have observe , they never so far forget , as to assail the bosom of each other ; where a few blow would be fatal to most of they . this , I know , some derive from they be of a more bloody inclination than the males . on which account they apply to the nose , as to the part whence blood may most easily be draw ; but this seem a far- fetched as well as ill - natured supposition . have great advantage of in this particular ; for the former have indeed no breast , she bosom ( if it may be so call ) , as well in colour as in many other property , exactly resembl a antient piece of parchment , upon which any one might have drum a considerable while without do she any great damage . , beside she present unhappy condition , be differently form in those part , and might , perhaps , have temp the envy of to give she a fatal blow , have not the lucky arrival of at this instant put a immediate end to the bloody scene . this accident be luckily owe to
to ; for he , , and , have mount they horse , after church , to take the air , and have ride about a quarter of a mile , when , change he mind ( not idly , but for a reason which we shall unfold as soon as we have leisure ) , desire the young gentleman to ride with he another way than they have at first purpose . this motion be comply with , bring they of necessity back again to the churchyard . master , who ride first , see such a mob assemble , and two woman in the posture in which we leave the combatant , stopt he horse to enquire what be the matter . a country fellow , scratch he head , answer he : " I do not know , measter , you not I ; a not please you honour , here hath be a vight , I think , between and . " " who , who ? " cry ; but without wait for a answer , have discover the feature of he through all the discomposure in which they now be , he hastily alight , turn he horse loose , and , leap over the wall , run to she . she now first burst into tear , tell he how barbarously she have be treat . upon which , forget the sex of , or perhaps not know it in he rage -- for , in reality , she have no feminine appearance but a petticoat , which he might not observe -- he give she a lash or two with he horsewhip ; and then fly at the mob , who be all accuse by , he deal he blow so profusely on all side , that unless I would again invoke the muse ( which the good - natured reader may think a little too hard upon she , as she hath so lately be violently sweate ) , it would be impossible for I to recound the horse - whipping of that day . have scour the whole coast of the enemy , as well as any of Homer 's hero ever do , or as or any knight - errant in the world could have do , he return to , whom he find in a condition which must give both I and my reader pain , be it to be describe here . rav like a madman , beat he breast , tore he hair , stamp on the ground , and vow the utmost vengeance on all who have be concerned . he then pull off he coat , and button it round she , put he hat upon she head , wip the blood from she face as well as he could with he handkerchief , and call out to the servant to ride as fast as possible for a side - saddle , or a pillion , that he might carry she safe home . master object to the send away the servant , as they have only one with they ; but as second the order of , he be oblige to comply . the servant return in a very short time with the pillion , and , have collect she rag as well as she could , be place behind he . in which manner she be carry home , , , and attend . here have receive he coat , give she a sly kiss , and whisper she , that he would return in the evening , quit he , and ride on after he companion . chapter ix . contain matter of no very peaceable colour . have no sooner apparell herself in she accustom rag , than she sister begin to fall violently upon she , particularly she eldest sister , who tell she she be well enough serve . " how have she the assurance to wear a gown which yoing have give to mother ! if one of we be to wear it , I think , " say she , " I myself have the best right ; but I warrant you think it belong to you beauty . I suppose you think yourself more handsomer than any of we . " --" hand she down the bit of glass from over the cupboard , " cry another ; " I would wash the blood from my face before I talk of my beauty . " -- " you would better have mind what the parson say , " cry the eldest , " and not a harken after man voke . " --" indeed , child , and so she have , " say the mother , sobb : " she hath bring a disgrace upon we all . she be the vurst of the vamily that ever be a whore . " " you need not upbraid I with that , mother , " cry ; " you yourself be bring - to - bed of sister there , within a week after you be marry . " " yes , hussy , " answer the enraged mother , " so I be , and what be the mighty matter of that ? I be make a honest woman then ; and if you be to be make a honest woman , I should not be angry ; but you must have to do with a gentleman , you nasty slut ; you will have a bastard , hussy , you will ; and that I defy any one to say of I . " in this situation find he family , when he come home for the purpose before mention . as he wife and three daughter be all of they talk together , and most of they cry , it be some time before he could get a opportunity of be hear ;
; but as soon as such a interval occur , he acquaint the company with what have say to he . then begin to revile she daughter afresh . " here , " say she , " you have bring we into a fine quandary indeed . what will madam say to that big belly ? oh that ever I should live to see this day ! " answer with great spirit , " and what be this mighty place which you have get for I , father ? " ( for he have not well understand the phrase use by of be about she person ) . " I suppose it be to be under the cook ; but I sha not wash dish for anybody . my gentleman will provide better for I . see what he hath give I this afternoon . he hath promise I shall never want money ; and you sha not want money neither , mother , if you will hold you tongue , and know when you be well . " and so say , she pull out several guinea , and give she mother one of they . the good woman no sooner feel the gold within she palm , than she temper begin ( such be the efficacy of that panacea ) to be mollify . " why , husband , " say she , " would any but such a blockhead as you not have enquire what place this be before he have accept it ? perhaps , as say , it may be in the kitchen ; and truly I do not care my daughter should be a scullion wench ; for , poor as I be , I be a gentlewoman . and thor I be oblige , as my father , who be a clergyman , die worse than nothing , and so could not give I a shilling of _potion , to undervalue myself by marry a poor man ; yet I would have you to know , I have a spirit above all they thing . come up ! it would better become Madam western to look at home , and remember who she own grandfather be . some of my family , for atch I know , might ride in they coach , when the grandfather of some voke walk a - voot . I warrant she fancie she do a mighty matter , when she send we that old gownd ; some of my family would not have pick up such rag in the street ; but poor people be always trample upon .-- the parish need not have be in such a fluster with . you might have tell they , child , you grandmother wore better thing new out of the shop . " " well , but consider , " cry , " what answer shall I make to madam ? " " I do not know what answer , " say she ; " you be always bring you family into one quandary or other . do you remember when you shoot the partridge , the occasion of all we misfortune ? do not I advise you never to go into 's manor ? do not I tell you many a good year ago what would come of it ? but you would have you own headstrong way ; yes , you would , you villain . " be , in the main , a peaceable kind of fellow , and nothing choleric nor rash ; yet do he bear about he something of what the antient call the irascible , and which he wife , if she have be endow with much wisdom , would have fear . he have long experienced , that when the storm grow very high , argument be but wind , which serve rather to increase , than to abate it . he be therefore seldom unprovided with a small switch , a remedy of wonderful force , as he have often essayed , and which the word villain serve as a hint for he apply . no sooner , therefore , have this symptom appear , than he have immediate recourse to the said remedy , which though , as it be usual in all very efficacious medicines , it at first seem to heighten and inflame the disease , soon produce a total calm , and restore the patient to perfect ease and tranquillity . this be , however , a kind of horse - medicine , which require a very robust constitution to digest , and be therefore proper only for the vulgar , unless in one single instance , viz. , where superiority of birth break out ; in which case , we should not think it very improperly apply by any husband whatever , if the application be not in itself so base , that , like certain application of the physical kind which need not be mention , it so much degrade and contaminate the hand employ in it , that no gentleman should endure the thought of anything so low and detestable . the whole family be soon reduce to a state of perfect quiet ; for the virtue of this medicine , like that of electricity , be often communicate through one person to many other , who be not touch by the instrument . to say the truth , as they both operate by friction , it may be doubt whether there be not something analogous between they , of which would do well to enquire , before he publish the next edition of he book . a council be now call , in which , after many debate , still persist that she would not go to service , it be at length resolve , that herself should wait on , and endeavou to procure the place for she eldest daughter , who
who declare great readiness to accept it : but , who seem to have be a enemy of this little family , afterwards put a stop to she promotion . chapter x . a story tell by , the curate . the penetration of . he great love for he daughter , and the return to it make by she . the next morning hunt with , and be at he return invite by that gentleman to dinner . the lovely shine forth that day with more gaiety and sprightliness than usual . she battery be certainly levell at we heroe ; though , I believe , she herself scarce yet know she own intention ; but if she have any design of charme he , she now succeed . , the curate of 's parish , make one of the company . he be a good - natured worthy man ; but chiefly remarkable for he great taciturnity at table , though he mouth be never shut at it . in short , he have one of the best appetite in the world . however , the cloth be no sooner take away , than he always make sufficient amend for he silence : for he be a very hearty fellow ; and he conversation be often entertaining , never offensive . at he first arrival , which be immediately before the entrance of the roast - beef , he have give a intimation that he have bring some news with he , and be begin to tell , that he come that moment from 's , when the sight of the roast - beef strike he dumb , permit he only to say , and to declare he must pay he respect to the baronet , for so he call the sirloin . when dinner be over , be remind by of he news , he begin as follow : " I believe , lady , you ladyship observe a young woman at church yesterday at even - song , who be drest in one of you outlandish garment ; I think I have see you ladyship in such a one . however , in the country , such dress be avi in terris , nigroque simillima cygno ._ that be , madam , as much as to say , ` a rare bird upon the earth , and very like a black swan . ' the verse be in . but to return to what I be relate . I be say such garment be rare sight in the country ; and perchance , too , it be think the more rare , respect be have to the person who wear it , who , they tell I , be the daughter of , you worship 's gamekeeper , whose suffering , I should have opin , might have teach he more wit , than to dress forth he wench in such gaudy apparel . she create so much confusion in the congregation , that if have not silence it , it would have interrupt the service : for I be once about to stop in the middle of the first lesson . , nevertheless , after prayer be over , and I be depart home , this occasion a battle in the churchyard , where , amongst other mischief , the head of a travelling fidler be very much broken . this mor the fidler come to for a warrant , and the wench be bring before he . the squire be inclin to have compound matter ; when , lo ! on a sudden the wench appear ( I ask you ladyship 's pardon ) to be , as it be , at the eve of bring forth a bastard . the squire demand of she who be the father ? but she pertinaciously refuse to make any response . so that he be about to make she mittimus to Bridewell when I depart . " " and be a wench have a bastard all you news , doctor ? " cry western ; " I think it might have be some public matter , something about the nation . " " I be afraid it be too common , indeed , " answer the parson ; " but I think the whole story altogether deserve commemorating . as to national matter , you worship know they best . my concern extend no farther than my own parish . " " why , ay , " say the squire , " I believe I do know a little of that matter , as you say . but , come , , drink about ; the bottle stand with you . " beg to be excuse , for that he have particular business ; and get up from table , escape the clutch of the squire , who be rise to stop he , and go off with very little ceremony . the squire give he a good curse at he departure ; and then turn to the parson , he cry out , " I smoke it : I smoke it . be certainly the father of this bastard . Zooks , parson , you remember how he recommend the veather o' she to I . d -- and un , what a sly b -- ch ' tis . ay , ay , as sure as two - pence , be the veather of the bastard . " " I should be very sorry for that , " say the parson . " why sorry , " cry the squire : " where be the mighty matter oot ? what , I suppose dost pretend that thee hast never get a bastard ? more good luck 's thine ? for I warrant hast a do a _therefore many 's the good time and often . " " you worship be pleased to be jocular ,
, " answer the parson ; " but I do not only animadvert on the sinfulness of the action -- though that surely be to be greatly deprecate -- but I fear he unrighteousness may injure he with . and truly I must say , though he hath the character of be a little wild , I never see any harm in the young man ; nor can I say I have hear any , save what you worship now mention . I wish , indeed , he be a little more regular in he responsis at church ; but altogether he seem vultus puer ingenuique pudoris ._ that be a classical line , young lady ; and , be render into , be , ` a lad of a ingenuous countenance , and of a ingenuous modesty ;' for this be a virtue in great repute both among the Latins and Greeks . I must say , the young gentleman ( for so I think I may call he , notwithstand he birth ) appear to I a very modest , civil lad , and I should be sorry that he should do himself any injury in 's opinion . " " Poogh ! " say the squire : " , with ! why , love a wench himself . Doth not all the country know whose son be ? you must talk to another person in that manner . I remember Allworthy at college . " " I think , " say the parson , " he have never be at the university . " " yes , yes , he be , " say the squire : " and many a wench have we two have together . as arrant a whore - master as any within five mile of 'un . no , no . it will do and no harm with he , assure yourself ; nor with anybody else . ask there -- you have not the worse opinion of a young fellow for get a bastard , have you , girl ? no , no , the woman will like un the better fo r't . " this be a cruel question to poor . she have observ 's colour change at the parson 's story ; and that , with he hasty and abrupt departure , give she sufficient reason to think she father 's suspicion not groundless . she heart now at once discover the great secret to she which it have be so long disclose by little and little ; and she find herself highly interested in this matter . in such a situation , she father 's malapert question rush suddenly upon she , produce some symptom which might have alarme a suspicious heart ; but , to do the squire justice , that be not he fault . when she rise therefore from she chair , and tell he a hint from he be always sufficient to make she withdraw , he suffer she to leave the room , and then with great gravity of countenance remark , " that it be better to see a daughter over -modest than over-forward ; " -- a sentiment which be highly applaude by the parson . there now ensue between the squire and the parson a most excellent political discourse , fram out of newspaper and political pamphlet ; in which they make a libation of four bottle of wine to the good of they country : and then , the squire be fast asleep , the parson light he pipe , mount he horse , and ride home . when the squire have finish he half - hour 's nap , he summon he daughter to she harpsichord ; but she beg to be excuse that evening , on account of a violent head - ache . this remission be presently grant ; for indeed she seldom have occasion to ask he twice , as he love she with such ardent affection , that , by gratify she , he commonly convey the highest gratification to himself . she be really , what he frequently call she , he little darling , and she well deserve to be so ; for she return all he affection in the most ample manner . she have preserve the most inviolable duty to he in all thing ; and this she love make not only easy , but so delightful , that when one of she companion laugh at she for placing so much merit in such scrupulous obedience , as that young lady call it , answer , " you mistake I , madam , if you think I value myself upon this account ; for besides that I be barely discharge my duty , I be likewise please myself . I can truly say I have no delight equal to that of contributing to my father 's happiness ; and if I value myself , my dear , it be on have this power , and not on execute it . " this be a satisfaction , however , which poor be incapable of taste this evening . she therefore not only desire to be excuse from she attendance at the harpsichord , but likewise beg that he would suffer she to absent herself from supper . to this request likewise the squire agree , though not without some reluctance ; for he scarce ever permit she to be out of he sight , unless when he be engage with he horse , dog , or bottle . nevertheless he yield to the desire of he daughter , though the poor man be at the same time oblige to avoid he own company ( if I may so express myself ) , by send for a neighbour farmer to sit with he . chapter xi . the narrow escape of , with some observation for which we have be force to
to dive pretty deep into nature . have ride one of 's horse that morne in the chase ; so that have no horse of he own in the squire 's stable , he be obliged to go home on foot : this he do so expeditiously that he run upward of three mile within the half - hour . just as he arrive at 's outward gate , he meet the constable and company with in they possession , whom they be conduct to that house where the inferior sort of people may learn one good lesson , viz. , respect and deference to they superior ; since it must show they the wide distinction Fortune intend between those persons who be to be correcte for they fault , and those who be not ; which lesson if they do not learn , I be afraid they very rarely learn any other good lesson , or improve they moral , at the house of correction . a lawyer may perhaps think exceed he authority a little in this instance . and , to say the truth , I question , as here be no regular information before he , whether he conduct be strictly regular . however , as he intention be truly upright , he ought to be excuse in _foro conscientia ; since so many arbitrary act be daily commit by magistrate who have not this excuse to plead for themselves . be no sooner inform by the constable whither they be proceed ( indeed he pretty well guess it of himself ) , than he catch in he arm , and embrace she tenderly before they all , swore he would murder the first man who offer to lay hold of she . he bid she dry she eye and be comforte ; for , wherever she go , he would accompany she . then turn to the constable , who stand trembl with he hat off , he desire he , in a very mild voice , to return with he for a moment only to he father ( for so he now call ) ; for he durst , he say , be assure , that , when he have alledge what he have to say in she favour , the girl would be discharge . the constable , who , I make no doubt , would have surrender he prisoner have demand she , very readily consent to this request . so back they all go into be hall ; where desire they to stay till he return , and then go himself in pursuit of the good man . as soon as he be find , throw himself at he foot , and have beg a patient hearing , confess himself to be the father of the child of which be then big . he entreate he to have compassion on the poor girl , and to consider , if there be any guilt in the case , it lay principally at he door . " if there be any guilt in the case ! " answer warmly : " be you then so profligate and abandon a libertine to doubt whether the break the law of and man , the corrupting and ruin a poor girl be guil ? I own , indeed , it doth lie principally upon you ; and so heavy it be , that you ought to expect it should crush you . " " whatever may be my fate , " say , " let I succeed in my intercession for the poor girl . I confess I have corrupt she ! but whether she shall be ruin , depend on you . for 's sake , sir , revoke you warrant , and do not send she to a place which must unavoidably prove she destruction . " bid he immediately call a servant . answer there be no occasion ; for he have luckily meet they at the gate , and rely upon he goodness , have bring they all back into he hall , where they now wait he final resolution , which upon he knee he besotch he might be in favour of the girl ; that she might be permit to go home to she parent , and not be expose to a greater degree of shame and scorn than must necessarily fall upon she . " I know , " say he , " that be too much . I know I be the wicked occasion of it . I will endeaavor to make amend , if possible ; and if you shall have hereafter the goodness to forgive I , I hope I shall deserve it . " hesitate some time , and at last say , " well , I will discharge my mittimus .-- you may send the constable to I . " he be instantly call , discharge , and so be the girl . it will be believe that fail not to read a very severe lecture on this occasion ; but it be unnecessary to insert it here , as we have faithfully transcribe what he say to in the first book , most of which may be apply to the man , equally with the woman . so sensible a effect have these reproof on the young man , who be no hardened sinner , that he retire to he own room , where he pass the evening alone , in much melancholy contemplation . be sufficientely offende by this transgression of ; for notwithstand the assertion of , it be certain this worthy man have never indulge himself in any loose pleasure with woman , and greatly condemn the vice of incontinence in other . indeed , there be much reason to imagine that there be not the least truth in what western affirm , especially as he lay the scene of those
those impurity at the university , where have never be . in fact , the good squire be a little too apt to indulge that kind of pleasantry which be generally call rhodomontade : but which may , with as much propriety , be express by a much shorter word ; and perhaps we too often supply the use of this little monosyllable by other ; since very much of what frequently pass in the world for wit and humour , should , in the strictest purity of language , receive that short appellation , which , in conformity to the well - breed law of custom , I here suppress . but whatever detestation have to this or to any other vice , he be not so blinded by it but that he could discern any virtue in the guilty person , as clearly indeed as if there have be no mixture of vice in the same character . while he be angry therefore with the incontinence of , he be no less pleased with the honour and honesty of he self - accusation . he begin now to form in he mind the same opinion of this young fellow , which , we hope , we reader may have conceive . and in balance he fault with he perfection , the latter see rather to preponderate . it be to no purpose , therefore , that , who be immediately charge by with the story , unbend all he rancour against poor . give a patient hearing to they invective , and then answer coldly : " that young man of 's complexion be too generally addicte to this vice ; but he believe that be sincerely affect with what he have say to he on the occasion , and he hope he would not transgress again . " so that , as the day of whipping be at a end , the tutor have no other vent but he own mouth for he gall , the usual poor resource of impotent revenge . but , who be a less violent , be a much more artful man ; and as he hat more perhaps than himself do , so he contrive to do he more mischief in the mind of . the reader must remember the several little incidents of the partridge , the horse , and the , which be recount in the second book . by all which have rather improved than injure the affection which be inclin to entertain for he . the same , I believe , must have happen to he with every other person who hath any idea of friendship , generosity , and greatness of spirit , that be to say , who hath any trace of goodness in he mind . himself be not unacquaint with the true impression which those several instance of goodness have make on the excellent heart of ; for the philosopher very well know what virtue be , though he be not always perhaps steady in its pursuit ; but as for , from what reason I will not determine , no such thought ever enter into he head : he see in a bad light , and he imagine see he in the same , but that he be resolve , from pride and stubbornness of spirit , not to give up the boy whom he have once cherish ; since by so do , he must tacitly acknowledge that he former opinion of he have be wrong . therefore embrace this opportunity of injure in the tenderest part , by give a very bad turn to all these before - mention occurrence . " I be sorry , sir , " say he , " to own I have be deceive as well as yourself . I could not , I confess , help be pleased with what I ascribe to the motive of friendship , though it be carry to a excess , and all excess be faulty and vicious : but in this i make allowance for . little do I suspect that the sacrifice of truth , which we both imagine to have be make to friendship , be in reality a prostitution of it to a deprave and debauch appetite . you now plainly see whence all the see generosity of this young man to the family of the gamekeeper proceed . he support the father in order to corrupt the daughter , and preserve the family from starving , to bring one of they to shame and ruin . this be friendship ! this be generosity ! as say , ` Gluttons who give high price for delicacies , be very worthy to be call generous . ' in short I be resolve , from this instance , never to give way to the weakness of human nature more , nor to think anything virtue which doth not exactly quadrate with the unerring rule of right . " the goodness of Allworthy have prevent those consideration from occur to himself ; yet be they too plausible to be absolutely and hastily reject , when laid before he eye by another . indeed what have say sink very deeply into he mind , and the uneasiness which it there create be very visible to the other ; though the good man would not acknowledge this , but make a very slight answer , and forcibly drive off the discourse to some other subject . it be well perhaps for poor , that no such suggestion have be make before he be pardon ; for they certainly stamp in the mind of the first bad impression concern . chapter xii . contain much clearer matter ; but which flow from the same fountain with those in the preceding chapter . the reader will be pleased , I believe , to return with I to . she pass the night ,
, after we see she last , in no very agreeable manner . sleep befriend she but little , and dream less . in the morning , when , she maid , attend she at the usual hour , she be find already up and drest . person who live two or three mile ' distance in the country be consider as next - door neighbour , and transaction at the one house fly with incredible celerity to the other . , therefore , have hear the whole story of 's shame ; which she , be of a very communicative temper , have no sooner enter the apartment of she mistress , than she begin to relate in the follow manner :-- " , , what doth you la'ship think ? the girl that you lag ship see at church on , whom you think so handsome ; though you would not have think she so handsome neither , if you have see she nearer , but to be sure she hath be carry before the justice for be big with child . she seem to I to look like a confident slut : and to be sure she hath lay the child to yoing . and all the parish say be so angry with young , that he will not see he . to be sure , one can not help pity the poor young man , and yet he doth not deserve much pity neither , for demean himself with such kind of trumpery . yet he be so pretty a gentleman , I should be sorry to have he turn out of door . I dare to swear the wench be as willing as he ; for she be always a forward kind of body . and when wench be so come , young man be not so much to be blame neither ; for to be sure they do no more than what be natural . indeed it be beneath they to meddle with such dirty draggle - tail ; and whatever happen to they , it be good enough for they . and yet , to be sure , the vile baggage be most in fault . I wish , with all my heart , they be well to be whip at the cart 's tail ; for it be pity they should be the ruin of a pretty young gentleman ; and nobody can deny but that be one of the most handsomest young man that ever ---- " she be run on thus , when , with a more peevish voice than she have ever speak to she in before , cry , " , why dost thou trouble I with all this stuff ? what concern have I in what ? I suppose you be all alike . and you seem to I to be angry it be not you own case . " " I , ma 'be ! " answer , " I be sorry you ladyship should have such a opinion of I . I be sure nobody can say any such thing of I . all the young fellow in the world may go to the divil for I . because I say he be a handsome man ? everybody say it as well as I . to be sure , I never think as it be any harm to say a young man be handsome ; but to be sure I shall never think he so any more now ; for handsome be that handsome do . a beggar wench !--" " stop thy torrent of impertinence , " cry , " and see whether my father want I at breakfast . " then fling out of the room , mutter much to herself , of which " come up , I assure you , " be all that could be plainly distinguished . whether really deserve that suspicion , of which she mistress give she a hint , be a matter which we can not indulge we reader 's curiosity by resolving . we will , however , make he amend in disclosing what pass in the mind of . the reader will be pleased to recollect , that a secret affection for have insensibly steal into the bosom of this young lady . that it have there grow to a pretty great height before she herself have discover it . when she first begin to perceive its symptom , the sensation be so sweet and pleasing , that she have not resolution sufficient to check or repel they ; and thus she go on cherish a passion of which she never once consider the consequence . this incident relate to first open she eye . she now first perceive the weakness of which she have be guilty ; and though it cause the utmost perturbation in she mind , yet it have the effect of other nauseous physic , and for the time expel she distemper . it be operation indeed be most wonderfully quick ; and in the short interval , while she maid be absent , so entirely remove all symptom , that when return with a summon from she father , she be become perfectly easy , and have bring herself to a thorough indifference for . the disease of the mind do in almost every particular imitate those of the body . for which reason , we hope , that learn faculty , for whom we have so profound a respect , will pardon we the violent hand we have be necessitate to lay on several word and phrase , which of right belong to they , and without which we description must have be often unintelligible . now there be no one circumstance in which the distemper of the mind bear a more exact analogy to those which be call bodily , than that aptness which both have to a
a relapse . this be plain in the violent disease of ambition and avarice . I have know ambition , when cure at court by frequent disappointment ( which be the only physic for it ) , to break out again in a contest for foreman of the grand jury at a assize ; and have hear of a man who have so far conquer avarice , as to give away many a sixpence , that comforte himself , at last , on he deathbed , by make a crafty and advantageous bargain concern he ensuing funeral , with a undertaker who have marry he only child . in the affair of love , which , out of strict conformity with the philosophy , we shall here treat as a disease , this proneness to relapse be no less conspicuous . thus it happen to poor ; upon whom , the very next time she see young , all the former symptom return , and from that time cold and hot fit alternately seize she heart . the situation of this young lady be now very different from what it have ever be before . that passion which have formerly be so exquisitely delicious , become now a scorpion in she bosom . she resist it therefore with she utmost force , and summon every argument she reason ( which be surprisingly strong for she age ) could suggest , to subdue and expel it . in this she so far succeed , that she begin to hope from time and absence a perfect cure . she resolve therefore to avoid as much as possible ; for which purpose she begin to conceive a design of visit she aunt , to which she make no doubt of obtain she father 's consent . but , who have other design in she head , put a immediate stop to any such proceeding , by introduce a accident , which will be related in the next chapter . chapter xiii . a dreadful accident which befel . the gallant behaviour of , and the more dreadful consequence of that behaviour to the young lady ; with a short digression in favour of the female sex . grow every day fonder and fonder of , insomuch that he beloved dog themselves almost give place to she in he affections ; but as he could not prevail on himself to abandon these , he contrive very cunningly to enjoy they company , together with that of he daughter , by insist on she ride a hunting with he . , to whom she father 's word be a law , readily comply with he desire , though she have not the least delight in a sport , which be of too rough and masculine a nature to suit with she disposition . she have however another motive , beside she obedience , to accompany the old gentleman in the chase ; for by she presence she hope in some measure to restrain he impetuosity , and to prevent he from so frequently expose he neck to the utmost hazard . the strongest objection be that which would have formerly be a inducement to she , namely , the frequent meeting with young , whom she have determine to avoid ; but as the end of the hunting season now approach , she hope , by a short absence with she aunt , to reason herself entirely out of she unfortunate passion ; and have not any doubt of be able to meet he in the field the subsequent season without the least danger . on the second day of she hunt , as she be return from the chase , and be arrive within a little distance from 's house , she horse , whose mettlesome spirit require a better rider , fall suddenly to prance and cape in such a manner that she be in the most imminent peril of falling . , who be at a little distance behind , see this , and immediately gallop up to she assistance . as soon as he come up , he leapt from he own horse , and catch hold of hers by the bridle . the unruly beast presently rear himself a end on he hind leg , and throw he lovely burthan from he back , and catch she in he arm . she be so affect with the fright , that she be not immediately able to satisfy , who be very sollicitous to know whether she have receive any hurt . she soon after , however , recovere she spirits , assure he she be safe , and thanke he for the care he have take of she . answer , " if I have preserve you , madam , I be sufficiently repay ; for I promise you , I would have secure you from the least harm at the expense of a much greater misfortune to myself than I have suffer on this occasion . " " what misfortune ? " reply eagerly ; " I hope you have come to no mischief ? " " be not concerned , madam , " answer . " be praise you have escape so well , consider the danger you be in . if I have break my arm , I consider it as a trifle , in comparison of what I fear upon you account . " then scream out , " break you arm ! heaven forbid . " " I be afraid I have , madam , " say : " but I beg you will suffer I first to take care of you . I have a right hand yet at you service , to help you into the next field , whence we have but a very little walk to you father 's house . " see he left arm dangling by he side , while
while he be use the other to lead she , no longer doubt of the truth . she now grow much paler than she fear for herself have make she before . all she limb be seize with a trembling , insomuch that could scarce support she ; and as she thought be in no less agitation , she could not refrain from give a look so full of tenderness , that it almost argue a stronger sensation in she mind , than even gratitude and pity can raise in the gentlest female bosom , without the assistance of a third more powerful passion . , who be advanced at some distance when this accident happen , be now return , as be the rest of the horseman . immediately acquaint they with what have befall , and beg they to take care of he . upon which western , who have be much alarm by meet he daughter 's horse without its rider , and be now overjoyed to find she unhurt , cry out , " I be glad it be no worse . if hath break he arm , we will get a joiner to mmend un again . " the squire alight from he horse , and proceed to he house on foot , with he daughter and . a impartial spectator , who have meet they on the way , would , on view they several countenance , have conclude alone to have be the object of compassion : for as to , he exult in have probably save the life of the young lady , at the price only of a broken bone ; and , though he be not unconcerned at the accident which have befallen , be , however , delighted in a much higher degree with the fortunate escape of he daughter . the generosity of 's temper construe this behaviour of into great bravery ; and it make a deep impression on she heart : for certain it be , that there be no one quality which so generally recommend man to woman as this ; proceed , if we believe the common opinion , from that natural timidity of the sex , which be , say , " so great , that a woman be the most cowardly of all the creature ever make ;" -- a sentiment more remarkable for its bluntness than for its truth . , in he politics , doth they , I believe , more justice , when he say , " the modesty and fortitude of man differ from those virtue in woman ; for the fortitude which become a woman , would be cowardice in a man ; and the modesty which become a man , would be pertness in a woman . " be there , perhaps , more of truth in the opinion of those who derive the partiality which woman be inclin to show to the brave , from this excess of they fear . ( I think , in he article of ) impute this , and with greater probability , to they violent love of glory ; for the truth of which , we have the authority of he who of all other see farthest into human nature , and who introduce the heroine of he Odyssey , the great pattern of matrimonial love and constancy , assign the glory of she husband as the only source of she affection towards he . [ *] [ *] the english reader will not find this in the poem ; for the sentiment be entirely leave out in the translation . however this be , certain it be that the accident operate very strongly on ; and , indeed , after much enquiry into the matter , I be inclin to believe , that , at this very time , the charming make no less impression on the heart of ; to say truth , he have for some time become sensible of the irresistible power of she charms . xiv. the arrival of a surgeon . -- he operation , and a long dialogue between and she maid . when they arrive at 's hall , , who have totter along with much difficulty , sunk down in she chair ; but by the assistance of hartshorn and water , she be prevent from fainting away , and have pretty well recover she spirits , when the surgeon who be send for to appear . , who impute these symptom in he daughter to she fall , advise she to be presently bloode by way of prevention . in this opinion he be seconde by the surgeon , who give so many reasons for bleeding , and quote so many case where person have miscarry for want of it , that the squire become very importunate , and indeed insist peremptorily that he daughter should be bloode . soon yield to the command of she father , though entirely contrary to she own inclination , for she suspect , I believe , less danger from the fright , than either the squire or the surgeon . she then stretch out she beautiful arm , and the operator begin to prepare for he work . while the servant be busy in provide material , the surgeon , who impute the backwardness which have appear in to she fear , begin to comfort she with assurance that there be not the least danger ; for no accident , he say , could ever happen in bleeding , but from the monstrous ignorance of pretender to surgery , which he pretty plainly insinuate be not at present to be apprehend . declare she be not under the least apprehension ; add , " if you open a artery , I promise you I will forgive you . " " will you ? " cry western : " d -- and I ,
, if I will . if he do thee the least mischief , -- and I if I do not ha ' the heart 's blood of 'un out . " the surgeon assent to bleed she upon these condition , and then proceed to he operation , which he perform with as much dexterity as he have promise ; and with as much quickness : for he take but little blood from she , say , it be much safer to bleed again and again , than to take away too much at once . , when she arm be bound up , retire : for she be not willing ( nor be it , perhaps , strictly decent ) to be present at the operation on . indeed , one objection which she have to bleed ( though she do not make it ) be the delay which it would occasion to set the broken bone . for western , when be concerned , have no consideration but for she ; and as for himself , he " sit like patience on a monument smiling at grief . " to say the truth , when he see the blood spring from the lovely arm of , he scarce think of what have happene to himself . the surgeon now order he patient to be stript to he shirt , and then entirely ba the arm , he begin to stretch and examine it , in such a manner that the torture he put he to cause to make several wry face ; which the surgeon observe , greatly wonder at , cry , " what be the matter , sir ? I be sure it be impossible I should hurt you . " and then hold forth the broken arm , he begin a long and very learned lecture of anatomy , in which simple and double fracture be most accurately consider ; and the several way in which might have break he arm be discuss , with proper annotation show how many of these would have be better , and how many worse than the present case . have at length finish he laboured harangue , with which the audience , though it have greatly raise they attention and admiration , be not much edified , as they really understand not a single syllable of all he have say , he proceed to business , which he be more expeditious in finishing , than he have be in beginning . be then order into a bed , which compelle he to accept at he own house , and sentence of water - gruel be pass upon he . among the good company which have attend in the hall during the bone - setting , be one ; who be summon to she mistress as soon as it be over , and ask by she how the young gentleman do , presently launch into extravagant praise on the magnanimity , as she call it , of he behaviour , which , she say , " be so charme in so pretty a creature . " she then burst forth into much warmer encomium on the beauty of he person ; enumerat many particular , and end with the whiteness of he skin . this discourse have a effect on 's countenance , which would not perhaps have escape the observance of the sagacious waiting - woman , have she once look she mistress in the face , all the time she be speak : but as a look - glass , which be most commodiously place opposite to she , give she a opportunity of survey those feature , in which , of all other , she take most delight ; so she have not once remove she eye from that amiable object during she whole speech . be so intirely wrap up in the subject on which she exercise she tongue , and the object before she eye , that she give she mistress time to conquer she confusion ; which have do , she smile on she maid , and tell she , " she be certainly in love with this young fellow . " --" I in love , madam ! " answer she : " upon my word , ma 'am , I assure you , ma 'am , upon my soul , ma 'am , I be not . " --" why , if you be , " cry she mistress , " I see no reason that you should be asham of it ; for he be certainly a pretty fellow . " --" yes , ma 'am , " answer the other , " that he be , the most handsomest man I ever see in my life . yes , to be sure , that he be , and , as you ladyship say , I do not know why I should be asham of love he , though he be my better . to be sure , gentlefolk be but flesh and bland no more than we servants . besides , as for , thon hath make a gentleman of he , he be not so good as myself by birth : for thor I be a poor body , I be a honest person 's child , and my father and mother be marry , which be more than some people can say , as high as they hold they head . , come up ! I assure you , my dirty cousin ! thon he skin be so white , and to be sure it be the most whitest that ever be see , I be a as well as he , and nobody can say that I be base bear : my grandfather be a clergyman , [ * ] and would have be very angry , I believe , to have think any of he family
family should have take up with 's dirty leaving . " [ *] this be the second person of low condition whom we have record in this history to have sprung from the clergy . it be to be hope such instance will , in future age , when some provision be make for the family of the inferior clergy , appear stranger than they can be think at present . perhaps might have suffer she maid to run on in this manner , from want sufficient spirits to stop she tongue , which the reader may probably conjecture be no very easy task ; for certainly there be some passage in she speech which be far from be agreeable to the lady . however , she now check the torrent , as there see no end of its flow . " I wonder , " say she , " at you assurance in daring to talk thus of one of my father 's friend . as to the wench , I order you never to mention she name to I . and with regard to the young gentleman 's birth , those who can say nothing more to he disadvantage , may as well be silent on that head , as I desire you will be for the future . " " I be sorry I have offend you ladyship , " answer . " I be sure I hate as much as you ladyship can ; and as for abuse , I can call all the servants in the house to witness , that whenever any talk hath be about bastard , I have always take he part ; for which of you , say I to the footman , would not be a bastard , if he could , to be make a gentleman of ? and , say I , I be sure he be a very fine gentleman ; and he hath one of the whitest hand in the world ; for to be sure so he hath : and , say I , one of the sweetest temperedest , best naturedest man in the world he be ; and , say I , all the servants and neighbour all round the country love he . and , to be sure , I could tell you ladyship something , but that I be afraid it would offend you . " --" what could you tell I , ? " say . " Nay , ma 'am , to be sure he mean nothing by it , therefore I would not have you ladyship be offended . " -- " tell I , " say ; " I will know it this instant . " -- " why , ma 'am , " answer , " he come into the room one day last week when I be at work , and there lay you ladyship 's muff on a chair , and to be sure he put he hand into it ; that very muff you ladyship give I but yesterday . ! say I , , you will stretch my lady 's muff , and spoil it : but he still keep he hand in it : and then he kiss it -- to be sure I hardly ever see such a kiss in my life as he give it . " --" I suppose he do not know it be mine , " reply . " you ladyship shall hear , ma 'am . he kiss it again and again , and say it be the prettiest muff in the world . ! sir , say I , you have see it a hundred time . yes , , cry he ; but who can see anything beautiful in the presence of you lady but herself ? -- , that be not all neither ; but I hope you ladyship will not be offend , for to be sure he mean nothing . one day , as you ladyship be play on the harpsichord to my master , be sit in the next room , and methotch he look melancholy . ! say I , , what be the matter ? a penny for you thought , say I . why , hussy , say he , start up from a dream , what can I be think of , when that angel you mistress be play ? and then squeeze I by the hand , oh ! , say he , how happy will that man be !-- and then he sigh . upon my troth , he breath be as sweet as a nosegay . -- but to be sure he mean no harm by it . so I hope you ladyship will not mention a word ; for he give I a crown never to mention it , and make I swear upon a book , but I believe , indeed , it be not the . " till something of a more beautiful red than vermilion be find out , I shall say nothing of 's colour on this occasion . " Ho -- nour , " say she , " I -- if you will not mention this any more to I -- nor to anybody else , I will not betray you -- I mean , I will not be angry ; but I be afraid of you tongue . why , my girl , will you give it such liberty ? " --" Nay , ma 'am , " answer she , " to be sure , I would sooner cut out my tongue than offend you ladyship . to be sure I shall never mention a word that you ladyship would not have I . " --" why , I would not have you mention this any more , " say , " for it may come to my father 's ears , and he would
would be angry with ; though I really believe , as you say , he mean nothing . I should be very angry myself , if I imagine --" -- " Nay , ma 'am , " say , " I protest I believe he mean nothing . I think he talk as if he be out of he sense ; nay , he say he believe he be beside himself when he have speak the word . ay , sir , say I , I believe so too . yes , say he , Honou .--but I ask you ladyship 's pardon ; I could tear my tongue out for offend you . " " go on , " say ; " you may mention anything you have not tell I before ." --" yes , Honour , say he ( this be some time afterwards , when he give I the crown ) , I be neither such a coxcomb , or such a villain , as to think of she in any other delight but as my goddess ; as such I will always worship and adore she while I have breath .-- this be all , ma 'am , I will be swear , to the best of my remembrance . I be in a passion with he myself , till I find he mean no harm . " -- " indeed , , " say , " I believe you have a real affection for I . I be provoke the other day when I give you warning ; but if you have a desire to stay with I , you shall . " -- " to be sure , ma 'am , " answer , " I shall never desire to part with you ladyship . to be sure , I almost cry my eye out when you give I warning . it would be very ungrateful in I to desire to leave you ladyship ; because as why , I should never get so good a place again . I be sure I would live and die with you ladyship ; for , as poor say , happy be the man ---- " here the dinner bell interrupt a conversation which have wrotch such a effect on , that she be , perhaps , more obliged to she bleed in the morning , than she , at the time , have apprehend she should be . as to the present situation of she mind , I shall adhere to a rule of , by not attempt to describe it , from despair of success . most of my reader will suggest it easily to themselves ; and the few who cannot , would not understand the picture , or at least would deny it to be natural , if ever so well draw . . contain a portion of time somewhat longer Than . I . of the in writing , and for what purpose it be introduce . Peradventure there may be no part in this prodigious work which will give the reader less pleasure in the perusing , than those which have give the author the greatest pain in composing . among these probably may be reckon those initial essay which we have prefix to the historical matter contain in every book ; and which we have determine to be essentially necessary to this kind of writing , of which we have set ourselves at the head . for this we determination we do not hold ourselves strictly bound to assign any reason ; it be abundantly sufficient that we have lay it down as a rule necessary to be observe in all prosai-comi-epic writing . who ever demand the reason of that nice unity of time or place which be now establish to be so essential to dramatic poetry ? what crintic hath be ever ask , why a play may not contain two day as well as one ? or why the audience ( provide they travel , like elector , without any expense ) may not be waft fifty mile as well as five ? Hath any commentator well account for the limitation which a antient crintic hath set to the drama , which he will have contain neither more nor less than five act ? or hath any one live attempt to explain what the modern judge of we theatre mean by that word _low ; by which they have happily succeed in banish all humour from the stage , and have make the theatre as dull as a drawing - room ! upon all these occasion the world seem to have embrace a maxim of we law , viz. , _cuicunque in arte sua perito credendum est :_ for it seem perhaps difficult to conceive that any one should have have enough of impudence to lay down dogmatical rule in any art or science without the least foundation . in such case , therefore , we be apt to conclude there be sound and good reasons at the bottom , though we be unfortunately not able to see so far . now , in reality , the world have pay too great a compliment to critic , and have imagine they man of much greater profundity than they really be . from this complacence , the critic have be embolden to assume a dictatorial power , and have so far succeed , that they be now become the master , and have the assurance to give law to those author from whose predecessor they originally receive they . the crintic , rightly consider , be no more than the clerk , whose office it be to transcribe the rule and law lay down by those great judge whose vast strength of genius hath place they in the light of legislator , in the several sciences over which they preside . this office be all which the critic
critic of old aspire to ; nor do they ever dare to advance a sentence , without support it by the authority of the judge from whence it be borrowed . but in process of time , and in ag of ignorance , the clerk begin to invake the power and assume the dignity of he master . the law of writing be no longer found on the practice of the author , but on the dictate of the critic . the clerk become the legislator , and those very peremptorily give law whose business it be , at first , only to transcribe they . hence arise a obvious , and perhaps a unavoidable error ; for these critic be man of shallow capacity , very easily mistake mere form for substance . they act as a judge would , who should adhere to the lifeless letter of law , and reject the spirit . little circumstance , which be perhaps accidental in a great author , be by these critic consider to constitute he chief merit , and transmit as essential to be observe by all he successor . to these encroachment , time and ignorance , the two great supporter of imposture , give authority ; and thus many rule for good writing have be establish , which have not the least foundation in truth or nature ; and which commonly serve for no other purpose than to curb and restrain genius , in the same manner as it would have restrain the dancing - master , have the many excellent treatise on that art lay it down as a essential rule that every man must dance in chain . to avoid , therefore , all imputation of lay down a rule for posterity , found only on the authority of _ipse dixit _-- for which , to say the truth , we have not the profoundest veneration -- we shall here waive the privilege above contende for , and proceed to lay before the reader the reason which have induce we to intersperse these several digressive essay in the course of this work . and here we shall of necessity be lead to open a new vein of knowledge , which if it hath be discover , hath not , to we remembrance , be wrotch on by any antient or modern writer . this vein be no other than that of contrast , which run through all the work of the creation , and may probably have a large share in constituting in we the idea of all beauty , as well natural as artificial : for what demonstrate the beauty and excellence of anything but it be reverse ? thus the beauty of day , and that of summer , be set off by the horror of night and winter . and , I believe , if it be possible for a man to have see only the two former , he would have a very imperfect idea of they beauty . but to avoid too serious a air ; can it be doubt , but that the finest woman in the world would lose all benefit of she charms in the eye of a man who have never see one of another cast ? the lady themselves seem so sensible of this , that they be all industrious to procure foil : nay , they will become foil to themselves ; for I have observe ( at particularly ) that they endeaavor to appear as ugly as possible in the morning , in order to set off that beauty which they intend to show you in the evening . most artist have this secret in practice , though some , perhaps , have not much study the theory . the jeweller know that the finest brilliant require a foil ; and the painter , by the contrast of he figure , often acquire great applause . a great genius among we will illustrate this matter fully . I cannot , indeed , range he under any general head of common artist , as he hath a title to be place among those _Inventas qui vitbe excoluere per arte ._ who by invented art have life improve . I mean here the inventor of that most exquisite entertainment , call the . this entertainment consist of two part , which the inventor distinguished by the name of the serious and the comic . the seriious exhibit a certain number of heathan god and heroe , who be certainly the worst and dullest company into which a audience be ever introduce ; and ( which be a secret know to few ) be actually intend so to be , in order to contrast the comic part of the entertainment , and to display the trick of harlequin to the better advantage . this be , perhaps , no very civil use of such personage : but the contrivance be , nevertheless , ingenious enough , and have its effect . and this will now plainly appear , if , instead of serious and comic , we supply the word duller and dullest ; for the comic be certainly duller than anything before show on the stage , and could be set off only by that superlative degree of dulness which compose the serious . so intolerably serious , indeed , be these gods and heroe , that harlequin ( though the english gentleman of that name be not at all related to the french family , for he be of a much more serious disposition ) be always welcome on the stage , as he relieve the audience from worse company . Judicious writer have always practise this art of contrast with great success . I have be surprize that should cavil at this art in Homer ; but indeed he contradict himself in the very next line : _Indignor quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus ; Verum
Verum opere in longo fa est obrepere somnum ._ I grieve if e'er great Homer chance to sleep , yet slumber on long work have right to creep . for we be not here to understand , as perhaps some have , that a author actually fall asleep while he be write . it be true , that reader be too apt to be so overtaken ; but if the work be as long as any of , the author himself be too well entertaine to be subject to the least drowsiness . he be , as obserf , Sleepless himself to give he reader sleep . to say the truth , these soporific part be so many scene of serious artfully interwoven , in order to contrast and set off the rest ; and this be the true meaning of a late facetious writer , who tell the public that whenever he be dull they might be assure there be a design in it . in this light , then , or rather in this darkness , I would have the reader to consider these initial essay . and after this warning , if he shall be of opinion that he can find enough of serious in other part of this history , he may pass over these , in which we profess to be laboriously dull , and begin the follow book at the second chapter . . in which receive many friendly visit during he confinement ; with some fine touch of the passion of love , scarce visible to the naked eye . have many visitor during he confinement , though some , perhaps , be not very agreeable to he . see he almost every day ; but though he pitie 's suffering , and greatly approve the gallant behaviour which have occasion they ; yet he think this be a favourable opportunity to bring he to a sober sense of he indiscreet conduct ; and that wholesome advice for that purpose could never be apply at a more proper season than at the present , when the mind be soften by pain and sickness , and alarme by danger ; and when its attention be unembarrassed with those turbulent passion which engage we in the pursuit of pleasure . at all season , therefore , when the good man be alone with the youth , especially when the latter be totally at ease , he take occasion to remind he of he former miscarriage , but in the mildest and tenderest manner , and only in order to introduce the caution which he prescribe for he future behaviour ; " on which alone , " he assure he , " would depend he own felicity , and the kindness which he might yet promise himself to receive at the hand of he father by adoption , unless he should hereafter forfeit he good opinion : for as to what have past , " he say , " it should be all forgive and forgote . he therefore advise he to make a good use of this accident , that so in the end it might prove a visitation for he own good . " be likewise pretty assiduous in he visit ; and he too consider a sick - be to be a convenient scene for lecture . he stile , however , be more severe than 's : he tell he pupil , " that he ought to look on he broken limb as a judgment from heaven on he sins . that it would become he to be daily on he knee , pour forth thanksgiving that he have break he arm only , and not he neck ; which latter , " he say , " be very probably reserve for some future occasion , and that , perhaps , not very remote . for he part , " he say , " he have often wonder some judgment have not overtake he before ; but it might be perceive by this , that divine punishment , though slow , be always sure . " hence likewise he advise he , " to foresee , with equal certainty , the greater evils which be yet behind , and which be as sure as this of overtak he in he state of reprobacy . these be , " say he , " to be avert only by such a thorough and sincere repentance as be not to be expect or hope for from one so abandon in he youth , and whose mind , I be afraid , be totally corrupt . it be my duty , however , to exhort you to this repentance , though I too well know all exhortation will be vain and fruitless . but _liberavi animam meam ._ I can accuse my own conscience of no neglect ; though it be at the same time with the utmost concern I see you travel on to certain misery in this world , and to as certain damnation in the next . " talk in a very different strain ; he say , " such accident as a broken bone be below the consideration of a wise man . that it be abundantly sufficient to reconcile the mind to any of these mischance , to reflect that they be liable to befal the wisest of mankind , and be undoubtedly for the good of the whole . " he say , " it be a mere abuse of word to call those thing evils , in which there be no moral unfitness : that pain , which be the worst consequence of such accident , be the most contemptible thing in the world ; " with more of the like sentence , extracte out of the second book of 's question , and from the great . in pronouncing these he be one day so eager , that he
he unfortunately bit he tongue ; and in such a manner , that it not only put a end to he discourse , but create much emotion in he , and cause he to mutter a oath or two : but what be worst of all , this accident give , who be present , and who hold all such doctrine to be heathenish and atheistical , a opportunity to clap a judgment on he back . now this be done with so malicious a sneer , that it totally unhinged ( if I may so say ) the temper of the philosopher , which the bite of he tongue have somewhat ruffle ; and as he be disable from vent he wrath at he lip , he have possibly find a more violent method of revenge himself , have not the surgeon , who be then luckily in the room , contrary to he own interest , interpose and preserve the peace . visit he friend but seldom , and never alone . this worthy young man , however , profess much regard for he , and as great concern at he misfortune ; but cautiously avoid any intimacy , lest , as he frequently hint , it might contaminate the sobriety of he own character : for which purpose he have constantly in he mouth that proverb in which speak against evil communication . not that he be so bitter as ; for he always express some hope of 's reformation ; " which , " he say , " the unparalleled goodness show by he uncle on this occasion , must certainly effect in one not absolutely abandon : " but conclude , " if ever offend hereafter , I shall not be able to say a syllable in he favour . " as to , he be seldom out of the sick - room , unless when he be engage either in the field or over he bottle . Nay , he would sometimes retire hither to take he beer , and it be not without difficulty that he be prevent from force to take he beer too : for no quack ever hold he nostrum to be a more general panacea than he do this ; which , he say , have more virtue in it than be in all the physic in a apothecary 's shop . he be , however , by much entreaty , prevail on to forbear the application of this medicine ; but from serenad he patient every hunt morning with the horn under he window , it be impossible to withhold he ; nor do he ever lay aside that hallow , with which he enter into all company , when he visit , without any regard to the sick person 's be at that time either awake or asleep . this boisterous behaviour , as it mean no harm , so happily it effect none , and be abundantly compensate to , as soon as he be able to sit up , by the company of , whom the squire then bring to visit he ; nor be it , indeed , long before be able to attend she to the harpsichord , where she would kindly condescmend , for hour together , to charm he with the most delicious music , unless when the squire think proper to interrupt she , by insist on , or some other of he favourite piece . Notwithstand the nicest guard which endeavoure to set on she behaviour , she could not avoid let some appearances now and then slip forth : for love may again be like to a disease in this , that when it be deny a vent in one part , it will certainly break out in another . what she lip , therefore , conceal , she eye , she blush , and many little involuntary action , betrayed . one day , when be play on the harpsichord , and be attend , the squire come into the room , cry , " there , , I have have a battle for thee below - stair with thick parson Thwackum . he hath be a tell , before my face , that the broken bone be a judgment upon thee . d -- and it , say I , how can that be ? do he not come by it in defence of a young woman ? a judgament indeed ! Pox , if he never doth anything worse , he will go to heaven sooner than all the parson in the country . he hath more reason to glory in it than to be asham of it . " -- " indeed , sir , " say , " I have no reason for either ; but if it preserve , I shall always think it the happiest accident of my life . " -- " and to gu , " say the squire , " to zet against thee vor it ! d -- and un , if the parson have unt he petticuoat on , I should have lent un of flick ; for I love thee dearly , my boy , and -- n I if there be anything in my power which I will not do for thee . Shaot take thy choice of all the horse in my stable to - morrow morning , except only the and . " thank he , but decline accept the offer . " Nay , " add the squire , " sh a't ha the sorrel mare that rode . she cost I fifty guinea , and come six year old this grass . " " if she have cost I a thousand , " cry passionately , " I would have give she to the dog . " " Pooh ! pooh ! " answer western ; " what ! because she
she break thy arm ? Shouldst forget and forgive . I think hadst be more a man than to bear malice against a dumb creature . " -- Here interpose , and put a end to the conversation , by desire she father 's leave to play to he ; a request which he never refuse . the countenance of have undergone more than one change during the foregoing speech ; and probably she impute the passionate resentment which have express against the mare , to a different motive from that from which she father have derive it . she spirit be at this time in a visible flutter ; and she play so intolerably ill , that have not western soon fall asleep , he must have remark it . , however , who be sufficientely awake , and be not without a ear any more than without eyes , make some observation ; which be join to all which the reader may remember to have pass formerly , give he pretty strong assurance , when he come to reflect on the whole , that all be not well in the tender bosom of ; a opinion which many young gentleman will , I doubt not , extremely wonder at he not have be well confirm in long ago . to confess the truth , he have rather too much diffidence in himself , and be not forward enough in see the advances of a young lady ; a misfortune which can be cure only by that early town education , which be at present so generally in fashion . when these thought have fully take possession of , they occasion a perturbation in he mind , which , in a constitution less pure and firm than he , might have be , at such a season , attend with very dangerous consequence . he be truly sensible of the great worth of . he extremely like she person , no less admire she accomplishment , and tenderly love she goodness . in reality , as he have never once entertaine any thought of possesse she , nor have ever give the least voluntary indulgence to he inclination , he have a much stronger passion for she than he himself be acquaint with . he hebe now bring forth the full secret , at the same time that it assure he the adorable object return he affection . chapter iii . which all who have no heart will think to contain much adue about nothing . the reader will perhaps imagine the sensation which now arise in to have be so sweet and delicious , that they would rather tend to produce a chearful serenity in the mind , than any of those dangerous effect which we have mention ; but in fact , sensation of this kind , however delicious , be , at they first recognition , of a very tumultuous nature , and have very little of the opiate in they . they be , moreover , in the present case , embitter with certain circumstance , which be mix with sweeter ingredient , ten altogether to compose a dratch that might be term bitter - sweet ; than which , as nothing can be more disagreeable to the palate , so nothing , in the metaphorical sense , can be so injuriious to the mind . for first , though he have sufficient foundation to flatter himself in what he have observe in , he be not yet free from doubt of misconstruing compassion , or at best , esteem , into a warmer regard . he be far from a sanguine assurance that have any such affection towards he , as might promise he inclination that harvest , which , if they be encourage and nurse , they would finally grow up to require . besides , if he could hope to find no bar to he happiness from the daughter , he think himself certain of meet a effectual bar in the father ; who , though he be a country squire in he diversion , be perfectly a man of the world in whatever regard he fortune ; have the most violent affection for he only daughter , and have often signified , in he cup , the pleasure he propose in see she marry to one of the richest man in the county . be not so vain and senseless a coxcomb as to expect , from any regard which western have profess for he , that he would ever be induce to lay aside these view of advance he daughter . he well know that fortune be generally the principal , if not the sole , consideration , which operate on the best of parent in these matters : for friendship make we warmly espouse the interest of other ; but it be very cold to the gratification of they passion . indeed , to feel the happiness which may result from this , it be necessary we should possess the passion ourselves . as he have therefore no hope of obtain she father 's consent ; so he think to endeaavor to succeed without it , and by such means to frustrate the great point of 's life , be to make a very ill use of he hospitality , and a very ungrateful return to the many little favour receive ( however roughly ) at he hand . if he see such a consequence with horror and disdain , how much more be he shock with what regard ; to whom , as he have more than filial obligation , so have he for he more than filial piety ! he know the nature of that good man to be so averse to any baseness or treachery , that the least attempt of such a kind would make the sight of the guilty person for ever odious to he
he eye , and he name a detestable sound in he ear . the appearance of such unsurmountable difficulty be sufficient to have inspire he with despair , however ardent he wish have be ; but even these be contruol by compassion for another woman . the idea of lovely now intrude itself before he . he have swear eternal constancy in she arm , and she have as often vow never to out - live he desert she . he now see she in all the most shocking posture of death ; nay , he consider all the misery of prostitution to which she would be liable , and of which he would be doubly the occasion ; first by seducing , and then by desert she ; for he well know the hatred which all she neighbour , and even she own sister , bear she , and how ready they would all be to tear she to piece . indeed , he have expose she to more envy than shame , or rather to the latter by means of the former : for many woman abuse she for be a whore , while they envy she she lover , and she finery , and would have be themselves glad to have purchase these at the same rate . the ruin , therefore , of the poor girl must , he foresee , unavoidably attend he desert she ; and this thought sting he to the soul . Poverty and distress seem to he to give none a right of aggravate those misfortune . the meanness of she condition do not represent she misery as of little consequence in he eye , nor do it appear to justify , or even to palliate , he guilt , in bring that misery upon she . but why do I mention justification ? he own heart would not suffer he to destroy a human creature who , he think , love he , and have to that love sacrifice she innocence . he own good heart plead she cause ; not as a cold venal advocate , but as one interested in the event , and which must itself deeply share in all the agony its owner bring on another . when this powerful advocate have sufficiently raise the pity of , by painting poor in all the circumstance of wretchedness ; it artfully call in the assistance of another passion , and represent the girl in all the amiable colour of youth , health , and beauty ; as one greatly the object of desire , and much more so , at least to a good mind , from be , at the same time , the object of compassion . Amidst these thought , poor pass a long sleepless night , and in the morning the result of the whole be to abide by , and to think no more of . in this virtuous resolution he continue all the next day till the evening , cherish the idea of , and drive from he thought ; but in the fatal evening , a very trifling accident set all he passion again on float , and work so total a change in he mind , that we think it decent to communicate it in a fresh chapter . chapter iv . a little chapter , in which be contain a little incident . among other visitant , who pay they compliment to the young gentleman in he confinement , be one . the reader , perhaps , when he reflect on some expression which have formerly dropt from she , may conceive that she herself have a very particular affection for ; but , in reality , it be no such thing . be a handsome young fellow ; and for that species of man have some regard ; but this be perfectly indiscriminate ; for have be cross in the love which she bear a certain nobleman 's footman , who have basely desert she after a promise of marriage , she have so securely keep together the broken remains of she heart , that no man have ever since be able to possess himself of any single fragment . she viewed all handsome man with that equal regard and benevolence which a sober and virtuous mind bear to all the good . she might indeed be call a lover of man , as be a lover of mankind , prefer one to another for corporeal , as he for mental qualifications ; but never carry this preference so far as to cause any perturbation in the philosophical serenity of she temper . the day after have that conflict with himself which we have see in the preceding chapter , come into he room , and find he alone , begin in the follow manner :--" , sir , where do you think I have be ? I warrant you , you would not guess in fifty year ; but if you do guess , to be sure I must not tell you neither . " -- " Nay , if it be something which you must not tell I , " say , " I shall have the curiosity to enquire , and I know you will not be so barbarous to refuse I . " --" I do not know , " cry she , " why I should refuse you neither , for that matter ; for to be sure you will not mention it any more . and for that matter , if you know where I have be , unless you know what I have be about , it would not signify much . Nay , I do not see why it should be keep a secret for my part ; for to be sure she be the best lady in the world . " upon this , begin to beg earnestly to
to be let into this secret , and faithfully promise not to divulge it . she then proceed thus :--" why , you must know , sir , my young lady send I to enquire after , and to see whether the wench want anything ; to be sure , I do not care to go , methink ; but servants must do what they be order .-- how could you undervalue yourself so , ?-- so my lady bid I go and carry she some linen , and other thing . she be too good . if such forward slut be send to , it would be better for they . I tell my lady , say I , madam , you la'ship be encourage idleness . " -- " and be my so good ? " say . " my ! I assure you , marry come up , " answer . " and yet if you know all -- indeed , if I be as , I should look a little higher than such trumpery as . " " what do you mean by these word , " reply , " if I know all ? " " I mean what I mean , " say . " do not you remember put you hand in my lady 's muff once ? I vow I could almost find in my heart to tell , if I be certain my lady would never come to the hearing of n't . " then make several solemn protestation . and Honou proceed -- " then to be sure , my lady give I that muff ; and afterwards , upon hear what you have do " --" then you tell she what I have do ? " interrupt . " if I do , sy , " answer she , " you need not be angry with I . many be the man would have give he head to have have my lady tell , if they have know , -- for , to be sure , the biggest lord in the land might be proud -- but , I protest , I have a great mind not to tell you . " fall to entreaty , and soon prevail on she to go on thus . " you must know then , sir , that my lady have give this muff to I ; but about a day or two after I have tell she the story , she quarrel with she new muff , and to be sure it be the prettiest that ever be see . Honou , say she , this be a odious muff ; it be too big for I , I can not wear it : till I can get another , you must let I have my old one again , and you may have this in the room of n't -- for she be a good lady , and scorn to give a thing and take a thing , I promise you then . so to be sure I fetch it she back again , and , I believe , she hath wear it upon she arm almost ever since , and I warrant hath give it many a kiss when nobody hath see she . " here the conversation be interrupt by western himself , who come to to the harpsichord ; whither the poor young fellow go all pale and trembling . this western observ , but , on see , impute it to a wrong cause ; and have give a hearty curse between jest and earnest , he bid he beat abroad , and not poach up the game in he warren . look this evening with more than usual beauty , and we may believe it be no small addition to she charms , in the eye of , that she now happen to have on she right arm this very muff . she be play one of she father 's favourite tune , and he be lean on she chair , when the muff fell over she finger , and put she out . this so disconcert the squire , that he snatch the muff from she , and with a hearty curse throw it into the fire . instantly start up , and with the utmost eagerness recover it from the flame . though this incident will probably appear of little consequence to many of we reader ; yet , trifl as it be , it have so violent a effect on poor Jones , that we think it we duty to relate it . in reality , there be many little circumstance too often omit by injudicious historian , from which event of the utmost importance arise . the world may indeed be consider as a vast machine , in which the great wheel be originally set in motion by those which be very minute , and almost imperceptible to any but the strongest eye . thus , not all the charms of the incomparable ; not all the dazzling brightness , and languish softness of she eye ; the harmony of she voice , and of she person ; not all she wit , good - humour , greatness of mind , or sweetness of disposition , have be able so absolutely to conquer and enslave the heart of poor Jones , as this little incident of the muff . thus the poet sweetly sings of -- _-- dolis lachrymisque coacto Quos neque Tydides , nec Larissaeus Achille , non anni domuere decem , non mille Carinae ._ what Diomede or tThetis ' greater son , a thousand ship , nor ten year ' siege have do false tear and fawn word the city win . the citadel of be now take by surprize . all those consideration of honour and prudence which we heroe have lately with so much military wisdom place
place as guard over the avenue of he heart , run away from they post , and the god of love march in , in triumph . v. a very long chapter , contain a very great incident . but though this victorious deity easily expel he avow enemy from the heart of , he find it more difficult to supplant the garrison which he himself have place there . to lay aside all allegory , the concern for what must become of poor greatly disturb and perplex the mind of the worthy youth . the superior merit of totally eclipse , or rather extinguish , all the beauty of the poor girl ; but compassion instead of contempt succeed to love . he be convince the girl have place all she affections , and all she prospect of future happiness , in he only . for this he have , he know , give sufficient occasion , by the utmost profusion of tenderness towards she : a tenderness which he have take every means to persuade she he would always maintain . she , on she side , have assure he of she firm belief in he promise , and have with the most solemn vow declare , that on he fulfilling or break these promise , it depend , whether she should be the happiest or most miserable of womankind . and to be the author of this highest degree of misery to a human being , be a thought on which he could not bear to ruminate a single moment . he consider this poor girl as have sacrifice to he everything in she little power ; as have be at she own expense the object of he pleasure ; as sigh and languish for he even at that very instant . shall then , say he , my recovery , for which she hath so ardently wish ; shall my presence , which she hath so eagerly expect , instead of give she that joy with which she hath flatter herself , cast she at once down into misery and despair ? can I be such a villain ? here , when the genius of poor seem triumphant , the love of towards he , which now appear no longer dubious , rush upon he mind , and bore away every obstacle before it . at length it occur to he , that he might possibly be able to make amend another way ; namely , by give she a sum of money . this , nevertheless , he almost despaire of she accept , when he recollect the frequent and vehement assurance he have receive from she , that the world put in balance with he would make she no amend for he loss . however , she extreme poverty , and chiefly she egregious vanity ( somewhat of which hath be already hinte to the reader ) , give he some little hope , that , notwithstand all she avow tenderness , she might in time be bring to contend herself with a fortune superior to she expectation , and which might indulge she vanity , by set she above all she equal . he resolve therefore to take the first opportunity of make a proposal of this kind . one day , accordingly , when he arm be so well recover that he could walk easily with it sling in a sash , he steal forth , at a season when the squire be engage in he field exercise , and visit he fair one . she mother and sister , whom he find take they tea , inform he first that be not at home ; but afterwards the eldest sister acquaint he , with a malicious smile , that she be above stair a - bed . have no objection to this situation of he mistress , and immediately ascend the ladder which lead towards she bed - chamber ; but when he come to the top , he , to he great surprize , find the door fast ; nor could he for some time obtain any answer from within ; for , as she herself afterwards inform he , be fast asleep . the extrem of grief and joy have be remark to produce very similar effect ; and when either of these rush on we by surprize , it be apt to create such a total perturbation and confusion , that we be often thereby deprive of the use of all we faculty . it can not therefore be wonder at , that the unexpected sight of should so strongly operate on the mind of , and should overwhelm she with such confusion , that for some minute she be unable to express the great rapture , with which the reader will suppose she be affect on this occasion . as for , he be so entirely possess , and as it be enchant , by the presence of he beloved object , that he for a while forget , and consequently the principal purpose of he visit . this , however , soon recur to he memory ; and after the first transport of they meeting be over , he find mean by degree to introduce a discourse on the fatal consequence which must attend they amour , if , who have strictly forbidden he ever see she more , should discover that he still carry on this commerce . such a discovery , which he enemy give he reason to think would be unavoidable , must , he say , end in he ruin , and consequently in hers . since therefore they hard fate have determine that they must separate , he advise she to bear it with resolution , and swore he would never omit any opportunity , through the course of he life , of show she the sincerity of he affection , by
by provide for she in a manner beyond she utmost expectation , or even beyond she wish , if ever that should be in he power ; conclude at last , that she might soon find some man who would marry she , and who would make she much happier than she could be by lead a disreputable life with he . remain a few moment in silence , and then burst into a flood of tear , she begin to upbraid he in the follow word : " and this be you love for I , to forsake I in this manner , now you have ruin I ! how often , when I have tell you that all man be false and perjury alike , and grow tired of we as soon as ever they have have they wicked wills of we , how often have you swear you would never forsake I ! and can you be such a perjury man after all ? what signify all the riche in the world to I without you , now you have gain my heart , so you have -- you have -- ? why do you mention another man to I ? I can never love any other man as long as I live . all other man be nothing to I . if the greatest squire in all the country would come a suiting to I to - morrow , I would not give my company to he . no , I shall always hate and despise the whole sex for you sake . " -- she be proceed thus , when a accident put a stop to she tongue , before it have run out half its career . the room , or rather garret , in which lay , be up one pair of stair , that be to say , at the top of the house , be of a slop figure , resembl the great of the Greek . the english reader may perhaps form a better idea of it , by be tell that it be impossible to stand upright anywhere but in the middle . now , as this room want the conveniency of a closet , have , to supply that defect , nail up a old rug against the rafter of the house , which enclose a little hole where she best apparel , such as the remains of that sack which we have formerly mention , some cap , and other thing with which she have lately provide herself , be hang up and secure from the dust . this enclose place exactly front the foot of the bed , to which , indeed , the rug hung so near , that it serve in a manner to supply the want of curtain . now , whether , in the agony of she rage , push this rug with she foot ; or might touch it ; or whether the pin or nail give way of its own accord , I be not certain ; but as pronounce those last word , which be record above , the wicked rug get loose from its fastening , and discover everything hide behind it ; where among other female utensil appear --( with shame I write it , and with sorrow will it be read ) -- the , in a posture ( for the place would not near admit he stand upright ) as ridiculous as can possibly be conceive . the posture , indeed , in which he stand , be not greatly unlike that of a soldier who be tie neck and heel ; or rather resembl the attitude in which we often see fellow in the public street of , who be not suffer but deserive punishment by so standing . he have a nightcap belong to on he head , and he two large eye , the moment the rug fell , stare directly at ; so that when the idea of philosophy be add to the figure now discover , it would have be very difficult for any spectator to have refrain from immoderate laughter . I question not but the surprize of the reader will be here equal to that of ; as the suspicions which must arise from the appearance of this wise and grave man in such a place , may seem so inconsistent with that character which he hath , doubtless , maintain hithertoo , in the opinion of every one . but to confess the truth , this inconsistency be rather imaginary than real . Philosopher be compose of flesh and blood as well as other human creature ; and however sublimate and refin the theory of these may be , a little practical frailty be as incident to they as to other mortal . it be , indeed , in theory only , and not in practice , as we have before hinted , that consist the difference : for though such great being think much better and more wisely , they always act exactly like other man . they know very well how to subdue all appetite and passion , and to despise both pain and pleasure ; and this knowledge affords much delightful contemplation , and be easily acquire ; but the practice would be vexatious and troublesome ; and , therefore , the same wisdom which teach they to know this , teach they to avoid carry it into execution . happen to be at church on that , when , as the reader may be pleased to remember , the appearance of in she sack have cause all that disturbance . here he first observ she , and be so pleased with she beauty , that he prevail with the young gentleman to change they intend ride that even , that he might pass by the habitation of , and by that mean might obtain
obtain a second chance of see she . this reason , however , as he do not at that time mention to any , so neither do we think proper to communicate it then to the reader . among other particulars which constitute the unfitness of thing in 's opinion , danger and difficulty be two . the difficulty therefore which he apprehend there might be in corrupt this young wench , and the danger which would accrue to he character on the discovery , be such strong dissuasive , that it be probable he at first intend to have contente himself with the pleasing idea which the sight of beauty furnish we with . these the gravest man , after a full meal of serious meditation , often allow themselves by way of dessert : for which purpose , certain book and picture find they way into the most private recess of they study , and a certain liquorish part of natural philosophy be often the principal subject of they conversation . but when the philosopher hear , a day or two afterwards , that the fortress of virtue have already be subdue , he begin to give a larger scope to he desire . he appetite be not of that squeamish kind which can not feed on a dainty because another hath taste it . in short , he like the girl the better for the want of that chastity , which , if she have possess it , must have be a bar to he pleasure ; he pursue and obtain she . the reader will be mistaken , if he think give the preference to she younger lover : on the contrary , have she be confine to the choice of one only , would undoubtedly have be , of the two , the victorious person . be it solely the consideration that two be better than one ( though this have its proper weight ) to which owed he success : the absence of during he confinement be a unlucky circumstance ; and in that interval some well - choose present from the philosopher so soften and unguard the girl 's heart , that a favourable opportunity become irresistible , and triumph over the poor remains of virtue which subsist in the bosom of . it be now about a fortnight since this conquest , when pay the above -mentioned visit to he mistress , at a time when she and be in bed together . this be the true reason why the mother deny she as we have see ; for as the old woman share in the profit arise from the iniquity of she daughter , she encourage and protect she in it to the utmost of she power ; but such be the envy and hatre which the elder sister bear towards , that , notwithstand she have some part of the booty , she would willingly have part with this to ruin she sister and spoil she trade . hence she have acquaint with she be above - stair in bed , in hope that he might have catch she in 's arm . this , however , find means to prevent , as the door be fasten ; which give she a opportunity of convey she lover behind that rug or blanket where he now be unhappily discover . Square no sooner make he appearance than flng herself back in she bed , cry out she be undone , and abandon herself to despair . this poor girl , who be yet but a novice in she business , have not arrive to that perfection of assurance which help off a town lady in any extremity ; and either prompt she with a excuse , or else inspire she to brazen out the matter with she husband , who , from love of quiet , or out of fear of he reputation -- and sometimes , perhaps , from fear of the gallant , who , like in the play , wear a sword -- be glad to shut he eye , and content to put he horn in he pocket . , on the contrary , be silence by this evidence , and very fairly give up a cause which she have hitherto maintain with so many tear , and with such solemn and vehement protestation of the purest love and constancy . as to the gentleman behind the arra , he be not in much less consternation . he stand for a while motionless , and see equally at a loss what to say , or whither to direct he eye . , though perhaps the most astonished of the three , first find he tongue ; and be immediately recover from those uneasy sensation which by she upbraiding have occasion , he burst into a loud laughter , and then salut , advance to take he by the hand , and to relieve he from he place of confinement . be now arrive in the middle of the room , in which part only he could stand upright , look at with a very grave countenance , and say to he , " well , sir , I see you enjoy this mighty discovery , and , I dare swear , take great delight in the thought of expose I ; but if you will consider the matter fairly , you will find you be yourself only to blame . I be not guilty of corrupting innocence . I have do nothing for which that part of the world which judge of matter by the rule of right , will condemn I . fitness be govern by the nature of thing , and not by custom , form , or municipal law . nothing be indeed unfit which be not unnatural . " -- " well reason , old boy , " answer ; " but why dost
dost thou think that I should desire to expose thee ? I promise thee , I be never better pleased with thee in my life ; and unless thou hast a mind to discover it thyself , this affair may remain a profound secret for I . " -- " Nay , , " reply , " I would not be think to undervalue reputation . good fame be a species of the , and it be by no means fitte to neglect it . besides , to murder one 's own reputation be a kind of suicide , a detestable and odious vice . if you think proper , therefore , to conceal any infirmity of mine ( for such I may have , since no man be perfectly perfect ) , I promise you I will not betray myself . thing may be fitte to be do , which be not fit to be boast of ; for by the perverse judgment of the world , that often become the subject of censure , which be , in truth , not only innocent but laudable . " -- " right ! " cry : " what can be more innocent than the indulgence of a natural appetite ? or what more laudable than the propagation of we species ? " --" to be serious with you , " answer , " I profess they always appear so to I . " -- " and yet , " say , " you be of a different opinion when my affair with this girl be first discover . " --" why , I must confess , " say , " as the matter be misrepresent to I , by that parson Thwackum , I might condemn the corruption of innocence : it be that , sir , it be that -- and that --: for you must know , , in the consideration of fitness , very minute circumstance , sir , very minute circumstance cause great alteration . " -- " well , " cry , " be that as it will , it shall be you own fault , as I have promise you , if you ever hear any more of this adventure . Behave kindly to the girl , and I will never open my lip concern the matter to any one . and , , do you be faithful to you friend , and I will not only forgive you infidelity to I , but will do you all the service I can . " so say , he take a hasty leave , and , slipp down the ladder , retire with much expedition . be rejoiced to find this adventure be likely to have no worse conclusion ; and as for , be recover from she confusion , she begin at first to upbraid Square with have be the occasion of she loss of ; but that gentleman soon find the means of mitigate she anger , partly by caress , and partly by a small nostrum from he purse , of wonderful and approve efficacy in purge off the ill humours of the mind , and in restore it to a good temper . she then pour forth a vast profusion of tenderness towards she new lover ; turn all she have say to , and himself , into ridicule ; and vow , though he once have the possession of she person , that none but have ever be master of she heart . chapter vi . by compare which with the former , the reader may possibly correct some abuse which he hath formerly be guilty of in the application of the word love . the infidelity of , which have now discover , would , perhaps , have vindicate a much greater degree of resentment than he express on the occasion ; and if he have abandon she directly from that moment , very few , I believe , would have blame he . , however , it be , that he see she in the light of compassion ; and though he love to she be not of that kind which could give he any great uneasiness at she inconstancy , yet be he not a little shocked on reflec that he have himself originally corrupt she innocence ; for to this corruption he impute all the vice into which she appear now so likely to plunge herself . this consideration give he no little uneasiness , till , the elder sister , be so kind , some time afterwards , entirely to cure he by a hint , that one , and not himself , have be the first seducer of ; and that the little child , which he have hitherto so certainly conclude to be he own , might very probably have a equal title , at least , to claim for its father . eagerly pursue this scent when he have first receive it ; and in a very short time be sufficiently assure that the girl have tell he truth , not only by the confession of the fellow , but at last by that of herself . this will be a country gallant , and have acquire as many trophy of this kind as any ensign or attorney 's clerk in the kingdom . he have , indeed , reduce several woman to a state of utter profligacy , have break the heart of some , and have the honour of occasion the violent death of one poor girl , who have either drown herself , or , what be rather more probable , have be drown by he . among other of he conquest , this fellow have triumph over the heart of . he have make love to she long before be grow to be a fit object of that pastime ; but have afterwards desert she , and apply to
to she sister , with whom he have almost immediate success . now will have , in reality , the sole possession of 's affection , while and be almost equally sacrifice to she interest and to she pride . hence have grow that implacable hatred which we have before see rage in the mind of ; though we do not think it necessary to assign this cause sooner , as envy itself alone be adequate to all the effect we have mention . be become perfectly easy by possession of this secret with regard to ; but as to , he be far from be in a state of tranquillity ; nay , indeed , he be under the most violent perturbation ; he heart be now , if I may use the metaphor , entirely evacuate , and take absolute possession of it . he love she with a unbounded passion , and plainly see the tender sentiment she have for he ; yet could not this assurance lessen he despair of obtain the consent of she father , nor the horror which attend he pursuit of she by any base or treacherous method . the injury which he must thus do to , and the concern which would accrue to , be circumstance that torment he all day , and haunt he on he pillow at night . he life be a constant struggle between honour and inclination , which alternately triumph over each other in he mind . he often resolve , in the absence of , to leave she father 's house , and to see she no more ; and as often , in she presence , forget all those resolution , and determined to pursue she at the hazard of he life , and at the forfeiture of what be much dearer to he . this conflict begin soon to produce very strong and visible effect : for he lose all he usual sprightliness and gaiety of temper , and become not only melancholy when alone , but deject and absent in company ; nay , if ever he put on a force mirth , to comply with 's humour , the constraint appear so plain , that he seem to have be give the strongest evidence of what he endeavoure to conceal by such ostentation . it may , perhaps , be a question , whether the art which he use to conceal he passion , or the means which honest nature employ to reveal it , betraye he most : for while art make he more than ever reserve to , and forbad he to address any of he discourse to she , nay , to avoid meet she eye , with the utmost caution ; nature be no less busy in counterplott he . hence , at the approach of the young lady , he grow pale ; and if this be sudden , start . if he eye accidentally meet hers , the blood rush into he cheek , and he countenance become all over scarlet . if common civility ever oblige he to speak to she , as to drink she health at table , he tongue be sure to falter . if he touch she , he hand , nay he whole frame , tremble . and if any discourse tend , however remotely , to raise the idea of love , a involuntary sigh seldom fail to steal from he bosom . most of wich accident nature be wonderfully industrious to throw daily in he way . all these symptom escape the notice of the squire : but not so of . she soon perceive these agitation of mind in , and be at no loss to discover the cause ; for indeed she recognize it in she own breast . and this recognition be , I suppose , that sympathy which hath be so often note in lover , and which will sufficiently account for she be so much quicker - sight than she father . but , to say the truth , there be a more simple and plain method of accounting for that prodigious superiority of penetration which we must observe in some man over the rest of the human species , and one which will serve not only in the case of lover , but of all other . from whence be it that the knave be generally so quick - sight to those symptom and operation of knavery , which often dupe a honest man of a much better understanding ? there surely be no general sympathy among knave ; nor have they , like freemason , any common sign of communication . in reality , it be only because they have the same thing in they head , and they thought be turn the same way . thus , that see , and that do not see , the plain symptom of love in can be no wonder , when we consider that the idea of love never enter into the head of the father , whereas the daughter , at present , think of nothing else . when be well satisfied of the violent passion which torment poor , and no less certain that she herself be it be object , she have not the least difficulty in discover the true cause of he present behaviour . this highly endear he to she , and raise in she mind two of the best affections which any lover can wish to raise in a mistress -- these where , esteem and pity -- for sure the most outrageously rigid among she sex will excuse she pity a man whom she see miserable on she own account ; nor can they blame she for esteem one who visibly , from the most honourable motive , endeavoure to smother a flame in he own bosom , which , like the famous theft ,
, be prey upon and consum he very vital . thus he backwardness , he shunn she , he coldness , and he silence , be the forwardest , the most diligent , the warmest , and most eloquent advocate ; and wrotch so violently on she sensible and tender heart , that she soon feel for he all those gentle sensation which be consistent with a virtuous and elevate female mind . in short , all which esteem , gratitude , and pity , can inspire in such towards a agreeable man -- indeed , all which the nicest delicacy can allow . in a word , she be in love with he to distraction . one day this young couple accidentally meet in the garden , at the end of the two walk which be both bounde by that canal in which have formerly risque drown to retrieve the little bird that have there lose . this place have be of late much frequent by . here she use to ruminate , with a mixture of pain and pleasure , on a incident which , however trifl in itself , have possibly sown the first seed of that affection which be now arrive to such maturity in she heart . here then this young couple meet . they be almost close together before either of they know anything of the other 's approach . a bystander would have discover sufficient mark of confusion in the countenance of each ; but they feel too much themselves to make any observation . as soon as have a little recover he first surprize , he accost the young lady with some of the ordinary form of salutation , which she in the same manner return ; and they conversation begin , as usual , on the delicious beauty of the morning . hence they past to the beauty of the place , on which launch forth very high encomium . when they come to the tree whence he have formerly tumble into the canal , could not help remind he of that accident , and say , " I fancy , , you have some little shuddering when you see that water . " --" I assure you , madam , " answer , " the concern you feel at the loss of you little bird will always appear to I the highest circumstance in that adventure . poor little ! there be the branch he stand upon . how could the little wretch have the folly to fly away from that state of happiness in which i have the honour to place he ? he fate be a just punishment for he ingratitude . " -- " upon my word , , " say she , " you gallantry very narrowly escape as severe a fate . sure the remembrance must affect you . " --" indeed , madam , " answer he , " if I have any reason to reflect with sorrow on it , it be , perhaps , that the water have not be a little deeper , by which I might have escape many bitter heart - ach that seem to have in store for I . " -- " , ! " reply ; " I be sure you can not be in earnest now . this affect contempt of life be only a excess of you complacence to I . you would endeaavor to lessen the obligation of have twice venture it for my sake . beware the third time . " she speak these last word with a smile , and a softness inexpressible . answer with a sigh , " he fear it be already too late for caution : " and then look tenderly and stedfastly on she , he cry , " oh , miss western ! can you desire I to live ? can you wish I so ill ? " , look down on the ground , answer with some hesitation , " indeed , , I do not wish you ill . " -- " oh , I know too well that heavenly temper , " cry , " that divine goodness , which be beyond every other charm . " -- " Nay , now , " answer she , " I understand you not . I can stay no longer . " --" I -- I would not be understand ! " cry he ; " nay , I can not be understand . I know not what I say . meet you here so unexpectedly , I have be unguard : for 's sake pardon I , if I have say anything to offend you . I do not mean it . indeed , I would rather have die -- nay , the very thought would kill I . " --" you surprize I , " answer she . " how can you possibly think you have offend I ? " --" fear , madam , " say he , " easily run into madness ; and there be no degree of fear like that which I feel of offend you . how can I speak then ? Nay , do not look angrily at I : one frown will destroy I . I mean nothing . blame my eye , or blame those beauty . what be I say ? pardon I if I have say too much . my heart overflow . I have struggle with my love to the utmost , and have endeavoure to conceal a fever which prey on my vital , and will , I hope , soon make it impossible for I ever to offend you more . " now fall a trembling as if he have be shake with the fit of a ague . , who be in a situation not very different from he , answer in these word : " , I will
will not affect to misunderstand you ; indeed , I understand you too well ; but , for 's sake , if you have any affection for I , let I make the best of my way into the house . I wish I may be able to support myself thither . " , who be hardly able to support himself , offer she he arm , which she condescende to accept , but beg he would not mention a word more to she of this nature at present . he promise he would not ; insist only on she forgiveness of what love , without the leave of he will , have force from he : this , she tell he , he know how to obtain by he future behaviour ; and thus this young pair totter and tremble along , the lover not once da to squeeze the hand of he mistress , though it be lock in he . immediately retir to she chamber , where and the hartshorn be summon to she assistance . as to poor , the only relief to he distempered mind be a unwelcome piece of news , which , as it open a scene of different nature from those in which the reader hath lately be conversant , will be communicate to he in the next chapter . chapter vii . in which appear on a sick - bed . be become so fond of that he be unwilling to part with he , though he arm have be long since cure ; and , either from the love of sport , or from some other reason , be easily persuade to continue at he house , which he do sometimes for a fortnight together without pay a single visit at 's ; nay , without ever hear from thence . have be for some day indispose with a cold , which have be attend with a little fever . this he have , however , neglect ; as it be usual with he to do all manner of disorder which do not confine he to he bed , or prevent he several faculty from perform they ordinary function ;-- a conduct which we would by no means be think to approve or recommend to imitation ; for surely the gentleman of the Aesculapian art be in the right in advising , that the moment the disease have enter at one door , the physician should be introduce at the other : what else be mean by that old adage , occurrite morbo ?_ " oppose a distemper at its first approach . " thus the doctor and the disease meet in fair and equal conflict ; whereas , by give time to the latter , we often suffer he to fortify and entrench himself , like a french army ; so that the learn gentleman find it very difficult , and sometimes impossible , to come at the enemy . Nay , sometimes by gain time the disease apply to the french military politics , and corrupt nature over to he side , and then all the power of physic must arrive too late . agreeable to these observation be , I remember , the complaint of the great , who use very pathetically to lament the late application which be make to he skill , say , " , I believe my pation take I for de undertaker , for dey never send for I till physicion have kill dem . " be distemper , by means of this neglect , gain such ground , that , when the increase of he fever oblige he to send for assistance , the doctor at he first arrival shook he head , wish he have be send for sooner , and intimate that he think he in very imminent danger . , who have settle all he affair in this world , and be as well prepare as it be possible for human nature to be for the other , receive this information with the utmost calmness and unconcern . he could , indeed , whenever he lay himself down to rest , say with in the tragical poem -- let guilt or fear man 's rest : know neither of they ; indifferent in he choice to sleep or die . in reality , he could say this with ten time more reason and confidence than , or any other proud fellow among the antient or modern heroe ; for he be not only devoid of fear , but might be consider as a faithful labourer , when at the end of harvest he be summon to receive he reward at the hand of a bountiful master . the good man give immediate order for all he family to be summon round he . none of these be then abroad , but , who have be some time in , and , whom the reader hath just part from at 's , and who receive this summon just as have leave he . the news of 's danger ( for the servant tell he he be die ) drive all thought of love out of he head . he hurry instantly into the chariot which be send for he , and order the coachman to drive with all imaginable haste ; nor do the idea of , I believe , once occur to he on the way . and now the whole family , namely , , , , , and some of the servant ( for such be 's order ) be all assemble round he bed , the good man sit up in it , and be begin to speak , when fall to blubber , and begin to express very loud and bitter lamentation . upon this shook he by the hand , and say , " do not sorrow thus , my dear nephew , at
at the most ordinary of all human occurrence . when misfortunes befal we friend we be justly grieve ; for those be accident which might often have be avoid , and which may seem to render the lot of one man more peculiarly unhappy than that of other ; but death be certainly unavoidable , and be that common lot in which alo the fortune of all man agree : nor be the time when this happen to we very material . if the wisest of man hath compare life to a span , surely we may be allow to consider it as a day . it be my fate to leave it in the evening ; but those who be take away earlier have only lose a few hour , at the best little worth lamenting , and much oftener hour of labour and fatigue , of pain and sorrow . one of the poets , I remember , likend we leave life to we departure from a feast ;-- a thought which hath often occur to I when I have see man struggle to protract a entertainment , and to enjoy the company of they friend a few moment longer . ! how short be the most protracted of such enjoyment ! how immaterial the difference between he who retire the soonest , and he who stay the latest ! this be see life in the best view , and this unwillingness to quit we friend be the most amiable motive from which we can derive the fear of death ; and yet the longest enjoyment which we can hope for of this kind be of so trivial a duration , that it be to a wise man truly contemptible . few man , I own , think in this manner ; for , indeed , few man think of death till they be in its jaw . however gigantic and terrible a object this may appear when it approach they , they be nevertheless incapable of see it at any distance ; nay , though they have be ever so much alarme and frighten when they have apprehend themselves in danger of dying , they be no sooner clear from this apprehension than even the fear of it be erase from they minds . but , alas ! he who escape from death be not pardon ; he be only reprieve , and reprieve to a short day . " , therefore , no more , my dear child , on this occasion : a event which may happen every hour ; which every element , nay , almost every particle of matter that surround we be capable of producing , and which must and will most unavoidably reach we all at last , ought neither to occasion we surprize nor we lamentation . " my physician have acquaint I ( which I take very kindly of he ) that I be in danger of leave you all very shortly , I have determine to say a few word to you at this we part , before my distemper , which I find grow very fast upon I , put it out of my power . " but I shall waste my strength too much . I intend to speak concern my will , which , though I have settle long ago , I think proper to mention such head of it as concern any of you , that I may have the comfort of perceive you be all satisfied with the provision I have there make for you . " nephew Blifil , I leave you the heir to my whole estate , except only  500 a - year , which be to revert to you after the death of you mother , and except one other estate of  500 a - year , and the sum of  6000 , which I have bestow in the follow manner : " the estate of  500 a - year I have give to you , : and as I know the inconvenience which attend the want of ready money , I have add  1000 in specie . in this I know not whether I have exceed or fall short of you expectation . perhaps you will think I have give you too little , and the world will be as ready to condemn I for give you too much ; but the latter censure I despise ; and as to the former , unless you should entertain that common error which I have often hear in my life plead as a excuse for a total want of charity , namely , that instead of raising gratitude by voluntary act of bounty , we be apt to raise demand , which of all other be the most boundless and most difficult to satisfy .-- I the bare mention of this ; I will not suspect any such thing . " fling himself at he benefactor 's foot , and take eagerly hold of he hand , assure he he goodness to he , both now and all other time , have so infinitely exceed not only he merit but he hope , that no word could express he sense of it . " and I assure you , sir , " say he , " you present generosity hath leave I no other concern than for the present melancholy occasion . oh , my friend , my father ! " here he word choak he , and he turn away to hide a tear which be start from he eyes . Allworthy then gently squeeze he hand , and proceed thus : " I be convince , my child , that you have much goodness , generosity , and honou , in you temper : if you will add prudence and religion to these , you must be happy ; for the three former quality
quality , I admit , make you worthy of happiness , but they be the latter only which will put you in possession of it . " one thousand pound I have give to you , ; a sum I be convince which greatly exceed you desire , as well as you want . however , you will receive it as a memorial of my friendship ; and whatever superfluity may redound to you , that piety which you so rigidly maintain will instruct you how to dispose of they . " a like sum , , I have bequeath to you . this , I hope , will enable you to pursue you profession with better success than hitherto . I have often observe with concern , that distress be more apt to excite contempt than commiseration , especially among man of business , with whom poverty be understand to indicate want of ability . but the little I have be able to leave you will extricate you from those difficulty with which you have formerly struggle ; and then I doubt not but you will meet with sufficient prosperity to supply what a man of you philosophical temper will require . " I find myself grow faint , so I shall refer you to my will for my disposition of the residue . my servant will there find some token to remember I by ; and there be a few charity which , I trust , my executor will see faithfully perform . bless you all . I be set out a little before you . " -- here a footman come hastily into the room , and say there be a attorney from who have a particular message , which he say he must communicate to himself : that he see in a violent hurry , and protest he have so much business to do , that , if he could cut himself into four quarter , all would not be sufficient . " go , child , " say to , " see what the gentleman want . I be not able to do any business now , nor can he have any with I , in which you be not at present more concerned than myself . besides , I really be -- I be incapable of see any one at present , or of any longer attention . " he then salute they all , say , perhaps he should be able to see they again , but he should be now glad to compose himself a little , find that he have too much exhaust he spirits in discourse . some of the company she tear at they parting ; and even the wip he eye , albeit unuse to the melting mood . as to , she dropt she pearl as fast as the Arabian tree they medicinal gum ; for this be a ceremonial which that gentlewoman never omit on a proper occasion . after this again lay himself down on he pillow , and endeavoure to compose himself to rest . chapter viii . contain matter rather natural than pleasing . besides grief for she master , there be another source for that briny stream which so plentifully rise above the two mountainous cheek - bone of the housekeeper . she be no sooner retired , than she begin to mutter to herself in the follow pleasant strain : " might have make some difference , methinks , between I and the other servants . I suppose he hath leave I mourn ; but , i'fackin ! if that be all , the devil shall wear it for he , for I . I would have he worship know I be no beggar . I have save five hundred pound in he service , and after all to be use in this manner .-- it be a fine encouragement to servant to be honest ; and to be sure , if I have take a little something now and then , other have take ten time as much ; and now we be all put in a lump together . if so be that it be so , the legacy may go to the devil with he that give it . no , I will not give it up neither , because that will please some folk . no , I will buy the gayest gown I can get , and dance over the old curmudgeon 's grave in it . this be my reward for take he part so often , when all the country have cry shame of he , for breed up he bastard in that manner ; but he be go now where he must pay for all . it would have become he better to have repent of he sins on he deathbed , than to glory in they , and give away he estate out of he own family to a misbegotten child . find in he bed , forsooth ! a pretty story ! ay , ay , those that hide know where to find . forgive he ! I warrant he hath many more bastard to answer for , if the truth be know . one comfort be , they will all be know where he be a go now .--` the servant will find some token to remember I by . ' those be the very word ; I shall never forget they , if I be to live a thousand year . ay , ay , I shall remember you for huddl I among the servants . one would have think he might have mention my name as well as that of ; but he be a gentleman forsooth , though he have not clot on he back when he come hither first . come up with such gentleman ! though he hath live here this many year , I do
do not believe there be arrow a servant in the house ever see the colour of he money . the devil shall wait upon such a gentleman for I . " much more of the like kind she mutter to herself ; but this taste shall suffice to the reader . neither nor be much better satisfied with they legacy . though they breathe not they resentment so loud , yet from the discontent which appear in they countenance , as well as from the follow dialogue , we collect that no great pleasure reign in they minds . about a hour after they have leave the sick - room , meet in the hall and accost he thus : " well , sir , have you hear any news of you friend since we part from he ? " --" if you mean , " answer , " I think you might rather give he the appellation of you friend ; for he seem to I to have deserve that title . " --" the title be as good on you side , " reply , " for he bounty , such as it be , hath be equal to both . " --" I should not have mention it first , " cry , " but since you begin , I must inform you I be of a different opinion . there be a wide distinction between voluntary favour and reward . the duty I have do in he family , and the care I have take in the education of he two boy , be service for which some man might have expect a greater return . I would not have you imagine I be therefore dissatisfie ; for hath teach I to be content with the little I have . have the modicum be less , I should have know my duty . but though the Scripture oblige I to remain contente , it doth not enjoin I to shut my eye to my own merit , nor restrain I from see when I be injure by a unjust comparison . " -- " Since you provoke I , " return , " that injury be do to I ; nor do I ever imagine have hold my friendship so light , as to put I in balance with one who receive he wage . I know to what it be owe ; it proceed from those narrow principles which you have be so long endeavouring to infuse into he , in contempt of everything which be great and noble . the beauty and loveliness of friendship be too strong for dim eye , nor can it be perceive by any other medium than that unerring rule of right , which you have so often endeavoure to ridicule , that you have pervert you friend 's understanding . " --" I wish , " cry , in a rage , " I wish , for the sake of he soul , you damnable doctrine have not pervert he faith . it be to this I impute he present behaviour , so unbecom a . who but a atheist could think of leave the world without have first make up he account ? without confess he sins , and receive that absolution which he know he have one in the house duly authorize to give he ? he will feel the want of these necessary when it be too late , when he be arrive at that place where there be wailing and gnash of tooth . it be then he will find in what mighty stead that heathen goddess , that virtue , which you and all other deist of the age adore , will stand he . he will then summon he priest , when there be none to be find , and will lament the want of that absolution , without which no sinner can be safe . " -- " if it be so material , " say , " why do not you present it he of you own accord ? " " it hath no virtue , " cry , " but to those who have sufficient grace to require it . but why do I talk thus to a heathen and a unbeliever ? it be you that teach he this lesson , for which you have be well reward in this world , as I doubt not you disciple will soon be in the other . " --" I know not what you mean by reward , " say ; " but if you hint at that pitiful memorial of we friendship , which he hath think fit to bequeath I , I despise it ; and nothing but the unfortunate situation of my circumstance should prevail on I to accept it . " the physician now arrive , and begin to inquire of the two disputant , how we all do above - stair ? " in a miserable way , " answer . " it be no more than I expect , " cry the doctor : " but pray what symptom have appear since I leave you ? " -- " no good one , I be afraid , " reply : " after what past at we departure , I think there be little hope . " the bodily physician , perhaps , misunderstand the curer of soul ; and before they come to a explanation , come to they with a most melancholy countenance , and acquaint they that he bring sad news , that he mother be dead at ; that she have be seize on the road home with the gout in she head and stomach , which have carry she off in a few hour . " good - lack - a - day ! " say the doctor . " one can not answer for event ; but I wish I
I have be at hand , to have be call in . the gout be a distemper which it be difficult to treat ; yet I have be remarkably successful in it . " and both condo with for the loss of he mother , which the one advise he to bear like a man , and the other like a . the young gentleman say he know very well we be all mortal , and he would endeaavor to submit to he loss as well as he could . that he could not , however , help complain a little against the peculiar severity of he fate , which bring the news of so great a calamity to he by surprize , and that at a time when he hourly expect the severest blow he be capable of feel from the malice of fortune . he say , the present occasion would put to the test those excellent rudiment which he have learn from and ; and it would be entirely owe to they , if he be enable to survive such misfortune . it be now debat whether should be inform of the death of he sister . this the doctor violently oppose ; in which , I believe , the whole college would agree with he : but say , he have receive such positive and repeat order from he uncle , never to keep any secret from he for fear of the disquietude which it might give he , that he durst not think of disobedience , whatever might be the consequence . he say , for he part , consider the religious and philosophic temper of he uncle , he could not agree with the doctor in he apprehension . he be therefore resolve to communicate it to he : for if he uncle recover ( as he heartily praye he might ) he know he would never forgive a endeavour to keep a secret of this kind from he . the physician be force to submit to these resolution , which the two other learn gentleman very highly commend . so together move and the doctor toward the sick - room ; where the physician first enter , and approach the bed , in order to feel he patient 's pulse , which he have no sooner done , than he declare he be much better ; that the last application have succeed to a miracle , and have bring the fever to intermit : so that , he say , there appear now to be as little danger as he have before apprehend there be hope . to say the truth , 's situation have never be so bad as the great caution of the doctor have represent it : but as a wise general never despise he enemy , however inferior that enemy 's force may be , so neither doth a wise physician ever despise a distemper , however inconsiderable . as the former preserve the same strict discipline , place the same guard , and employ the same scout , though the enemy be never so weak ; so the latter maintain the same gravity of countenance , and shake he head with the same significant air , let the distemper be never so trifl . and both , among many other good one , may assign this solid reason for they conduct , that by these mean the greater glory redound to they if they gain the victory , and the less disgrace if by any unlucky accident they should happen to be conquer . have no sooner lift up he eye , and thanke heaven for these hope of he recovery , than drew near , with a very dejected aspect , and have apply he handkerchief to he eye , either to wipe away he tear , or to do as somewhere express himself on another occasion _Si nullus erit , taman excute nullum ,_ if there be none , then wipe away that none , he communicate to he uncle what the reader hath be just before acquaint with . receive the news with concern , with patience , and with resignation . he dropt a tender tear , then compose he countenance , and at last cry , " the 's will be do in everything . " he now enquire for the messenger ; but tell he it have be impossible to detain he a moment ; for he appear by the great hurry he be in to have some business of importance on he hand ; that he complain of be hurrie and drive and tear out of he life , and repeat many time , that if he could divide himself into four quarter , he know how to dispose of every one . then desire to take care of the funeral . he say , he would have he sister deposite in he own chapel ; and as to the particular , he leave they to he own discretion , only mention the person whom he would have employ on this occasion . chapter ix . which , among other thing , may serve as a comment on that saying of , that " drunkenness show the mind of a man , as a mirrour reflect he person . " the reader may perhaps wonder at hear nothing of in the last chapter . in fact , he behaviour be so different from that of the person there mention , that we choose not to confound he name with theirs . when the good man have end he speech , be the last who desert the room . Thence he retir to he own apartment , to give vent to he concern ; but the restlessness of he mind would not suffer he to remain long there ; he slipp softly therefore to 's chamber - door , where he listen a
a considerable time without hear any kind of motion within , unless a violent snoring , which at last he fear misrepresent as groan . this so alarm he , that he could not forbear enter the room ; where he find the good man in the bed , in a sweet composed sleep , and he nurse snor in the above mention hearty manner , at the bed 's foot . he immediately take the only method of silence this thorough bass , whose music he fear might disturb ; and then sit down by the nurse , he remain motionless and the doctor come in together and wake the sick man , in order that the doctor might feel he pulse , and that the other might communicate to he that piece of news , which , have be apprize of it , would have have great difficulty of find its way to 's ear at such a season . when he first hear tell he uncle this story , could hardly contain the wrath which kindle in he at the other 's indiscretion , especially as the doctor shook he head , and declare he unwillingness to have the matter mention to he patient . but as he passion do not so far deprive he of all use of he understanding , as to hide from he the consequence which any violent expression towards might have on the sick , this apprehension still he rage at the present ; and he grow afterwards so satisfied with find that this news have , in fact , produce no mischief , that he suffer he anger to die in he own bosom , without ever mention it to . the physician dine that day at 's ; and have after dinner visit he patient , he return to the company , and tell they , that he have now the satisfaction to say , with assurance , that he patient be out of all danger : that he have bring he fever to a perfect intermission , and doubt not by throw in the bark to prevent it be return . this account so pleased , and throw he into such immoderate excess of rapture , that he might be truly say to be drink with joy -- a intoxication which greatly forward the effect of wine ; and as he be very free too with the bottle on this occasion ( for he drank many bumper to the doctor 's health , as well as to other toast ) he become very soon literally drunk . have naturally violent animal spirit : these be set on float and augment by the spirit of wine , produce most extravagant effect . he kiss the doctor , and embrace he with the most passionate endearment ; swear that next to himself , he love he of all man liive . " Doctor , " add he , " you deserve a statue to be erect to you at the public expense , for have preserve a man , who be not only the darling of all good man who know he , but a blessing to society , the glory of he country , and a honour to human nature . d -- n I if I do not love he better than my own soul . " " more shame for you , " cry . " though I think you have reason to love he , for he hath provide very well for you . and perhaps it might have be better for some folk that he have not live to see just reason of revoke he gift . " now look on with inconceivable disdain , answer , " and doth thy mean soul imagine that any such consideration could weigh with I ? no , let the earth open and swallow she own dirt ( if I have million of acre I would say it ) rather than swallow up my dear glorious friend . " t_Quis desiderio sit pudor aut modus Tam chari capitis ?_ [ *] [ *] " what modesty or measure can set bounds to we desire of so dear a friend ? " the word _desiderium_ here can not be easily translate . it include we desire of enjoy we friend again , and the grief which attend that desire . the doctor now interpose , and prevent the effect of a wrath which be kind between and ; after which the former give a loose to mirth , sang two or three amorous song , and fall into every frantic disorder which unbridled joy be apt to inspire ; but so far be he from any disposition to quarrel , that he be ten time better humour , if possible , than when he be sober . to say truth , nothing be more erroneous than the common observation , that man who be ill - natured and quarrelsome when they be drink , be very worthy person when they be sober : for drink , in reality , doth not reverse nature , or create passion in man which do not exist in they before . it take away the guard of reason , and consequently force we to produce those symptom , which many , when sober , have art enough to conceal . it heighten and inflame we passion ( generally indeed that passion which be uppermost in we mind ) , so that the angry temper , the amorous , the generous , the good - humoure , the avaricious , and all other disposition of man , be in they cup heighten and expose . and yet as no nation produce so many drunken quarrel , especially among the lower people , as ( for indeed , with they , to drink and to fight together be almost synonymous term ) , I would not ,
, methink , have it thence conclude , that the english be the worst - natured people alive . perhaps the love of glory only be at the bottom of this ; so that the fair conclusion seem to be , that we countryman have more of that love , and more of bravery , than any other plebeian . and this the rather , as there be seldom anything ungenerous , unfair , or ill - nature , exercise on these occasion : nay , it be common for the combatant to express good - will for each other even at the time of the conflict ; and as they drunken mirth generally end in a battle , so do most of they battle end in friendship . but to return to we history . though have show no design of give offence , yet be highly offended at a behaviour which be so inconsistent with the sober and prudent reserve of he own temper . he bear it too with the greater impatience , as it appear to he very indecent at this season ; " when , " as he say , " the house be a house of mourning , on the account of he dear mother ; and if it have pleas heaven to give he some prospect of 's recovery , it would become they better to express the exultation of they heart in thanksgiving , than in drunkenness and riot ; which be properer method to encrease the wrath , than to avert it . " , who have swallow more liquor than , but without any ill effect on he brain , second the pious harangue of ; but , for reason which the reader may probably guess , be totally silent . wine have not so totally overpower , as to prevent he recollect 's loss , the moment it be mention . as no person , therefore , be more ready to confess and condemn he own error , he offer to shake by the hand , and beg he pardon , say , " he excessive joy for 's recovery have drive every other think out of he mind . " scornfully reject he hand ; and with much indignation answer , " it be little to be wonder at , if tragical spectacle make no impression on the blind ; but , for he part , he have the misfortune to know who he parent were , and consequently must be affect with they loss . " , who , notwithstand he good humour , have some mixture of the irascible in he constitution , leape hastily from he chair , and catche hold of 's collar , cry out , " d -- and you for a rascal , do you insult I with the misfortune of my birth ? " he accompany these word with such rough action , that they soon get the better of 's peaceful temper ; and a scuffle immediately ensue , which might have produce mischief , have it not be prevent by the interposition of and the physician ; for the philosophy of render he superior to all emotion , and he very calmly smoak he pipe , as be he custom in all broil , unless when he apprehend some danger of have it break in he mouth . the combatant be now prevent from execute present vengeance on each other , betake themselves to the common resource of disappointed rage , and vent they wrath in threat and defiance . in this kind of conflict , , which , in the personal attack , seem to incline to , be now altogether as favourable to he enemy . a truce , nevertheless , be at length agree on , by the mediation of the neutral party , and the whole company again sit down at the table ; where be prevail on to ask pardon , and to give it , peace be restore , and everything seem _in statu quo _. but though the quarrel be , in all appearance , perfectly reconcile , the good humour which have be interrupt by it , be by no means restore . all merriment be now at a end , and the subsequent discourse consist only of grave relation of matter of fact , and of as grave observation upon they ; a species of conversation , in which , though there be much of dignity and instruction , there be but little entertainment . as we presume therefore to convey only this last to the reader , we shall pass by whatever be say , till the rest of the company have by degree drop off , leave only and the physician together ; at which time the conversation be a little heighten by some comment on what have happene between the two young gentleman ; both of whom the doctor declare to be no better than scoundrel ; to which appellation the philosopher , very sagaciously shak he head , agree . chapter x . show the truth of many observation of , and of other more grave writer , who have prove beyond contradiction , that wine be often the forerunner of incontinency . retir from the company , in which we have see he engage , into the field , where he intend to cool himself by a walk in the open air before he attend . there , whilst he renew those meditations on he dear , which the dangerous illness of he friend and benefactor have for some time interrupt , a accident happen , which with sorrow we relate , and with sorrow doubtless will it be read ; however , that historic truth to which we profess so inviolable a attachment , oblige we to communicate it to posterity . it be now a pleasant evening in the latter end of ,
, when we heroe be walk in a most delicious grove , where the genle breeze fan the leave , together with the sweet trilling of a murmuring stream , and the melodious note of nightingale , form altogether the most enchanting harmony . in this scene , so sweetly accommodate to love , he meditate on he dear . while he wanton fancy roam unbounded over all she beauty , and he lively imagination paint the charming maid in various ravishing form , he warm heart melt with tenderness ; and at length , throw himself on the ground , by the side of a gently murmuring brook , he break forth into the follow ejaculation : " o , would heaven give thee to my arm , how blest would be my condition ! Curst be that fortune which set 's a distance between we . be I but possess of thee , one only suit of rag thy whole estate , be there a man on earth whom I would envy ! how contemptible would the brightest Circassian beauty , drest in all the jewel of the Indy , appear to my eye ! but why do I mention another woman ? could I think my eye capable of look at any other with tenderness , these hand should tear they from my head . no , my , if cruel fortune separate we for ever , my soul shall doat on thee alone . the chastest constancy will I ever preserve to thy image . though I should never have possession of thy charming person , still shal thou alone have possession of my thought , my love , my soul . oh ! my fond heart be so wrapt in that tender bosom , that the brightest beautie would for I have no charms , nor would a hermit be colder in they embrace . , alone shall be mine . what rapture be in that name ! I will engrave it on every tree . " at these word he start up , and beheld -- not he -- no , nor a Circassian maid richly and elegantly attire for the grand 's seraglio . no ; without a gown , in a shift that be somewhat of the coarsest , and none of the cleanest , bedew likewise with some odoriferous effluvia , the produce of the day 's labour , with a pitchfork in she hand , approach . we hero have he penknife in he hand , which he have draw for the before - mention purpose of carving on the bark ; when the girl come near he , cry out with a smile , " you do not intend to kill I , squire , I hope ! " --" why should you think I would kill you ? " answer . " Nay , " reply she , " after you cruel usage of I when I see you last , kill I would , perhaps , be too great kindness for I to expect . " here ensue a parley , which , as I do not think myself oblige to relate it , I shall omit . it be sufficient that it last a full quarter of a hour , at the conclusion of which they retire into the thickest part of the grove . some of my reader may be inclin to think this event unnatural . however , the fact be true ; and perhaps may be sufficientely account for by suggesting , that probably think one woman better than none , and as probably imagine two man to be better than one . besides the before - mention motive assign to the present behaviour of , the reader will be likewise pleased to recollect in he favour , that he be not at this time perfect master of that wonderful power of reason , which so well enable grave and wise man to subdue they unruly passion , and to decline any of these prohibit amusement . wine now have totally subdue this power in . he be , indeed , in a condition , in which , if reason have interpose , though only to advise , she might have receive the answer which one give many year ago to a silly fellow , who ask he , if he be not asham to be drink ? " be not you , " say , " asham to admonish a drunken man ? " -- to say the truth , in a court of justice drunkenness must not be a excuse , yet in a court of conscience it be greatly so ; and therefore Aristotle , who commend the law of , by which drunken man receive double punishment for they crime , allow there be more of policy than justice in that law . now , if there be any transgression pardonable from drunkenness , they be certainly such as be at present guilty of ; on which head I could pour forth a vast profusion of learning , if I imagine it would either entertain my reader , or teach he anything more than he know already . for he sake therefore I shall keep my learning to myself , and return to my history . it hath be observ , that seldom doth thing by halve . to say truth , there be no end to she freak whenever she be dispose to gratify or displease . no sooner have we heroe retire with he Dido , but _Speluncam_ _dux et divinus eandem Deveniunt - -_ the parson and the young squire , who be take a serious walk , arrive at the stile which lead into the grove , and the latter catch a view of the lover just as they be sinke out of sight . know very well , though he be at above a hundred
hundred yard ' distance , and he be as positive to the sex of he companion , though not to the individual person . he start , bless himself , and utter a very solemn ejaculation . express some surprize at these sudden emotion , and ask the reason of they . to which answer , " he be certain he have see a fellow and wench retire together among the bushes , which he doubt not be with some wicked purpose . " as to the name of , he think proper to conceal it , and why he do so must be leave to the judgment of the sagacious reader ; for we never chuse to assign motives to the action of man , when there be any possibility of we be mistake . the parson , who be not only strictly chaste in he own person , but a great enemy to the opposite vice in all other , fire at this information . he desire to conduct he immediately to the place , which as he approach he breathe forth vengeance mix with lamentation ; nor do he refrain from cast some oblique reflection on ; insinuat that the wickedness of the country be principally owe to the encouragement he have give to vice , by have exert such kindness to a bastard , and by have mitigate that just and wholesome rigour of the law which allot a very severe punishment to loose wench . the way through which we hunter be to pass in pursuit of they game be so beset with briar , that it greatly obstruct they walk , and cause besides such a rustling , that have sufficient warning of they arrival before they could surprize he ; nay , indeed , so incapable be of conceal he indignation , and such vengeance do he mutter forth every step he take , that this alone must have abundantly satisfied Jones that he be ( to use the language of sportsman ) find . chapter xi . in which a simile in 's period of a mile introduce as bloody a battle as can possibly be fight without the assistance of steel or cold iron . as in the season of _rutting ( a uncouth phrase , by which the vulgar denote that gentle dalliance , which in the well - wood [ * ] forest of , pass between lover of the ferine kind ) , if , while the lofty - crest stag meditate the amorous sport , a couple of puppy , or any other beasts of hostile note , should wander so near the temple of that the fair hind should shrink from the place , touch with that somewhat , either of fear or frolic , of nicety or skittishness , with which nature hath bedeck all female , or hath at least instruct they how to put it on ; lest , through the indelicacy of male , the Samean mystery should be prye into by unhallowed eye : for , at the celebration of these rite , the female priestess cry out with she in ( who be then , probably , hard at work on such celebration ) , _-- Procul , of procul este , profani ; Proclamat vate , totoque absistite luco ._ -- far hence be soul profane , the sibyl cry' , and from the grove abstain.--dryden . [ *] this be a ambiguous phrase , and may mean either a forest well cloath with wood , or well stript of it . if , I say , while these sacred rite , which be in common to _genus omne animantium ,_ be in agitation between the stag and he mistress , any hostile beasts should venture too near , on the first hint give by the frighted hind , fierce and tremendous rush forth the stag to the entrance of the thicket ; there stand he centinel over he love , stamp the ground with he foot , and with he horn brandish aloft in air , proudly provoke the apprehend foe to combat . thus , and more terrible , when he perceive the enemy 's approach , leape forth we heroe . many a step advance he forwards , in order to conceal the trembling hind , and , if possible , to secure she retreat . and now Thwackum , have first dart some livid lightning from he fiery eye , begin to thunder forth , " upon it ! Fie upon it ! . be it possible you should be the person ? " --" you see , " answer , " it be possible I should be here . " -- " and who , " say , " be that wick slut with you ? " --" if I have any wicked slut with I , " cry , " it be possible I shall not let you know who she be . " --" I command you to tell I immediately , " say : " and I would not have you imagine , young man , that you age , though it hath somewhat abridge the purpose of tuition , hath totally take away the authority of the master . the relation of the master and scholar be indelible ; as , indeed , all other relation be ; for they all derive they original from heaven . I would have you think yourself , therefore , as much oblige to obey I now , as when I teach you you first rudiment . " --" I believe you would , " cry ; " but that will not happen , unless you have the same birchen argument to convince I . " --" then I must tell you plainly , " say , " I be resolve to discover the wicked wretch . " --" and I must tell you plainly
plainly , " return , " I be resolve you shall not . " then offer to advance , and laid hold of he arm ; which endeavoure to rescue , declare , " he would not see he old master insulte . " now find himself engage with two , think it necessary to ry himself of one of he antagonist as soon as possible . he therefore apply to the weakest first ; and , let the parson go , he direct a blow at the young squire 's breast , which luckily take place , reduce he to measure he length on the ground . be so intent on the discovery , that , the moment he find himself at liberty , he steep forward directly into the fern , without any great consideration of what might in the meantime befal he friend ; but he have advance a very few pace into the thicket , before , have defeat , overtake the parson , and drag he backward by the skirt of he coat . this parson have be a champion in he youth , and have win much honour by he fist , both at school and at the university . he have now indeed , for a great number of year , decline the practice of that noble art ; yet be he courage full as strong as he faith , and he body no less strong than either . he be moreover , as the reader may perhaps have conceive , somewhat irascible in he nature . when he look back , therefore , and see he friend stretch out on the ground , and find himself at the same time so roughly handle by one who have formerly be only passive in all conflict between they ( a circumstance which highly aggravate the whole ) , he patience at length give way ; he throw himself into a posture of offence ; and collect all he force , attack Jones in the front with as much impetuosity as he have formerly attack he in the rear . we heroe receive the enemy 's attack with the most undaunted intrepidity , and he bosom resound with the blow . this he presently return with no less violence , aim likewise at the parson 's breast ; but he dexterously drive down the fist of , so that it reach only he belly , where two pound of beef and as many of pudding be then deposit , and whence consequently no hollow sound could proceed . many lusty blow , much more pleasant as well as easy to have seen , than to read or describe , be give on both side : at last a violent fall , in which have throw he knee into 's breast , so weaken the latter , that victory have be no longer dubious , have not , who have now recover he strength , again renew the fight , and by engage with , give the parson a moment 's time to shake he ear , and to regain he breath . and now both together attack we heroe , whose blow do not retain that force with which they have fall at first , so weaken be he by he combat with ; for though the pedagogue choose rather to play _solo on the human instrument , and have be lately use to those only , yet he still retain enough of he antient knowledge to perform he part very well in a _duet . the victory , accord to modern custom , be like to be decide by number , when , on a sudden , a fourth pair of fists appear in the battle , and immediately pay they compliment to the parson ; and the owner of they at the same time cry out , " be not you asham , and be d -- n' to you , to fall two of you upon one ? " the battle , which be of the kind that for distinction 's sake be call , now rage with the utmost violence during a few minute ; till Blifil be a second time laid sprawl by , condescende to apply for quarter to he new antagonist , who be now find to be western himself ; for in the heat of the action none of the combatant have recognize he . in fact , that honest squire , happen , in he afternoon 's walk with some company , to pass through the field where the bloody battle be fight , and have conclude , from see three man engage , that two of they must be on a side , he hasten from he companion , and with more gallantry than policy , espouse the cause of the weaker party . by which generous proceed he very probably prevent from become a victim to the wrath of , and to the pious friendship which bear he old master ; for , besides the disadvantage of such odd , have not yet sufficiently recover the former strength of he broken arm . this reinforcement , however , soon put a end to the action , and with he ally obtain the victory . chapter xii . in which be see a more move spectacle than all the blood in the body of and , and of twenty other such , be capable of producing . the rest of 's company be now come up , be just at the instant when the action be over . these be the honest clergyman , whom we have formerly see at 's table ; , the aunt of ; and lastly , the lovely herself . at this time , the follow be the aspect of the bloody field . in one place lay on the ground , all pale , and almost breathless , the vanquished
vanquished Blifil . near he stand the conqueror , almost cover with blood , part of which be naturally he own , and part have be lately the property of the . in a third place stand the say , like , sullenly submit to the conqueror . the last figure in the piece be western the Great , most gloriously forbear the vanquished foe . , in whom there be little sign of life , be at first the principal object of the concern of every one , and particularly of , who have draw from she pocket a bottle of hartshorn , and be herself about to apply it to he nostril , when on a sudden the attention of the whole company be divert from poor , whose spirit , if it have any such design , might have now take a opportunity of stealing off to the other world , without any ceremony . for now a more melancholy and a more lovely object lay motionless before they . this be no other than the herself , who , from the sight of blood , or from fear for she father , or from some other reason , have fall down in a swoon , before any one could get to she assistance . first see she and scream . immediately two or three voice cry out , " be dead . " , water , every remedy be call for , almost at one and the same instant . the reader may remember , that in we description of this grove we mention a murmuring brook , which brook do not come there , as such gentle stream flow through vulgar romance , with no other purpose than to yomurmu . no ! Fortune have decree to ennoble this little brook with a higher honour than any of those which wash the plain of ever deserve . be rub 's temple , for he begin to fear he have give he a blow too much , when the word , western and dead , rush at once on he ear . he start up , leave to he fate , and fly to , whom , while all the rest be run against each other , backward and forward , look for water in the dry path , he catch up in he arm , and then run away with she over the field to the rivulet above mention ; where , plunge himself into the water , he contrive to besprinkle she face , head , and neck very plentifully . happy be it for that the same confusion which prevent she other friend from serve she , prevent they likewise from obstructing . he have carry she half way before they know what he be do , and he have actually restore she to life before they reach the waterside . she stretch out she arm , open she eye , and cry , " oh ! heaven ! " just as she father , aunt , and the parson come up . , who have hithertoo hold this lovely burthan in he arm , now relinquish he hold ; but give she at the same instant a tender caress , which , have she sense be then perfectly restore , could not have escape she observation . as she express , therefore , no displeasure at this freedom , we suppose she be not sufficiently recover from she swoon at the time . this tragical scene be now convert into a sudden scene of joy . in this we heroe be certainly the principal character ; for as he probably feel more ecstatic delight in have save than she herself receive from be save , so neither be the congratulation pay to she equal to what be confer on , especially by western himself , who , after have once or twice embrace he daughter , fall to hug and kiss . he call he the preserver of , and declare there be nothing , except she , or he estate , which he would not give he ; but upon recollection , he afterwards accept he fox - hound , the , and ( for so he call he favourite mare ) . all fear for be now remove , become the object of the squire 's consideration .-- " come , my lad , " say western , " d 'off thy quoat and wash thy feace ; for att in a devilish pickle , I promise thee . come , come , wash thyself , and shat go huome with I ; and we'l zee to vind thee another quoat . " immediately comply , throw off he coat , go down to the water , and wash both he face and bosom ; for the latter be as much exposed and as bloody as the former . but though the water could clear off the blood , it could not remove the black and blue mark which have imprint on both he face and breast , and which , be discern by , draw from she a sigh and a look full of inexpressible tenderness . receive this full in he eye , and it have infinitely a stronger effect on he than all the contusion which he have receive before . a effect , however , widly different ; for so soft and balmy be it , that , have all he former blow be stab , it would for some minute have prevent he feel they smart . the company now move backward , and soon arrive where have get again on he leg . here we can not suppress a pious wish , that all quarrel be to be decide by those weapons only with which nature , know what be proper for we , hath supply we ; and that cold iron be to be
be use in digge no bowel but those of the earth . then would war , the pastime of monarch , be almost inoffensive , and battle between great army might be fight at the particular desire of several lady of quality ; who , together with the king themselves , might be actual spectator of the conflict . then might the field be this moment well strew with human carcass , and the next , the dead man , or infinitely the greatest part of they , might get up , like 's troops , and march off either at the sound of a drum or fiddle , as should be previously agree on . I would avoid , if possible , treat this matter ludicrously , lest grave man and politician , whom I know to be offend at a jest , may cry pish at it ; but , in reality , might not a battle be as well decide by the greater number of broken head , bloody nos , and black eye , as by the greater heap of mang and murder human body ? might not town be contend for in the same manner ? indeed , this may be think too detrimental a scheme to the french interest , since they would thus lose the advantage they have over other nation in the superiority of they engineers ; but when I consider the gallantry and generosity of that people , I be persuade they would never decline put themselves upon a par with they adversary ; or , as the phrase be , make themselves he match . but such reformation be rather to be wish than hope for : I shall contend myself , therefore , with this short hint , and return to my narrative . western begin now to inquire into the original rise of this quarrel . to which neither nor give any answer ; but say surlily , " I believe the cause be not far off ; if you beat the bushes well you may find she . " -- " find she ? " reply western : " what ! have you be fight for a wench ? " --" ask the gentleman in he waistcoat there , " say : " he best know . " " then , " cry western , " it be a wench certainly .-- ah , , , thou be a liquorish dog . but come , gentlemen , be all friend , and go home with I , and make final peace over a bottle . " " I ask you pardon , sir , " say : " it be no such slight matter for a man of my character to be thus injuriously treat , and buffet by a boy , only because I would have do my duty , in endeavouring to detect and bring to justice a wanton harlot ; but , indeed , the principal fault lie in and yourself ; for if you put the law in execution , as you ought to do , you will soon ry the country of these vermin . " " I would have soon ry the country of fox , " cry western . " I think we ought to encourage the recruit those number which we be every day lose in the war .--But where be she ? , , show I . " he then begin to beat about , in the same language and in the same manner as if he have be beat for a hare ; and at last cry out , " ! Puss be not far off . here be she form , upon my soul ; I believe I may cry stole away . " and indeed so he might ; for he have now discover the place whence the poor girl have , at the beginning of the fray , steal away , upon as many foot as a hare generally use in travelling . now desire she father to return home ; say she find herself very faint , and apprehend a relapse . the squire immediately comply with he daughter 's request ( for he be the fondest of parent ) . he earnestly endeavoure to prevail with the whole company to go and sup with he : but and absolutely refuse ; the former say , there be more reason than he could then mention , why he must decline this honour ; and the latter declare ( perhaps rightly ) that it be not proper for a person of he function to be see at any place in he present condition . be incapable of refuse the pleasure of be with he ; so on he march with and he lady , the parson bring up the rear . this have , indeed , offer to tarry with he brother Thwackum , professe he regard for the cloth would not permit he to depart ; but would not accept the favour , and , with no great civility , push he after . thus end this bloody fray ; and thus shall end the fifth book of this history . . contain about three week . I . of love . in we last book we have be oblige to deal pretty much with the passion of love ; and in we succeeding book shall be force to handle this subject still more largely . it may not therefore in this place be improper to apply ourselves to the examination of that modern doctrine , by which certain philosopher , among many other wonderful discoveries , pretend to have find out , that there be no such passion in the human breast . whether these philosopher be the same with that surprising sect , who be honourably mention by the late , as have , by the mere force of genius alone ,
, without the least assistance of any kind of learn , or even read , discover that profound and invaluable secret that there be no ; or whether they be not rather the same with those who some year since very much alarme the world , by show that there be no such thing as virtue or goodness really exist in human nature , and who deduce we best action from pride , I will not here presume to determine . in reality , I be inclin to suspect , that all these several finder of truth , be the very identical man who be by other call the finder of gold . the method use in both these search after truth and after gold , be indeed one and the same , viz. , the searching , rummage , and examine into a nasty place ; indeed , in the former instance , into the nastiest of all place , a bad . but though in this particular , and perhaps in they success , the truth -finder and the gold - finder may very properly be compare together ; yet in modesty , surely , there can be no comparison between the two ; for who ever hear of a gold - finder that have the impudence or folly to assert , from the ill success of he search , that there be no such thing as gold in the world ? whereas the truth - finder , have rak out that jake , he own mind , and be there capable of trace no ray of divinity , nor anything virtuous or good , or lovely , or loving , very fairly , honestly , and logically conclude that no such thing exist in the whole creation . to avoid , however , all contention , if possible , with these philosopher , if they will be call so ; and to show we own disposition to accommodate matter peaceably between we , we shall here make they some concession , which may possibly put a end to the dispute . first , we will grant that many mind , and perhaps those of the philosopher , be entirely free from the least trace of such a passion . secondly , that what be commonly call love , namely , the desire of satisfy a voracious appetite with a certain quantity of delicate white human flesh , be by no means that passion for which I here contmend . this be indeed more properly hunger ; and as no glutton be asham to apply the word love to he appetite , and to say he love such and such dish ; so may the lover of this kind , with equal propriety , say , he Hunger after such and such woman . thirdly , I will grant , which I believe will be a most acceptable concession , that this love for which I be a advocate , though it satisfy itself in a much more delicate manner , doth nevertheless seek its own satisfaction as much as the grossest of all we appetite . and , lastly , that this love , when it operate towards one of a different sex , be very apt , towards its complete gratification , to call in the aid of that hunger which I have mention above ; and which it be so far from abating , that it heighten all its delights to a degree scarce imaginable by those who have never be susceptible of any other emotion than what have proceed from appetite alone . in return to all these concession , I desire of the philosopher to grant , that there be in some ( I believe in many ) human breast a kind and benevolent disposition , which be gratify by contribute to the happiness of other . that in this gratification alone , as in friendship , in parental and filial affection , as indeed in general philanthropy , there be a great and exquisite delight . that if we will not call such disposition love , we have no name for it . that though the pleasure arise from such pure love may be heighten and sweeten by the assistance of amorous desire , yet the former can subsist alone , nor be they destroy by the intervention of the latter . Lastly , that esteem and gratitude be the proper motive to love , as youth and beauty be to desire , and , therefore , though such desire may naturally cease , when age or sickness overtake it be object ; yet these can have no effect on love , nor ever shake or remove , from a good mind , that sensation or passion which hath gratitude and esteem for its basis . to deny the existence of a passion of which we often see manifest instance , seem to be very strange and absurd ; and can indeed proceed only from that self - admonition which we have mention above : but how unfair be this ! Doth the man who recognize in he own heart no trace of avarice or ambition , conclude , therefore , that there be no such passion in human nature ? why will we not modestly observe the same rule in judging of the good , as well as the evil of other ? or why , in any case , will we , as phrase it , " put the world in we own person ? " Predominant vanity be , I be afraid , too much concerned here . this be one instance of that adulation which we bestow on we own mind , and this almost universally . for there be scarce any man , how much soever he may despise the character of a flatterer , but will condescmend in the meanest manner to flatter himself . to those
those therefore I apply for the truth of the above observation , whose own mind can bear testimony to what I have advance . examine you heart , my good reader , and resolve whether you do believe these matters with I . if you do , you may now proceed to they exemplification in the follow page : if you do not , you have , I assure you , already read more than you have understood ; and it would be wiser to pursue you business , or you pleasure ( such as they be ) , than to throw away any more of you time in reading what you can neither taste nor comprehend . to treat of the effect of love to you , must be as absurd as to discourse on colour to a man bear blind ; since possibly you idea of love may be as absurd as that which we be tell such blind man once entertain of the colour scarlet ; that colour seem to he to be very much like the sound of a trumpet : and love probably may , in you opinion , very greatly resemble a dish of soup , or a surloin of roast - beef . . the character of . she great learning and knowledge of the world , and a instance of the deep penetration which she derive from those advantages . the reader hath see , he sister , and daughter , with young , and the parson , go together to 's house , where the greater part of the company spend the evening with much joy and festivity . be indeed the only grave person ; for as to , though love have now get entire possession of he heart , yet the pleasing reflection on 's recovery , and the presence of he mistress , join to some tender look which she now and then could not refrain from give he , so elevate we heroe , that he join the mirth of the other three , who be perhaps as good -humoured people as any in the world . retain the same gravity of countenance the next morning at breakfast ; whence she retire likewise earlier than usual , leave she father and aunt together . the squire take no notice of this change in he daughter 's disposition . to say the truth , though he be somewhat of a politician , and have be twice a candidate in the country interest at a election , he be a man of no great observation . he sister be a lady of a different turn . she have live about the court , and have see the world . hence she have acquire all that knowledge which the say world usually communicate ; and be a perfect mistress of manners , custom , ceremony , and fashions . do she erudition stop here . she have considerably improve she mind by study ; she have not only read all the modern play , operas , oratorio , poem , and romance -- in all which she be a crintic ; but have go through 's History of , 's , and many french pour servir  l'Histoire : to these she have add most of the political pamphlet and journal publish within the last twenty year . from which she have attain a very competent skill in politics , and could discourse very learnedly on the affair of . she be , moreover , excellently well skillead in the doctrine of amour , and know better than anybody who and who be together ; a knowledge which she the more easily attaine , as she pursuit of it be never divert by any affair of she own ; for either she have no inclination , or they have never be solicite ; which last be indeed very probable ; for she masculine person , which be near six foot high , add to she manner and learn , possibly prevent the other sex from regard she , notwithstand she petticoat , in the light of a woman . however , as she have consider the matter scientifically , she perfectly well know , though she have never practise they , all the art which fine lady use when they desire to give encouragement , or to conceal liking , with all the long appendage of smile , ogles , glance , & c. , as they be at present practise in the beau - monde . to sum the whole , no species of disguise or affectation have escape she notice ; but as to the plain simple workings of honest nature , as she have never see any such , she could know but little of they . by means of this wonderful sagacity , have now , as she think , make a discovery of something in the mind of . the first hint of this she take from the behaviour of the young lady in the field of battle ; and the suspicion which she then conceive , be greatly corroborate by some observation which she have make that evening and the next morning . however , be greatly cautious to avoid be find in a mistake , she carry the secret a whole fortnight in she bosom , give only some oblique hint , by simpering , wink , nod , and now and then drop a obscure word , which indeed sufficiently alarme , but do not at all affect she brother . be at length , however , thoroughly satisfied of the truth of she observation , she take a opportunity , one morning , when she be alone with she brother , to interrupt one of he whistle in the follow manner :-- " pray , brother , have you not observ something very extraordinary in my niece lately ? " -- "
" no , not I , " answer western ; " be anything the matter with the girl ? " --" I think there be , " reply she ; " and something of much consequence too . " --" why , she doth not complain of anything , " cry western ; " and she hath have the small - pox . " --" , " return she , " girl be liable to other distemper besides the small - pox , and sometimes possibly to much worse . " here western interrupt she with much earnestness , and beg she , if anything ail he daughter , to acquaint he immediately ; add , " she know he love she more than he own soul , and that he would send to the world 's end for the best physician to she . " " Nay , nay , " answer she , smile , " the distemper be not so terrible ; but I believe , brother , you be convince I know the world , and I promise you I be never more deceive in my life , if my niece be not most desperately in love . " --" how ! in love ! " cry western , in a passion ; " in love , without acquaint I ! I will disinherit she ; I will turn she out of door , stark naked , without a farthing . be all my kindness vor 'ur , and vondness of yo'u come to this , to fall in love without ask I leave ?" --" but you will not , " answer , " turn this daughter , whom you love better than you own soul , out of door , before you know whether you shall approve she choice . suppose she should have fix on the very person whom you yourself would wish , I hope you would not be angry then ? " -- " no , no , " cry western , " that would make a difference . if she marry the man I would ha ' she , she may love whom she please , I sha not trouble my head about that . " " that be speak , " answer the sister , " like a sensible man ; but I believe the very person she hath choose would be the very person you would choose for she . I will disclaim all knowledge of the world , if it be not so ; and I believe , brother , you will allow I have some . " -- " why , lookee , sister , " say western , " I do believe you have as much as any woman ; and to be sure those be woman 's matter . you know I do not love to hear you talk about politics ; they belong to we , and petticoat should not meddle : but come , who be the man ? " --" ! " say she , " you may find he out yourself if you please . you , who be so great a politician , can be at no great loss . the judgament which can penetrate into the cabinet of prince , and discover the secret spring which move the great state wheel in all the political machine of , must surely , with very little difficulty , find out what pass in the rude uninformed mind of a girl . " --" , " cry the squire , " I have often warn would you not to talk the court gibberish to I . I tell you , I do not understand the lingo : but I can read a journal , or the ._ perhaps , indeed , there may be now and tan a verse which I can not make much of , because half the letter be leave out ; yet I know very well what be mean by that , and that we affair do not go so well as they should do , because of bribery and corruption . " --" I pity you country ignorance from my heart , " cry the lady .--" do you ? " answer western ; " and I pity you town learn ; I have rather be anything than a courtier , and a Presbyterian , and a Hanoverian too , as some people , I believe , be . " --" if you mean I , " answer she , " you know I be a woman , brother ; and it signify nothing what I be . besides --" --" I do know you be a woman , " cry the squire , " and it be well for thee that be one ; if hadst be a man , I promise thee I have lent thee a flick long ago . " -- " ay , there , " say she , " in that flick lie all you fancied superiority . you body , and not you brain , be stronger than ours . believe I , it be well for you that you be able to beat we ; or , such be the superiority of we understanding , we should make all of you what the brave , and wise , and witty , and polite be already -- we slave . " --" I be glad I know you mind , " answer the squire . " but we will talk more of this matter another time . at present , do tell I what man be it you mean about my daughter ? " --" hold a moment , " say she , " while I digest that sovereign contempt I have for you sex ; or else I ought to be angry too with you . there -- I have make a shift to gulp it down . and
and now , good polintic sir , what think you of ? do she not faint away on see he lie breathless on the ground ? do she not , after he be recover , turn pale again the moment we come up to that part of the field where he stand ? and pray what else should be the occasion of all she melancholy that night at supper , the next morning , and indeed ever since ?"--" ' fore ! " cry the squire , " now you mind I o not , I remember it all . it be certainly so , and I be glad of not with all my heart . I know be a good girl , and would not fall in love to make I angry . I be never more rejoice in my life ; for nothing can lie so handy together as we two estate . I have this matter in my head some time ago : for certainly the two estate be in a manner join together in matrimony already , and it would be a thousand pity to part they . it be true , indeed , there be larger estate in the kingdom , but not in this county , and I have rather bate something , than marry my daughter among strangers and foreigner . besides , most of ' zuch great estate be in the hand of lord , and I heate the very name of _themmun _. well but , sister , what would you advise I to do ; for I tell you woman know these matters better than we do ? " --" oh , you humble servant , sir , " answer the lady : " we be oblige to you for allow we a capacity in anything . since you be pleased , then , most polintic sir , to ask my advice , I think you may propose the match to Allworthy yourself . there be no indecorum in the proposal 's come from the parent of either side . , in 's , offer he daughter to Ulyss . I need not caution so polintic a person not to say that you daughter be in love ; that would indeed be against all rule . " -- " well , " say the squire , " I will propose it ; but I shall certainly lend un a flick , if he should refuse I . " " fear not , " cry Mrs western ; " the match be too advantageous to be refuse . " " I do not know that , " answer the squire : " be a queer b -- ch , and money hath no effect of 'un . " " brother , " say the lady , " you politics astonish I . be you really to be impos on by profession ? do you think hath more contempt for money than other man because he profess more ? such credulity would better become one of we weak woman , than that wise sex which heave hath form for politician . indeed , brother , you would make a fine plenipo to negotiate with the french . they would soon persuade you , that they take town out of mere defensive principle . " " sister , " answer the squire , with much scorn , " let you friend at court answer for the town take ; as you be a woman , I shall lay no blame upon you ; for I suppose they be wiser than to trust woman with secret . " he accompany this with so sarcastical a laugh , that could bear no longer . she have be all this time fret in a tender part ( for she be indeed very deeply skill in these matters , and very violent in they ) , and therefore , burst forth in a rage , declare she brother to be both a clown and a blockhead , and that she would stay no longer in he house . the squire , though perhaps he have never read , be , however , in many point , a perfect politician . he strongly hold all those wise tenet , which be so well inculcate in that - school of - alley . he know the just value and only use of money , viz. , to lay it up . he be likewise well skillead in the exact value of reversion , expectation , & c. , and have often consider the amount of he sister 's fortune , and the chance which he or he posterity have of inherit it . this he be infinitely too wise to sacrifice to a trifling resentment . when he find , therefore , he have carry matter too far , he begin to think of reconcile they ; which be no very difficult task , as the lady have great affection for she brother , and still greater for she niece ; and though too susceptible of a affront offer to she skill in politics , on which she much value herself , be a woman of a very extraordinary good and sweet disposition . have first , therefore , laid violent hand on the horse , for whose escape from the stable no place but the window be leave open , he next apply himself to he sister ; soften and soothe she , by unsay all he have say , and by assertion directly contrary to those which have incense she . Lastly , he summon the eloquence of to he assistance , who , besides a most graceful and win address , have the advantage of be hear with great favour and partiality by she aunt . the result of the whole be a kind smile from , who say , " brother , you be absolutely a
a perfect Croat ; but as those have they use in the army of the empress queen , so you likewise have some good in you . I will therefore once more sign a treaty of peace with you , and see that you do not infringe it on you side ; at least , as you be so excellent a politician , I may expect you will keep you leagu , like the french , till you interest call upon you to break they . " chapter iii . contain two defiance to the critic . the squire have settle matter with he sister , as we have see in the last chapter , be so greatly impatient to communicate the proposal to , that have the utmost difficulty to prevent he from visit that gentleman in he sickness , for this purpose . have be engage to dine with western at the time when he be take ill . he be therefore no sooner dischar out of the custody of physic , but he think ( as be usual with he on all occasion , both the highest and the lowest ) of fulfil he engagement . in the interval between the time of the dialogue in the last chapter , and this day of public entertainment , have , from certain obscure hint throw out by she aunt , collect some apprehension that the sagacious lady suspect she passion for . she now resolve to take this opportunity of wip out all such suspicion , and for that purpose to put a entire constraint on she behaviour . first , she endeavoure to conceal a throbb melancholy heart with the utmost sprightliness in she countenance , and the highest gaiety in she manner . secondly , she address she whole discourse to , and take not the least notice of poor the whole day . the squire be so delighted with this conduct of he daughter , that he scarce eat any dinner , and spend almost he whole time in watch opportunity of convey sign of he approbation by wink and nod to he sister ; who be not at first altogether so pleased with what she see as be she brother . in short , so greatly overact she part , that she aunt be at first stagger , and begin to suspect some affectation in she niece ; but as she be herself a woman of great art , so she soon attribute this to extreme art in . she remember the many hint she have give she niece concern she be in love , and imagine the young lady have take this way to rally she out of she opinion , by a overacted civility : a notion that be greatly corroborate by the excessive gaiety with which the whole be accompany . we can not here avoid remark , that this conjecture would have be better foun have liv ten year in the air of , where young lady do learn a wonderful knack of rallying and play with that passion , which be a mighty serious thing in wood and grove a hundred mile distant from . to say the truth , in discover the deceit of other , it matter much that we own art be wound up , if I may use the expression , in the same key with theirs : for very artful man sometimes miscarry by fancying other wiser , or , in other word , greater knave , than they really be . as this observation be pretty deep , I will illustrate it by the follow short story . three countryman be pursue a thief through . the simplest of they see " the , " write under a sign , advise he companion to enter it , for there most probably they would find they countryman . the second , who be wiser , laugh at this simplicity ; but the third , who be wiser still , answer , " let we go in , however , for he may think we should not suspect he of go amongst he own countryman . " they accordingly go in and search the house , and by that mean miss overtak the thief , who be at that time but a little way before they ; and who , as they all know , but have never once reflecte , could not read . the reader will pardon a digression in which so invaluable a secret be communicate , since every gamester will agree how necessary it be to know exactly the play of another , in order to countermine he . this will , moreover , afford a reason why the wiser man , as be often see , be the bubble of the weaker , and why many simple and innocent character be so generally misunderstood and misrepresent ; but what be most material , this will account for the deceit which put on she polintic aunt . dinner be end , and the company retire into the garden , , who be thoroughly convinced of the certainty of what he sister have tell he , take aside , and very bluntly propose a match between and young . be not one of those man whose heart flutter at any unexpected and sudden tiding of worldly profit . he mind be , indeed , temper with that philosophy which become a man and a . he affec no absolute superiority to all pleasure and pain , to all joy and grief ; but be not at the same time to be discompose and ruffle by every accidental blast , by every smile or frown of fortune . he receive , therefore , 's proposal without any visible emotion , or without any alteration of countenance . he say the alliance be such as he sincerely wish ; then launch forth into a very
very just encomium on the young lady 's merit ; acknowledge the offer to be advantageous in point of fortune ; and after thank for the good opinion he have profess of he nephew , conclude , that if the young people like each other , he should be very desirous to complete the affair . western be a little disappointed at 's answer , which be not so warm as he expect . he treat the doubt whether the young people might like one another with great contempt , say , " that parent be the best judge of proper match for they child : that for he part he should insist on the most resign obedience from he daughter : and if any young fellow could refuse such a bed - fellow , he be he humble servant , and hope there be no harm do . " endeavoure to soften this resentment by many eulogium on , declare he have no doubt but that would very gladly receive the offer ; but all be ineffectual ; he could obtain no other answer from the squire but -- " I say no more -- I humbly hope there be no harm do -- that be all . " which word he repeat at least a hundred time before they part . be too well acquaint with he neighbour to be offend at this behaviour ; and though he be so averse to the rigour which some parent exercise on they child in the article of marriage , that he have resolve never to force he nephew 's inclination , he be nevertheless much pleased with the prospect of this union ; for the whole country resound the praise of , and he have himself greatly admire the uncommon endowment of both she mind and person . to which I believe we may add , the consideration of she vast fortune , which , though he be too sober to be intoxicate with it , he be too sensible to despise . and here , in defiance of all the barking critic in the world , I must and will introduce a digression concern true wisdom , of which be in reality as great a pattern as he be of goodness . true wisdom then , notwithstand all which 's poor poet may have writ against riche , and in spite of all which any rich well - feed divine may have preach against pleasure , consist be not in the contempt of either of these . a man may have as much wisdom in the possession of a affluent fortune , as any beggar in the street ; or may enjoy a handsome wife or a hearty friend , and still remain as wise as any sour popish recluse , who bury all he social faculty , and starve he belly while he well lash he back . to say truth , the wisest man be the likeliest to possess all worldly blessing in a eminent degree ; for as that moderation which wisdom prescribe be the surest way to useful wealth , so can it alone qualify we to taste many pleasur . the wise man gratify every appetite and every passion , while the fool sacrifice all the rest to pall and satiate one . it may be object , that very wise man have be notoriously avaricious . I answer , not wise in that instance . it may likewise be say , that the wisest man have be in they youth immoderately fond of pleasure . I answer , they be not wise then . , in short , whose lesson have be represent as so hard to learn by those who never be at she school , only teach we to extend a simple maxim universally know and follow even in the lowest life , a little farther than that life carry it . and this be , not to buy at too dear a price . now , whoever take this maxim abroad with he into the grand market of the world , and constantly apply it to honour , to rich , to pleasure , and to every other commodity which that market affords , be , I will venture to affirm , a wise man , and must be so acknowledged in the worldly sense of the word ; for he make the best of bargain , since in reality he purchase everything at the price only of a little trouble , and carry home all the good thing I have mention , while he keep he health , he innocence , and he reputation , the common price which be pay for they by other , entire and to himself . from this moderation , likewise , he learn two other lesson , which complete he character . first , never to be intoxicate when he hath make the best bargain , nor deject when the market be empty , or when its commodity be too dear for he purchase . but I must remember on what subject I be write , and not trespass too far on the patience of a good - natured critic . here , therefore , I put a end to the chapter . iv. contain sundry curious matters . as soon as return home , he take apart , and after some preface , communicate to he the proposal which have be make by , and at the same time inform he how agreeable this match would be to himself . the charms of have not make the least impression on ; not that he heart be pre-engaged ; neither be he totally insensible of beauty , or have any aversion to woman ; but he appetite be by nature so moderate , that he be able , by philosophy , or by study , or by some other method , easily to subdue
subdue they : and as to that passion which we have treat of in the first chapter of this book , he have not the least tincture of it in he whole composition . but though he be so entirely free from that mix passion , of which we there treat , and of which the virtue and beauty of for so notable a object ; yet be he altogether as well furnish with some other passion , that promise themselves very full gratification in the young lady 's fortune . such be avarice and ambition , which divide the dominion of he mind between they . he have more than once consider the possession of this fortune as a very desirable thing , and have entertain some distant view concern it ; but he own youth , and that of the young lady , and indeed principally a reflection that might marry again , and have more child , have restrain he from too hasty or eager a pursuit . this last and most material objection be now in great measure remove , as the proposal come from himself . , therefore , after a very short hesitation , answer , that matrimony be a subject on which he have not yet think ; but that he be so sensible of he friendly and fatherly care , that he should in all thing submit himself to he pleasure . be naturally a man of spirit , and he present gravity arise from true wisdom and philosophy , not from any original phlegm in he disposition ; for he have possess much fire in he youth , and have marry a beautiful woman for love . he be not therefore greatly pleased with this cold answer of he nephew ; nor could he help launch forth into the praise of , and express some wonder that the heart of a young man could be impregnable to the force of such charms , unless it be guard by some prior affection . assure he he have no such guard ; and then proceed to discourse so wisely and religiously on love and marriage , that he would have stopt the mouth of a parent much less devoutly inclin than be he uncle . in the end , the good man be satisfy that he nephew , far from have any objection to , have that esteem for she , which in sober and virtuous mind be the sure foundation of friendship and love . and as he doubt not but the lover would , in a little time , become altogether as agreeable to he mistress , he foresee great happiness arise to all party by so proper and desirable a union . with 's consent therefore he write the next morning to , acquaint he that he nephew have very thankfully and gladly receive the proposal , and would be ready to wait on the young lady , whenever she should be pleased to accept he visit . western be much pleased with this letter , and immediately return a answer ; in which , without have mention a word to he daughter , he appoint that very afternoon for open the scene of courtship . as soon as he have dispatch this messenger , he go in quest of he sister , whom he find read and expound the to . to this exposition he be oblige to attend near a quarter of a hour , though with great violence to he natural impetuosity , before he be suffer to speak . at length , however , he find a opportunity of acquaint the lady , that he have business of great consequence to impart to she ; to which she answer , " brother , I be entirely at you service . thing look so well in the north , that I be never in a better humour . " the parson then withdraw , acquaint she with all which have pass , and desire she to communicate the affair to , which she readily and chearfully undertake ; though perhaps she brother be a little obliged to that agreeable northern aspect which have so delighted she , that he hear no comment on he proceedings ; for they be certainly somewhat too hasty and violent . v. in which be related what pass between and she aunt . be in she chamber , read , when she aunt come in . the moment she see , she shut the book with so much eagerness , that the good lady could not forbear ask she , what book that be which she see so much afraid of show ? " upon my word , madam , " answer , " it be a book which I be neither asham nor afraid to own I have read . it be the production of a young lady of fashion , whose good understanding , I think , doth honou to she sex , and whose good heart be a honour to human nature . " Mrs western then take up the book , and immediately after throw it down , say -- " yes , the author be of a very good family ; but she be not much among people one know . I have never read it ; for the best judge say , there be not much in it . " --" I dare not , madam , set up my own opinion , " say , " against the best judge , but there appear to I a great deal of human nature in it ; and in many part so much true tenderness and delicacy , that it hath cost I many a tear . " -- " ay , and do you love to cry then ? " say the aunt . " I love a tender sensation , " answer the niece , "
" and would pay the price of a tear for it at any time . " -- " well , but show I , " say the aunt , " what be you read when I come in ; there be something very tender in that , I believe , and very loving too . you blush , my dear . ah ! child , you should read book which would teach you a little hypocrisy , which would instruct you how to hide you thought 's a little better . " --" I hope , madam , " answer , " I have no thought which I ink to be asham of discovering . " --" Asham ! no , " cry the aunt , " I do not think you have any thought which you ink to be asham of ; and yet , child , you blush just now when I mention the word love . dear , be assure you have not one thought which I be not well acquaint with ; as well , child , as the french be with we motion , long before we put they in execution . do you think , child , because you have be able to impose upon you father , that you could impose upon I ? do you imagine I do not know the reason of you overact all that friendship for yesterday ? I have see a little too much of the world , to be so deceive . Nay , nay , do not blush again . I tell you it be a passion you need not be asham of . it be a passion I myself approve , and have already bring you father into the approbation of it . indeed , I solely consider you inclination ; for I would always have that gratify , if possible , though one may sacrifice higher prospect . come , I have news which will delight you very soul . make I you confident , and I will undertake you shall be happy to the very extent of you wish . " " la , madam , " say , look more foolishly than ever she do in she life , " I know not what to say -- why , madam , should you suspect ? " --" Nay , no dishonesty , " return . " consider , you be speak to one of you own sex , to a aunt , and I hope you be convince you speak to a friend . consider , you be only reveal to I what I know already , and what I plainly see yesterday , through that most artful of all disguise , which you have put on , and which must have deceive any one who have not perfectly know the world . Lastly , consider it be a passion which I highly approve . " " la , madam , " say , " you come upon one so unaware , and on a sudden . to be sure , madam , I be not blind -- and certainly , if it be a fault to see all human perfection assemble together -- but be it possible my father and you , madam , can see with my eye ? " " I tell you , " answer the aunt , " we do entirely approve ; and this very afternoon you father hath appoint for you to receive you lover . " " my father , this afternoon ! " cry , with the blood start from she face .--" yes , child , " say the aunt , " this afternoon . you know the impetuosity of my brother 's temper . I acquaint he with the passion which I first discover in you that evene when you faint away in the field . I see it in you fainting . I see it immediately upon you recovery . I see it that evening at supper , and the next morning at breakfast ( you know , child , I have see the world ) . well , I no sooner acquaint my brother , but he immediately want to propose it to . he propose it yesterday , consent ( as to be sure he must with joy ) , and this afternoon , I tell you , you be to put on all you best air . " " this afternoon ! " cry . " dear aunt , you frighten I out of my sense . " " o , my dear , " say the aunt , " you will soon come to yourself again ; for he be a charming young fellow , that be the truth of n't . " " Nay , I will own , " say , " I know none with such perfection . so brave , and yet so gentle ; so witty , yet so inoffensive ; so humane , so civil , so genteel , so handsome ! what signify he be base bear , when compare with such qualification as these ? " " base bear ? what do you mean ? " say the aunt , " base bear ! " turn instantly pale at this name , and faintly repeat it . upon which the aunt cry , " -- ay , , of whom else have we be talk ? " " good heaven , " answer , ready to sink , " of , I think ; I be sure I know no other who deserve -- " " I protest , " cry the aunt , " you frighten I in you turn . be it , and not , who be the object of you affection ? " " ! " repeat . " sure it be impossible you can be in earnest ; if you be , I be
be the most miserable woman alive . " now stand a few moment silent , while spark of fiery rage flash from she eyes . at length , collect all she force of voice , she thunder forth in the follow articulate sound : " and be it possible you can think of disgrac you family by ally yourself to a bastard ? can the blood of the submit to such contamination ? if you have not sense sufficient to restrain such monstrous inclination , I think the pride of we family would have prevent you from give the least encouragement to so base a affection ; much less do I imagine you would ever have have the assurance to own it to my face . " " madam , " answer , trembl , " what I have say you have extort from I . I do not remember to have ever mention the name of with approbation to any one before ; nor should I now have I not conceive he have you approbation . whatever be my thought of that poor , unhappy young man , I intend to have carry they with I to my grave -- to that grave where only now , I find , I be to seek repose . " here she sunk down in she chair , drown in she tear , and , in all the move silence of unutterable grief , present a spectacle which must have affect almost the hardest heart . all this tender sorrow , however , raise no compassion in she aunt . on the contrary , she now fall into the most violent rage .-- " and I would rather , " she cry , in a most vehement voice , " follow you to you grave , than I would see you disgrase yourself and you family by such a match . of ! could I have ever suspect that I should live to hear a niece of mine declare a passion for such a fellow ? you be the first -- yes , , you be the first of you name who ever entertain so grovell a thought . a family so note for the prudence of its woman " -- here she run on a full quarter of a hour , till , have exhaust she breath rather than she rage , she conclude with threatening to go immediately and acquaint she brother . then throw herself at she foot , and lay hold of she hand , beg she with tear to conceal what she have draw from she ; urge the violence of she father 's temper , and protest that no inclination of hers should ever prevail with she to do anything which might offend he . stand a moment look at she , and then , have recollect herself , say , " that on one consideration only she would keep the secret from she brother ; and this be , that should promise to entertain that very afternoon as she lover , and to regard he as the person who be to be she husband . " poor be too much in she aunt 's power to deny she anything positively ; she be oblige to promise that she would see , and be as civil to he as possible ; but beg she aunt that the match might not be hurrie on . she say , " be by no means agreeable to she , and she hope she father would be prevail on not to make she the most wretch of woman . " assure she , " that the match be entirely agree upon , and that nothing could or should prevent it . I must own , " say she , " I look on it as on a matter of indifference ; nay , perhaps , have some scruple about it before , which be actually get over by my think it highly agreeable to you own inclination ; but now I regard it as the most eligible thing in the world : nor shall there be , if I can prevent it , a moment of time lose on the occasion . " reply , " delay at least , madam , I may expect from both you goodness and my father 's . surely you will give I time to endeaavor to get the better of so strong a disinclination as I have at present to this person . " the aunt answer , " she know too much of the world to be so deceive ; that as she be sensible another man have she affections , she should persuade western to hasten the match as much as possible . it would be bad politics , indeed , " add she , " to protract a siege when the enemy 's army be at hand , and in danger of relieive it . no , no , , " say she , " as I be convince you have a violent passion which you can never satisfy with honour , I will do all I can to put you honour out of the care of you family : for when you be marry those matters will belong only to the consideration of you husband . I hope , child , you will always have prudence enough to act as become you ; but if you should not , marriage hath save many a woman from ruin . " Sophia well understand what she aunt mean ; but do not think proper to make she a answer . however , she take a resolution to see , and to behave to he as civilly as she could , for on that condition only she obtain a promise from she aunt to keep secret the liking which she ill fortune , rather than any scheme of , have unhappily draw from
from she . chapter vi . contain a dialogue between and , which may a little relieve those tender affections which the forego scene may have raise in the mind of a good - natured reader . Mrs western have obtain that promise from she niece which we have see in the last chapter , withdrew ; and presently after arrive . she be at work in a neighbour apartment , and have be summon to the keyhole by some vociferation in the preceding dialogue , where she have continue during the remaining part of it . at she entry into the room , she find stand motionless , with the tear trickling from she eyes . upon which she immediately order a proper quantity of tear into she own eye , and then begin , " of , my dear lady , what be the matter ? " --" Nothing , " cry . " nothing ! of dear madam ! " answer , " you must not tell I that , when you ladyship be in this take , and when there hath be such a preamble between you ladyship and Madam western . " --" do not teaze I , " cry ; " I tell you nothing be the matter . good heaven ! why be I bear ? " --" Nay , madam , " say , " you shall never persuade I that you la's ship can lament yourself so for nothing . to be sure I be but a servant ; but to be sure I have be always faithful to you lag ship , and to be sure I would serve you lag ship with my life . " -- " my dear Honour , " say , " 'tis not in thy power to be of any service to I . I be irretrievably undone . " --" heaven forbid ! " answer the waiting - woman ; " but if I can not be of any service to you , pray tell I , madam -- it will be some comfort to I to know -- pray , dear ma 'am , tell I what be the matter . " --" my father , " cry , " be go to marry I to a man I both despise and hate . " --" of dear , ma 'am , " answer the other , " who be this wicked man ? for to be sure he be very bad , or you la' ship would not despise he . " --" he name be poison to my tongue , " reply : " thou will know it too soon . " indeed , to confess the truth , she know it already , and therefore be not very inquisitive as to that point . she then proceed thus : " I do not pretend to give you la'ship advice , whereor you lag ship know much better than I can pretend to , be but a servant ; but , I - fackin ! no father in should marry I against my consent . and , to be sure , the ' squire be so good , that if he do but know you la' ship despise and hate the young man , to be sure he would not desire you to marry he . and if you la's ship would but give I leave to tell my master so . to be sure , it would be more properer to come from you own mouth ; but as you lag ship doth not care to foul you tongue with he nasty name --" -- " you be mistaken , Honour , " say ; " my father be determined before he ever think fit to mention it to I ." --" more shame for he , " cry Honou : " you be to go to bed to he , and not master : and thon a man may be a very proper man , yet every woman may not think he handsome alike . I be sure my master would never act in this manner of he own head . I wish some people would trouble themselves only with what belong to they ; they would not , I believe , like to be serve so , if it be they own case ; for though I be a maid , I can easily believe as how all man be not equally agreeable . and what signify you la's ship have so great a fortune , if you can not please yourself with the man you think most handsomest ? well , I say nothing ; but to be sure it be a pity some folk have not be better bear ; nay , as for that matter , I should not mind it myself ; but then there be not so much money ; and what of that ? you la' ship hath money enough for both ; and where can you la' ship bestow you fortune better ? for to be sure every one must allow that he be the most handsomest , charmingest , finest , tallest , properest man in the world . " -- " what do you mean by run on in this manner to I ? " cry , with a very grave countenance . " have I ever give any encouragement for these libertie ? " --" Nay , ma 'am , I ask pardon ; I mean no harm , " answer she ; " but to be sure the poor gentleman hath run in my head ever since I see he this morning . to be sure , if you la's ship have but see he just now , you must have pitie he . poor gentleman ! I wish some misfortune hath not happene to he ; for he hath be walk about with he arm across
across , and look so melancholy , all this morning : I vow and protest it make I almost cry to see he . " -- " to see whom ? " say . " poor , " answer . " see he ! why , where do you see he ? " cry . " by the canal , ma 'am , " say . " there he hath be walk all this morning , and at last there he lay himself down : I believe he lie there still . to be sure , if it have not be for my modesty , be a maid , as I be , I should have go and speak to he . do , ma 'am , let I go and see , only for a fancy , whether he be there still . " -- " ! " say . " there ! no , no : what should he do there ? he be go before this time , to be sure . besides , why -- what -- why should you go to see ? besides , I want you for something else . go , fetch I my hat and glove . I shall walk with my aunt in the grove before dinner . " Honou do immediately as she be bid , and put she hat on ; when , look in the glass , she fancie the ribbon with which she hat be tie do not become she , and so send she maid back again for a ribbon of a different colour ; and then give repeat charge not to leave she work on any account , as she say it be in violent haste , and must be finish that very day , she mutter something more about go to the grove , and then sally out the contrary way , and walk , as fast as she tender trembl limb could carry she , directly towards the canal . Jones have be there as have tell she ; he have indeed spend two hour there that morning in melancholy contemplation on he , and have go out from the garden at one door the moment she enter it at another . so that those unlucky minute which have be spend in change the ribbon , have prevent the lover from meeting at this time ;-- a most unfortunate accident , from which my fair reader will not fail to draw a very wholesome lesson . and here I strictly forbid all male critic to intermeddle with a circumstance which I have recount only for the sake of the ladie , and upon which they only be at liberty to comment . chapter vii . a picture of formal courtship in miniature , as it always ought to be draw , and a scene of a tenderer kind pain at full length . it be well remark by one ( and perhaps by more ) , that misfortunes do not come single . this wise maxe be now verify by , who be not only disappointed of see the man she love , but have the vexation of be oblige to dress herself out , in order to receive a visit from the man she hate . that afternoon Mr western , for the first time , acquaint he daughter with he intention ; tell she , he know very well that she have hear it before from she aunt . look very grave upon this , nor could she prevent a few pearl from steal into she eye . " come , come , " say western , " none of you maidenish air ; I know all ; I assure you sister hath tell I all . " " be it possible , " say , " that my aunt can have betraye I already ? " --" ay , ay , " say western ; " betraye you ! ay . why , you betraye yourself yesterday at dinner . you show you fancy very plainly , I think . but you young girl never know what you would be at . so you cry because I be go to marry you to the man you be in love with ! you mother , I remember , whimper and whin just in the same manner ; but it be all over within twenty - four hour after we be marry : be a brisk young man , and will soon put a end to you squeamishness . come , chear up , chear up ; I expect un every minute . " be now convince that she aunt have behave honourably to she : and she determine to go through that disagreeable afternoon with as much resolution as possible , and without give the least suspicion in the world to she father . soon arrive ; and soon after withdraw , leave the young couple together . here a long silence of near a quarter of a hour ensue ; for the gentleman who be to begin the conversation have all the unbecoming modesty which consist in bashfulness . he often attempt to speak , and as often suppress he word just at the very point of utterance . at last out they break in a torrent of far- fetch and high - strained compliment , which be answer on she side by downcast look , half bow , and civil monosyllable . , from he inexperience in the way of woman , and from he conceit of himself , take this behaviour for a modest assent to he courtship ; and when , to shorten a scene which she could no longer support , rise up and leave the room , he impute that , too , merely to bashfulness , and comforte himself that he should soon have enough of she company . he be indeed perfectly well
well satisfied with he prospect of success ; for as to that entire and absolute possession of the heart of he mistress which romantic lover require , the very idea of it never enter he head . she fortune and she person be the sole object of he wish , of which he make no doubt soon to obtain the absolute property ; as 's mind be so earnestly bend on the match ; and as he well know the strict obedience which be always ready to pay to she father 's will , and the greater still which she father would exact , if there be occasion . this authority , therefore , together with the charms which he fancie in he own person and conversation , could not fail , he think , of succeed with a young lady , whose inclination were , he doubt not , entirely disengage . of he certainly have not even the least jealousy ; and I have often think it wonderful that he have not . perhaps he imagine the character which bear all over the country ( how justly , let the reader determine ) , of be one of the wildest fellow in , might render he odious to a lady of the most exemplary modesty . perhaps he suspicion might be laid asleep by the behaviour of , and of himself , when they be all in company together . Lastly , and indeed principally , he be well assu there be not another self in the case . he fancie that he know to the bottom , and have in reality a great contempt for he understanding , for not be more attached to he own interest . he have no apprehension that be in love with ; and as for any lucrative motive , he imagine they would sway very little with so silly a fellow . , moreover , think the affair of still go on , and indeed believe it would end in marriage ; for really love he from he childhood , and have keep no secret from he , till he behaviour on the sickness of have entirely alienate he heart ; and it be by means of the quarrel which have ensue on this occasion , and which be not yet reconcile , that kknow nothing of the alteration which have happene in the affection which have formerly borne towards . from these reason , therefore , see no bar to he success with . he conclude she behaviour be like that of all other young lady on a first visit from a lover , and it have indeed entirely answer he expectation . take care to way - lay the lover at he exit from he mistress . he find he so elevate with he success , so enamoured with he daughter , and so satisfied with she reception of he , that the old gentleman begin to caper and dance about he hall , and by many other antic action to express the extravagance of he joy ; for he have not the least command over any of he passion ; and that which have at any time the ascendant in he mind hurrie he to the wildest excess . as soon as be depart , which be not till after many hearty kiss and embrace bestow on he by western , the good squire go instantly in quest of he daughter , whom he no sooner find than he pour forth the most extravagant rapture , bid she chuse what clothes and jewel she please ; and declare that he have no other use for fortune but to make she happy . he then caress she again and again with the utmost profusion of fondness , call she by the most endearing name , and protest she be he only joy on earth . perceive she father in this fit of affection , which she do not absolutely know the reason of ( for fit of fondness be not unusual to he , though this be rather more violent than ordinary ) , think she should never have a better opportunity of disclosing herself than at present , as far at least as regard ; and she too well foresee the necessity which she should soon be under of come to a full explanation . after have thank the squire , therefore , for all he profession of kindness , she add , with a look full of inexpressible softness , " and be it possible my papa can be so good to place all he joy in he Sophy 's happiness ? " which western have confirm by a great oath , and a kiss ; she then lay hold of he hand , and , fal on she knee , after many warm and passionate declaration of affection and duty , she beg he " not to make she the most miserable creature on earth by force she to marry a man whom she detest . this I entreat of you , dear sir , " say she , " for you sake , as well as my own , since you be so very kind to tell I you happiness depend on mine . " -- " how ! what ! " say western , stare wildly . " oh ! sir , " continue she , " not only you poor 's happiness ; she very life , she be , depend upon you grant she request . I can not live with . to force I into this marriage would be kill I . " --" you can not live with ? " say western . " no , upon my soul I can not , " answer . " then die and be d -- , " cry he , spur she from he . " oh ! sir , " cry ,
, catche hold of the skirt of he coat , " take pity on I , I beseech you . do not look and say such cruel -- can you be unmoved while you see you in this dreadful condition ? can the best of father break my heart ? will he kill I by the most painful , cruel , lingering death ? " --" Pooh ! pooh ! " cry the squire ; " all stuff and nonsense ; all maidenish trick . kill you , indeed ! will marriage kill you ? " --" oh ! sir , " answer , " such a marriage be worse than death . he be not even indifferent ; I hate and detest he . " --" if you detest un never so much , " cry western , " you shall ha'un . " this he bound by a oath too shocke to repeat ; and after many violent asseveration , conclude in these word : " I be resolve upon the match , and unless you consent to it I will not give you a groat , not a single farthing ; no , though I see you expire with famine in the street , I would not relieve you with a morsel of bread . this be my fix resolution , and so I leave you to consider on it . " he then break from she with such violence , that she face dash against the floor ; and he burst directly out of the room , leave poor prostrate on the ground . when western come into the hall , he there find ; who see he friend look wild , pale , and almost breathless , could not forbear enquir the reason of all these melancholy appearance . upon which the squire immediately acquaint he with the whole matter , conclude with bitter denunciation against , and very pathetic lamentation of the misery of all father who be so unfortunate to have daughter . , to whom all the resolution which have be take in favour of be yet a secret , be at first almost struck dead with this relation ; but recover he spirits a little , mere despair , as he afterwards say , inspire he to mention a matter to , which seem to require more impudence than a human forehead be ever gif with . he desire leave to go to , that he might endeaavor to obtain she concurrence with she father 's inclination . if the squire have be as quicksight as he be remarkable for the contrary , passion might at present very well have blind he . he thank for offer to undertake the office , and say , " go , go , prithee , try what canst do ; " and then swore many execrable oath that he would turn she out of door unless she consent to the match . chapter viii . the meeting between and . depart instantly in quest of , whom he find just risen from the ground , where she father have leave she , with the tear trickl from she eye , and the blood run from she lip . he presently run to she , and with a voice full at once of tenderness and terrour , cry , " o my , what mean this dreadful sight ? " she look softly at he for a moment before she speak , and then say , " , for 's sake how come you here ?-- leave I , I beseech you , this moment . " --" do not , " say he , " impose so harsh a command upon I -- my heart bleed faster than those lip . of , how easily could I drain my vein to preserve one drop of that dear blood . " --" I have too many obligation to you already , " answer she , " for sure you mean they such . " here she look at he tenderly almost a minute , and then burst into a agony , cry , " oh , , why do you save my life ? my death would have be happier for we both . " --" happier for we both ! " cry he . " could rack or wheel kill I so painfully as 's -- I can not bear the dreadful sound . do I live but for she ? " both he voice and look be full of inexpressible tenderness when he speak these word ; and at the same time he lay gently hold on she hand , which she do not withdraw from he ; to say the truth , she hardly know what she do or suffer . a few moment now pass in silence between these lover , while he eye be eagerly fix on , and hers decline towards the ground : at last she recover strength enough to desire he again to leave she , for that she certain ruin would be the consequence of they be find together ; add , " oh , , you know not , you know not what hath pass this cruel afternoon . " --" I know all , my , " answer he ; " you cruel father hath tell I all , and he himself hath send I hither to you . " --" my father send you to I ! " reply she : " sure you dream . " -- " Would to , " cry he , " it be but a dream ! oh , , you father hath send I to you , to be a advocate for my odious rival , to solicit you in he favour . I take any means to get access to you . of speak to I , ! comfort my bleeding heart . sure no one
one ever love , ever doate like I . do not unkindly withhold this dear , this soft , this gentle hand -- one moment , perhaps , tear you for ever from I -- nothing less than this cruel occasion could , I believe , have ever conquer the respect and awe with which you have inspire I . " she stand a moment silent , and cover with confusion ; then lift up she eye gently towards he , she cry , " what would have I say ? " --" o do but promise , " cry he , " that you never will give yourself to . " -- " not , " answer she , " the detested sound . be assure I never will give he what be in my power to withhold from he . " -- " now then , " cry he , " while you be so perfectly kind , go a little farther , and add that I may hope . " -- " ! " say she , " , whither will you drive I ? what hope have I to bestow ? you know my father 's intention . " --" but I know , " answer he , " you compliance with they can not be compelle . " -- " what , " say she , " must be the dreadful consequence of my disobedience ? my own ruin be my least concern . I can not bear the thought of be the cause of my father 's misery . " --" he be himself the cause , " cry , " by exact a power over you which nature hath not give he . think on the misery which I be to suffer if I be to lose you , and see on which side pity will turn the balance . " --" think of it ! " reply she : " can you imagine I do not feel the ruin which I must bring on you , should I comply with you desire ? it be that thought which give I resolution to bid you fly from I for ever , and avoid you own destruction . " --" I fear no destruction , " cry he , " but the loss of . if you would save I from the most bitter agony , recall that cruel sentence . indeed , I can never part with you , indeed I cannot . " the lover now stand both silent and trembl , be unable to withdraw she hand from , and he almost as unable to hold it ; when the scene , which I believe some of my reader will think have last long enough , be interrupt by one of so different a nature , that we shall reserve the relation of it for a different chapter . chapter ix . be of a much more tempestuous kind than the former . before we proceed with what now happen to we lover , it may be proper to recound what have past in the hall during they tender interview . after have leave western in the manner above mention , he sister come to he , and be presently inform of all that have pass between she brother and relate to . this behaviour in she niece the good lady construe to be a absolute breach of the condition on which she have engage to keep she love for a secret . she consider herself , therefore , at full liberty to reveal all she know to the squire , which she immediately do in the most explicit term , and without any ceremony or preface . the idea of a marriage between and he daughter , have never once enter into the squire 's head , either in the warmest minute of he affection towards that young man , or from suspicion , or on any other occasion . he do indeed consider a parity of fortune and circumstance to be physically as necessary a ingredient in marriage , as difference of sex , or any other essential ; and have no more apprehension of he daughter 's fall in love with a poor man , than with any animal of a different species . he become , therefore , like one thunderstruck at he sister 's relation . he be , at first , incapable of make any answer , have be almost deprive of he breath by the violence of the surprize . this , however , soon return , and , as be usual in other case after a intermission , with redouble force and fury . the first use he make of the power of speech , after he recovery from the sudden effect of he astonishment , be to discharge a round volley of oath and imprecation . after which he proceed hastily to the apartment where he expect to find the lover , and murmure , or rather indeed roar forth , intentions of revenge every step he go . as when two dove , or two wood -pigeon , or as when and ( for that come nearest to the mark ) be retire into some pleasant solitary grove , to enjoy the delightful conversation of , that bashful boy , who can not speak in public , and be never a good companion to more than two at a time ; here , while every object be serene , should hoarse thunder burst suddenly through the shattered cloud , and rumbl roll along the sky , the frightened maid start from the mossy bank or verdant turf , the pale livery of death succeed the red regimental in which love have before drest she cheek , fear shake she whole frame , and she lover scarce support she trembl tottering limb . or as when two gentleman , strangers to the wondrous
wondrous wit of the place , be crack a bottle together at some inn or tavern at , if the great Dowdy , who act the part of a madman as well as some of he setter - on do that of a fool , should rattle he chain , and dreadfully hum forth the grumbling catch along the gallery ; the frighted stranger stand aghast ; scared at the horrid sound , they seek some place of shelter from the approaching danger ; and if the well - barred window do admit they exit , would venture they neck to escape the threatening fury now come upon they . so tremble poor , so turn she pale at the noise of she father , who , in a voice most dreadful to hear , come on swearing , cursing , and vow the destruction of . to say the truth , I believe the youth himself would , from some prudent consideration , have prefer another place of abode at this time , have he terror on 's account give he liberty to reflect a moment on what any otherways concerned himself , than as he love make he partake whatever affect she . and now the squire , have burst open the door , beheld a object which instantly suspend all he fury against ; this be the ghastly appearance of , who have faint away in she lover 's arm . this tragical sight no sooner beheld , than all he rage forsook he ; he roar for help with he utmost violence ; run first to he daughter , then back to the door call for water , and then back again to , never consider in whose arm she then be , nor perhaps once recollect that there be such a person in the world as ; for indeed I believe the present circumstance of he daughter be now the sole consideration which employ he thought . and a great number of servant soon come to the assistance of with water , cordial , and everything necessary on those occasion . these be apply with such success , that in a very few minute begin to recover , and all the symptom of life to return . upon which she be presently lead off by she own maid and Mr western : nor do that good lady depart without leave some wholesome admonition with she brother , on the dreadful effect of he passion , or , as she pleas to call it , madness . the squire , perhaps , do not understand this good advice , as it be deliver in obscure hint , shrug , and note of admiration : at least , if he do understand it , he profit very little by it ; for no sooner be he cure of he immediate fear for he daughter , than he relapse into he former frenzy , which must have produce a immediate battle with , have not parson , who be a very strong man , be present , and by mere force restrain the squire from act of hostility . the moment be depart , advanc in a very suppliant manner to , whom the parson hold in he arm , and beg he to be pacify ; for that , while he continue in such a passion , it would be impossible to give he any satisfaction . " I wull have satisfaction of ' thee , " answer the squire ; " so doff thy clothes . _At unt half a man , and I will lick thee as well as wast ever lick in thy life . " he then bespatter the youth with abundance of that language which pass between country gentleman who embrace opposite side of the question ; with frequent application to he to salute that part which be generally introduce into all controversy that arise among the lower order of the english gentry at horse -race , cock -match , and other public place . Allusion to this part be likewise often make for the sake of the jest . and here , I believe , the wit be generally misunderstood . in reality , it lie in desire another to kiss you a -- for have just before threaten to kick he ; for I have observe very accurately , that no one ever desire you to kick that which belong to himself , nor offer to kiss this part in another . it may likewise seem surprize that in the many thousand kind invitation of this sort , which every one who hath converse with country gentleman must have hear , no one , I believe , hath ever see a single instance where the desire hath be comply with ; -- a great instance of they want of politeness ; for in town nothing can be more common than for the finest gentleman to perform this ceremony every day to they superior , without have that favour once request of they . to all such wit , very calmly answer , " , this usage may perhaps cancel every other obligation you have confer on I ; but there be one you can never cancel ; nor will I be provoke by you abuse to lift my hand against the father of . " at these word the squire grow still more outrageous than before ; so that the parson beg to retire ; say , " you behold , sir , how he waxeth wrath at you abode here ; therefore let I pray you not to tarry any longer . he anger be too much kindle for you to commune with he at present . you have better , therefore , conclude you visit , and refer what matter you have to urge in you behalf to some other opportunity . " accept this advice with thanks ,
, and immediately depart . the squire now regain the liberty of he hand , and so much temper as to express some satisfaction in the restraint which have be laid upon he ; declare that he should certainly have beat he brain out ; and add , " it would have vex one confoundedly to have be hang for such a rascal . " the parson now begin to triumph in the success of he peace - make endeavour , and proceed to read a lecture against anger , which might perhaps rather have tend to raise than to quiet that passion in some hasty mind . this lecture he enrich with many valuable quotation from the antient , particularly from ; who hath indeed so well handle this passion , that none but a very angry man can read he without great pleasure and profit . the doctor conclude this harangue with the famious story of and ; but as I find that enter in my common - place under title Drunkenness , I shall not insert it here . the squire take no notice of this story , nor perhaps of anything he say ; for he interrupt he before he have finish , by call for a tankard of beer ; observe ( which be perhaps as true as any observation on this fever of the mind ) that anger make a man dry . no sooner have the squire swallow a large dratch than he renew the discourse on , and declare a resolution of go the next morning early to acquaint . he friend would have dissuad he from this , from the mere motive of good - nature ; but he dissuasion have no other effect than to produce a large volley of oath and curse , which greatly shock the pious ear of ; but he do not dare to remonstrate against a privilege which the squire claim as a freeborn . to say truth , the parson submit to please he palate at the squire 's table , at the expense of suffer now and then this violence to he ear . he contente himself with think he do not promote this evil practice , and that the squire would not swear a oath the less , if he never enter within he gate . however , though he be not guilty of ill manners by rebuk a gentleman in he own house , he pay he off obliquly in the pulpit : which have not , indeed , the good effect of work a reformation in the squire himself ; yet it so far operate on he conscience , that he put the law very severely in execution against other , and the magistrate be the only person in the parish who could swear with impunity . chapter x . in which western visit . be now retir from breakfast with he nephew , well satisfy with the report of the young gentleman 's successful visit to ( for he greatly desire the match , more on account of the young lady 's character than of she riche ) , when break abruptly in upon they , and without any ceremony begin as follow :-- " there , you have do a fine piece of work truly ! you have brotch up you bastard to a fine purpose ; not that I believe you have have any hand in it neither , that be , as a man may say , designedly : but there be a fine kettle - of - fish make o not up at we house . " " what can be the matter , ? " say . " o , matter enow of all conscience : my daughter hath fall in love with you bastard , that be all ; but I will not ge she a hapeny , not the twentieth part of a brass varden . I always think what would come o ' breed up a bastard like a gentleman , and let un come about to vok 's hous . it be well vor un I could not get at un : I have a lick have un ; I would a spoil have he caterwauling ; I would a teach the son of a whore to meddle with meat for he master . he sha not ever have a morsel of meat of mine , or a varden to buy it : if she will ha un , one smock shall be she portion . I would sooner ge my esteate to the zinking fund , that it may be send to Hanover to corrupt we nation with . " " I be heartily sorry , " cry . " Pox of ' you sorrow , " say western ; " it will do I abundance of good when I have lose my only child , my poor Sophy , that be the joy of my heart , and all the hope and comfort of my age ; but I be resolve I will turn she out of ' door ; she shall beg , and starve , and rot in the street . not one hapeny , not a hapeny shall she ever hae of ' mine . the son of a bitch be always good at find a hare sitting , a be rot to 'n : I little think what puss he be look after ; but it shall be the worst he ever vound in he life . she shall be no better than carrion : the skin of 'er be all he shall ha , and you may tell un . " " I be in amazement , " cry , " at what you tell I , after what pass between my nephew and the young lady no longer ago than yesterday . " " yes , sir , " answer western , "
" it be after what pass between you nephew and she that the whole matter come out . Mr Blifil there be no sooner go than the son of a whore come lurch about the house . little do I think when I use to love he for a sportsman that he be all the while a poaching after my daughter . " " why truly , " say , " I could wish you have not give he so many opportunity with she ; and you will do I the justice to acknowledge that I have always be averse to he stay so much at you house , though I own I have no suspicion of this kind . " " why , zound , " cry western , " who could have think it ? what the have she to do wi'n ? he do not come there a courting to she ; he come there a hunting with I . " " but be it possible , " say , " that you should never discern any symptom of love between they , when you have see they so often together ? " " never in my life , as I hope to be save , " cry western : " I never so much as zeed he kiss she in all my life ; and so far from court she , he use rather to be more silent when she be in company than at any other time ; and as for the girl , she be always less civil to and than to any young man that come to the house . as to that matter , I be not more easy to be deceive than another ; I would not have you think I be , neighbour . " Allworthy could scarce refrain laughter at this ; but he resolve to do a violence to himself ; for he perfectly well know mankind , and have too much good - breeding and good - nature to offend the squire in he present circumstance . he then ask western what he would have he do upon this occasion . to which the other answer , " that he would have he keep the rascal away from he house , and that he would go and lock up the wench ; for he be resolve to make she marry in spite of she tooth . " he then shook by the hand , and swore he would have no other son - in - law . presently after which he take he leave ; say he house be in such disorder that it be necessary for he to make haste home , to take care he daughter do not give he the slip ; and as for , he swore if he catch he at he house , he would qualify he to run for the gelding 's plate . when and be again leave together , a long silence ensue between they ; all which interval the young gentleman fill up with sigh , which proceed partly from disappointment , but more from hatred ; for the success of be much more grievous to he than the loss of . at length he uncle ask he what he be determined to do , and he answer in the follow word :-- " ! sir , can it be a question what step a lover will take , when reason and passion point different way ? I be afraid it be too certain he will , in that dilemma , always follow the latter . dictate to I , to quit all thought of a woman who place she affections on another ; my passion bid I hope she may in time change she inclination in my favour . here , however , I conceive a objection may be raise , which , if it could not fully be answer , would totally deter I from any further pursuit . I mean the injustice of endeavour to supplant another in a heart of which he seem already in possession ; but the determine resolution of western show that , in this case , I shall , by so do , promote the happiness of every party ; not only that of the parent , who will thus be preserve from the highest degree of misery , but of both the other , who must be undone by this match . the lady , I be sure , will be undone in every sense ; for , besides the loss of most part of she own fortune , she will be not only marry to a beggar , but the little fortune which she father can not withhold from she will be squander on that wench with whom I know he yet converse . Nay , that be a trifle ; for I know he to be one of the worst man in the world ; for have my dear uncle know what I have hithertoo endeavoure to conceal , he must have long since abandon so profligate a wretch . " " how ! " say ; " hath he do anything worse than I already know ? tell I , I beseech you ? " " no , " reply ; " it be now past , and perhaps he may have repent of it . " " I command you , on you duty , " say , " to tell I what you mean . " " you know , sir , " say , " I never disobey you ; but I be sorry I mention it , since it may now look like revenge , whereas , I thank Heaven , no such motive ever enter my heart ; and if you oblige I to discover it , I must be he petitioner to you for you forgiveness . " " I
I will have no condition , " answer ; " I think I have show tenderness enough towards he , and more perhaps than you ought to thank I for . " " more , indeed , I fear , than he deserv , " cry ; " for in the very day of you utmost danger , when myself and all the family be in tear , he fill the house with riot and debauchery . he drank , and sung , and roar ; and when I give he a gentle hint of the indecency of he action , he fall into a violent passion , swore many oath , call I rascal , and strike I . " " how ! " cry ; " do he dare to strike you ? " " I be sure , " cry , " I have forgive he that long ago . I wish I could so easily forget he ingratitude to the best of benefactor ; and yet even that I hope you will forgive he , since he must have certainly be possess with the devil : for that very evening , as and myself be take the air in the field , and exult in the good symptom which then first begin to discover themselves , we unluckily see he engage with a wench in a manner not fit to be mention . , with more boldness than prudence , advance to rebuke he , when ( I be sorry to say it ) he fall upon the worthy man , and beat he so outrageously that I wish he may have yet recover the bruise . be I without my share of the effect of he malice , while I endeavoure to protect my tutor ; but that I have long forgiven ; nay , I prevail with to forgive he too , and not to inform you of a secret which I fear might be fatal to he . and now , sir , since I have unadvisedly drop a hint of this matter , and you command have oblige I to discover the whole , let I intercede with you for he . " " of child ! " say , " I know not whether I should blame or applaud you goodness , in concealing such villany a moment : but where be ? not that I want any confirmation of what you say ; but I will examine all the evidence of this matter , to justify to the world the example I be resolve to make of such a monster . " be now send for , and presently appear . he corroborate every circumstance which the other have depose ; nay , he produce the record upon he breast , where the handwriting of remain very legible in black and blue . he conclude with declaring to , that he should have long since inform he of this matter , have not , by the most earnest interposition , prevent he . " he be , " say he , " a excellent youth : through such forgiveness of enemy be carry the matter too far . " in reality , have take some pain to prevail with the parson , and to prevent the discovery at that time ; for which he have many reason . he know that the mind of man be apt to be soften and relax from they usual severity by sickness . besides , he imagine that if the story be tell when the fact be so recent , and the physician about the house , who might have unravel the real truth , he should never be able to give it the malicious turn which he intend . again , he resolve to hoard up this business , till the indiscretion of should afford some additional complaint ; for he think the joint weight of many fact fall upon he together , would be the most likely to crush he ; and he watch , therefore , some such opportunity as that with which fortune have now kindly present he . Lastly , by prevailing with to conceal the matter for a time , he know he should confirm a opinion of he friendship to , which he have greatly laboured to establish in . chapter xi . a short chapter ; but which contain sufficient matter to affect the good - natured reader . it be 's custom never to punish any one , not even to turn away a servant , in a passion . he resolve therefore to delay pass sentence on till the afternoon . the poor young man attend at dinner , as usual ; but he heart be too much load to suffer he to eat . he grief too be a good deal aggravate by the unkind look of ; whence he conclude that western have discover the whole affair between he and ; but as to 's story , he have not the least apprehension ; for of much the greater part he be entirely innocent ; and for the residue , as he have forgive and forgote it himself , so he suspect no remembrance on the other side . when dinner be over , and the servant depart , begin to harangue . he set forth , in a long speech , the many iniquity of which have be guilty , particularly those which this day have bring to light ; and conclude by tell he , " that unless he could clear himself of the charge , he be resolve to banish he he sight for ever . " many disadvantage attend poor Jones in make he defence ; nay , indeed , he hardly know he accusation ; for as , in recount the drunkenness , & c. , while he lay ill , out of modesty sunk everything that relate
relate particularly to himself , which indeed principally constitute the crime ; could not deny the charge . he heart be , besides , almost break already ; and he spirit be so sunk , that he could say nothing for himself ; but acknowledge the whole , and , like a criminal in despair , throw himself upon mercy ; concluding , " that though he must own himself guilty of many folly and inadvertency , he hope he have do nothing to deserve what would be to he the greatest punishment in the world . " answer , " that he have forgive he too often already , in compassion to he youth , and in hope of he amendment : that he now find he be a abandoned reprobate , and such as it would be criminal in any one to support and encourage . Nay , " say to he , " you audacious attempt to steal away the young lady , call upon I to justify my own character in punish you . the world who have already censure the regard I have show for you may think , with some colour at least of justice , that I connive at so base and barbarous a action -- a action of which you must have know my abhorrence : and which , have you have any concern for my ease and honour , as well as for my friendship , you would never have think of undertaking . Fie upon it , young man ! indeed there be scarce any punishment equal to you crime , and I can scarce think myself justifiable in what I be now go to bestow on you . however , as I have educate you like a child of my own , I will not turn you nake into the world . when you open this paper , therefore , you will find something which may enable you , with industry , to get a honest livelihood ; but if you employ it to worse purpose , I shall not think myself oblige to supply you farther , be resolve , from this day forward , to converse no more with you on any account . I can not avoid say , there be no part of you conduct which I resent more than you ill - treatment of that good young man ( mean ) who hath behave with so much tenderness and honou towards you . " these last word be a dose almost too bitter to be swallow . a flood of tear now gush from the eyes of , and every faculty of speech and motion seem to have desert he . it be some time before he be able to obey 's peremptory command of departing ; which he at length do , have first kiss he hand with a passion difficult to be affect , and as difficult to be describe . the reader must be very weak , if , when he consider the light in which then appear to , he should blame the rigour of he sentence . and yet all the neighbourhood , either from this weakness , or from some worse motive , condemne this justice and severity as the highest cruelty . Nay , the very person who have before censure the good man for the kindness and tenderness show to a bastard ( he own , accord to the general opinion ) , now cry out as loudly against turn he own child out of door . the woman especially be unanimous in take the part of , and raise more story on the occasion than I have room , in this chapter , to set down . one thing must not be omit , that , in they censure on this occasion , none ever mention the sum contain in the paper which give , which be no less than five hundred pound ; but all agree that he be send away penniless , and some say naked , from the house of he inhuman father . chapter xii . contain love - letter , &c . be command to leave the house immediately , and tell , that he clothes and everything else should be send to he whithersoever he should order they . he accordingly set out , and walk above a mile , not regard , and indeed scarce know , whither he go . at length a little brook obstruct he passage , he throw himself down by the side of it ; nor could he help mutter with some little indignation , " sure my father will not deny I this place to rest in ! " here he presently fall into the most violent agony , tear he hair from he head , and use most other action which generally accompany fit of madness , rage , and despair . when he have in this manner vent the first emotion of passion , he begin to come a little to himself . he grief now take another turn , and discharge itself in a gentler way , till he become at last cool enough to reason with he passion , and to consider what step be proper to be take in he deplorable condition . and now the great doubt be , how to act with regard to . the thought of leave she almost rent he heart asunder ; but the consideration of reduce she to ruin and beggary still rack he , if possible , more ; and if the violent desire of possesse she person could have induce he to listen one moment to this alternative , still he be by no means certain of she resolution to indulge he wish at so high a expense . the resentment of , and the injury he must do to he quiet , argue strongly against this latter ;
; and lastly , the apparent impossibility of he success , even if he would sacrifice all these consideration to it , come to he assistance ; and thus honou at last back with despair , with gratitude to he benefactor , and with real love to he mistress , get the better of burn desire , and he resolve rather to quit , than pursue she to she ruin . it be difficult for any who have not feel it , to conceive the glow warmth which fill he breast on the first contemplation of this victory over he passion . flatter he so agreeably , that he mind perhaps enjoy perfect happiness ; but this be only momentary : soon return to he imagination , and allay the joy of he triumph with no less bitter pang than a good - natured general must feel , when he survey the bleed heap , at the price of whose blood he hath purchase he laurel ; for thousand of tender idea lay murder before we conqueror . be resolved , however , to pursue the path of this giant honour , as the gigantic poet call it , he determine to write a farewel letter to ; and accordingly proceed to a house not far off , where , be furnish with proper material , he write as follow :-- " madam , " when you reflect on the situation in which I write , I be sure you good - nature will pardon any inconsistency or absurdity which my letter contain ; for everything here flow from a heart so full , that no language can express its dictate . " I have resolve , madam , to obey you command , in fly for ever from you dear , you lovely sight . indeed those command be ; but it be a cruelty which proceed from fortune , not from my . Fortune hath make it necessary , necessary to you preservation , to forget there ever be such a wretch as I be . " believe I , I would not hind all my suffering to you , if I imagine they could possibly escape you ear . I know the goodness and tenderness of you heart , and would avoid give you any of those pain which you always feel for the miserable . o let nothing , which you shall hear of my hard fortune , cause a moment 's concern ; for , after the loss of you , everything be to I a trifle . " of ! it be hard to leave you ; it be harder still to desire you to forget I ; yet the sincerest love oblige I to both . pardon my conceiving that any remembrance of I can give you disquiet ; but if I be so gloriously wretch , sacrifice I every way to you relief . think I never love you ; or think truly how little I deserve you ; and learn to scorn I for a presumption which can never be too severely punish .-- I be unable to say more .-- May guardian angels protect you for ever ! " he be now search he pocket for he wax , but find none , nor indeed anything else , therein ; for in truth he have , in he frantic disposition , toss everything from he , and amongst the rest , he pocket - book , which he have receive from , which he have never open , and which now first occur to he memory . the house suppli he with a wafer for he present purpose , with which , have seal he letter , he return hastily towards the brook side , in order to search for the thing which he have there lose . in he way he meet he old friend , who heartily condol with he on he misfortune ; for this have already reach he ear , and indeed those of all the neighbourhood . acquaint the gamekeeper with he loss , and he as readily go back with he to the brook , where they search every tuft of grass in the meadow , as well where have not be as where he have be ; but all to no purpose , for they find nothing ; for , indeed , though the thing be then in the meadow , they omit to search the only place where they be deposit ; to wit , in the pocket of the say ; for he have just before find they , and be luckily apprize of they value , have very carefully put they up for he own use . the gamekeeper have exert as much diligence in quest of the lost goods , as if he have hope to find they , desire to recollect if he have be in no other place : " for sure , " say he , " if you have lose they here so lately , the thing must have be here still ; for this be a very unlikely place for any one to pass by . " and indeed it be by great accident that he himself have pass through that field , in order to lay wire for hare , with which he be to supply a poulterer at the next morning . now give over all hope of recovere he loss , and almost all thought concern it , and turn to , ask he earnestly if he would do he the greatest favour in the world ? answer with some hesitation , " , you know you may command I whatever be in my power , and I heartily wish it be in my power to do you any service . " in fact , the question stagger he ; for he have , by selling game , amass a pretty good
good sum of money in 's service , and be afraid that want to borrow some small matter of he ; but he be presently relieved from he anxiety , by be desire to convey a letter to , which with great pleasure he promise to do . and indeed I believe there be few favour which he would not have gladly confer on ; for he bear as much gratitude towards he as he could , and be as honest as man who love money better than any other thing in the universe , generally be . be agree by both to be the proper mean by which this letter should pass to . they then separate ; the gamekeeper return home to 's , and walk to a alehouse at half a mile 's distance , to wait for he messenger 's return . no sooner come home to he master 's house than he meet with ; to whom , have first sound she with a few previous question , he deliver the letter for she mistress , and receive at the same time another from she , for ; which tell he she have carry all that day in she bosom , and begin to despair of find any means of deliver it . the gamekeeper return hastily and joyfully to , who , have receive 's letter from he , instantly withdrew , and eagerly break it open , read as follow :-- " sir , " it be impossible to express what I have feel since I see you . you submit , on my account , to such cruel insult from my father , lay I under a obligation I shall ever own . as you know he temper , I beg you will , for my sake , avoid he . I wish I have any comfort to send you ; but believe this , that nothing but the last violence shall ever give my hand or heart where you would be sorry to see they bestow . " read this letter a hundred time over , and kiss it a hundred time as often . he passion now bring all tender desire back into he mind . he repent that he have writ to in the manner we have see above ; but he repent more that he have make use of the interval of he messenger 's absence to write and dispatch a letter to , in which he have faithfully promised and bound himself to quit all thought of he love . however , when he cool reflection return , he plainly perceive that he case be neither mende nor alte by 's billet , unless to give he some little glimpse of hope , from she constancy , of some favourable accident hereafter . he therefore resume he resolution , and take leave of , set forward to a town about five mile distant , whither he have desire , unless he pleas to revoke he sentence , to send he thing after he . chapter xiii . the behaviour of on the present occasion ; which none of she sex will blame , who be capable of behave in the same manner . and the discussion of a knotty point in the court of conscience . have pass the last twenty - four hour in no very desirable manner . during a large part of they she have be entertain by she aunt with lecture of prudence , recommend to she the example of the polite world , where love ( so the good lady say ) be at present entirely laugh at , and where woman consider matrimony , as man do office of public trust , only as the means of make they fortune , and of advancing themselves in the world . in comment on which text have display she eloquence during several hour . these sagacious lecture , though little suite either to the taste or inclination of , be , however , less irksome to she than she own thought , that form the entertainment of the night , during which she never once close she eye . but though she could neither sleep nor rest in she bed , yet , have no avocation from it , she be find there by she father at he return from 's , which be not till past ten o'clock in the morning . he go directly up to she apartment , open the door , and see she be not up , cry , " oh ! you be safe then , and I be resolve to keep you so . " he then lock the door , and deliver the key to , have first give she the strictest charge , with great promise of reward for she fidelity , and most dreadful menace of punishment in case she should betray she trust . be order be , not to suffer she mistress to come out of she room without the authority of the squire himself , and to admit none to she but he and she aunt ; but she be herself to attend she with whatever Sophia pleased , except only pen , ink , and paper , of which she be forbide the use . the squire order he daughter to dress herself and attend he at dinner ; which she obey ; and have sit the usual time , be again conduct to she prison . in the evening the gaoler Honou bring she the letter which she receive from the gamekeeper . read it very attentively twice or thrice over , and then throw herself upon the bed , and burst into a flood of tear . express great astonishment at this behaviour in she mistress ; nor could she forbear very eagerly beg to know the cause of this passion . make she no answer for some
some time , and then , start suddenly up , catch she maid by the hand , and cry , " o ! I be undone . " " , " cry : " I wish the letter have be burnt before I have bring it to you la'ship . I be sure I think it would have comforte you lag ship , or I would have see it at the devil before I would have touch it . " " Honou , " say , " you be a good girl , and it be vain to attempt concealing longer my weakness from you ; I have throw away my heart on a man who hath forsake I . " " and be , " answer the maid , " such a perfidy man ? " " he hath take he leave of I , " say , " for ever in that letter . Nay , he hath desire I to forget he . could he have desire that if he have love I ? could he have borne such a thought ? could he have write such a word ? " " no , certainly , ma 'am , " cry ; " and to be sure , if the best man in be to desire I to forget he , I would take he at he word . , come up ! I be sure you lag ship hath do he too much honour ever to think on he ;-- a young lady who may take she choice of all the young man in the country . and to be sure , if I may be so presumptuous as to offer my poor opinion , there be young , who , besides that he be come of honest parent , and will be one of the greatest squire all hereabout , he be to be sure , in my poor opinion , a more handsomer and a more politer man by half ; and beside , he be a young gentleman of a sober character , and who may defy any of the neighbour to say black be he eye ; he follow no dirty trollop , nor can any bastard be laid at he door . forget he , indeed ! I thank I myself be not so much at my last prayer as to suffer any man to bid I forget he twice . if the best he that wear a head be for to go for to offer to say such a affront word to I , I would never give he my company afterwards , if there be another young man in the kingdom . and as I be a say , to be sure , there be young . " " name not he detest name , " cry . " Nay , ma 'am , " say , " if you la's ship doth not like he , there be more jolly handsome young man that would court you lag ship , if they have but the least encouragement . I do not believe there be arrow young gentleman in this county , or in the next to it , that if you la's ship be but to look as if you have a mind to he , would not come about to make he offer directly . " " what a wretch dost thou imagine I , " cry , " by affront my ear with such stuff ! I detest all mankind . " " Nay , to be sure , ma 'am , " answer , " you lag ship hath have enough to give you a surfeit of they . to be use ill by such a poor , beggarly , bastardly fellow . " --" hold you blasphemous tongue , " cry : " how dare you mention he name with disrespect before I ? he use I ill ? no , he poor bleeding heart suffer more when he writ the cruel word than mine from read they . o ! he be all heroic virtue and angelic goodness . I be asham of the weakness of my own passion , for blame what I ought to admire . o , ! it be my good only wich he consult . to my interest he sacrifice both himself and I . the apprehension of ruin I hath drive he to despair . " " I be very glad , " say , " to hear you lag ship take that into you consideration ; for to be sure , it must be nothing less than ruin to give you mind to one that be turn out of door , and be not worth a farthing in the world . " " turn out of door ! " cry hastily : " how ! what dost thou mean ? " " why , to be sure , ma'am , my master no sooner tell about have offer to make love to you lag ship than the squire stripp he stark naked , and turn he out of door ! " " ! " say , " I have be the cursed , wretched cause of he destruction ! turn naked out of door ! here , Honou , take all the money I have ; take the ring from my finger . here , my watch : carry he all . go find he immediately . " " for 's sake , ma 'am , " answer , " do but consider , if my master should miss any of these thing , I should be make to answer for they . therefore let I beg you lag ship not to part with you watch and jewel . besides , the money , I think , be enough of all conscience ; and as for that , my master can never know anything of the matter
matter . " " here , then , " cry , " take every farthing I be worth , find he out immediately , and give it he . go , go , lose not a moment . " depart accord to order , and find below - stair , deliver he the purse , which contain sixteen guinea , be , indeed , the whole stock of ; for though she father be very liberal to she , she be much too generous to be rich . have receive the purse , set forward towards the alehouse ; but in the way a thought occur to he , whether he should not detain this money likewise . he conscience , however , immediately start at this suggestion , and begin to upbraid he with ingratitude to he benefactor . to this he avarice answer , that he conscience should have consider the matter before , when he deprive poor Jones of he  500 . that have quietly acquiesce in what be of so much greater importance , it be absurd , if not downright hypocrisy , to affect any qualm at this trifle . in return to which , conscience , like a good lawyer , attempt to distinguish between a absolute breach of trust , as here , where the goods be deliver , and a bare concealment of what be find , as in the former case . Avarice presently treat this with ridicule , call it a distinction without a difference , and absolutely insist that when once all pretension of honour and virtue be give up in any one instance , that there be no precedent for resort to they upon a second occasion . in short , poor conscience have certainly be defeat in the argument , have not fear stept in to she assistance , and very strenuously urge that the real distinction between the two action , do not lie in the different degree of honou but of safety : for that the secreting the  500 be a matter of very little hazard ; whereas the detain the sixteen guinea be liable to the utmost danger of discovery . by this friendly aid of , obtain a compleat victory in the mind of , and , after make he a few compliment on he honesty , force he to deliver the money to . xiv. a short chapter , contain a short dialogue between and he sister . have be engage abroad all that day . the squire meet she at she return home ; and when she enquire after , he acquaint she that he have secure she safe enough . " she be lock up in chamber , " cry he , " and Honou keep the key . " as he look be full of prodigious wisdom and sagacity when he give he sister this information , it be probable he expect much applause from she for what he have do ; but how be he disappoint when , with a most disdainful aspect , she cry , " sure , brother , you be the weakest of all man . why will you not confide in I for the management of my niece ? why will you interpose ? you have now undone all that I have be spend my breath in order to bring about . while I have be endeavour to fill she mind with maxim of prudence , you have be provoke she to reject they . English woman , brother , I thank heaven , be no slave . we be not to be lock up like the spanish and italian wives . we have as good a right to liberty as yourselves . we be to be convince by reason and persuasion only , and not govern by force . I have see the world , brother , and know what argument to make use of ; and if you folly have not prevent I , should have prevail with she to form she conduct by those rule of prudence and discretion which I formerly teach she . " " to be sure , " say the squire , " I be always in the wrong . " " brother , " answer the lady , " you be not in the wrong , unless when you meddle with matter beyond you knowledge . you must agree that I have see most of the world ; and happy have it be for my niece if she have not be take from under my care . it be by live at home with you that she hath learn romantic notion of love and nonsense . " " you do not imagine , I hope , " cry the squire , " that I have teach she any such thing . " " you ignorance , brother , " return she , " as the great say , almost subdue my patience . " [ *] " d -- and ! " answer the squire : " if he have the impudence to say so to my face , I would lend he a douse , thor he be never so great a man . patience ! a you come to that , sister , I have more occasion of patience , to be use like a overgrown schoolboy , as I be by you . do you think no one hath any understanding , unless he hath be about at court . the world be come to a fine pass indeed , if we be all fools , except a parcel of round - head and Hanover rat . Pox ! I hope the time be a come when we shall make fools of they , and every man shall enjoy he own . that be all , sister ; and every man shall enjoy he own . I hope to zee it
it , sister , before the Hanover rat have eat up all we corn , and leave we nothing but turnep to feed upon . " --" I protest , brother , " cry she , " you be now get beyond my understanding . you jargon of turnep and Hanover rat be to I perfectly unintelligible . " --" I believe , " cry he , " you do not care to hear of th'ey ; but the country interest may succeed one day or other for all that . " --" I wish , " answer the lady , " you would think a little of you daughter 's interest ; for , believe I , she be in greater danger than the nation ." --" just now , " say he , " you chide I for think on she , and would ha ' she leave to you . " --" and if you will promise to interpose no more , " answer she , " I will , out of my regard to my niece , undertake the charge . " -- " well , do then , " say the squire , " for you know I always agree , that woman be the properest to manage woman . " [ *] the reader may , perhaps , subdue he own patience , if he search for this in . ] Mr western then depart , mutter something with a air of disdain , concern woman and management of the nation . she immediately repair to 's apartment , who be now , after a day 's confinement , release again from she captivity . . contain three Day . I . a comparison between the world and the stage . the world hath be often compare to the theatre ; and many grave writer , as well as the poet , have consider human life as a great drama , resembl , in almost every particular , those scenical representation which be first report to have invent , and which have be since receive with so much approbation and delight in all polite country . this thought hath be carry so far , and be become so general , that some word proper to the theatre , and which be at first metaphorically apply to the world , be now indiscriminately and literally speak of both ; thus stage and scene be by common use grow as familiar to we , when we speak of life in general , as when we confine ourselves to dramatic performance : and when transaction behind the curtain be mention , 's be more likely to occur to we thought than Drury - lane . it may seem easy enough to account for all this , by reflec that the theatrical stage be nothing more than a representation , or , as call it , a imitation of what really exist ; and hence , perhaps , we might fairly pay a very high compliment to those who by they writings or action have be so capable of imitat life , as to have they picture in a manner confound with , or mistaken for , the original . but , in reality , we be not so fond of pay compliment to these people , whom we use as child frequently do the instrument of they amusement ; and have much more pleasure in hissing and buffet they , than in admir they excellence . there be many other reason which have induce we to see this analogy between the world and the stage . some have consider the larger part of mankind in the light of actor , as personat character no more they own , and to which in fact they have no better title , than the player hath to be in earnest thought the king or emperor whom he represent . thus the hypocrite may be say to be a player ; and indeed the Greek call they both by one and the same name . the brevity of life hath likewise give occasion to this comparison . so the immortal Shakespear -- -- be a poor player , that strut and fret he hour upon the stage , and then be hear no more . for which hackney quotation I will make the reader amend by a very noble one , which few , I believe , have read . it be take from a poem call the Deity , publish about nine year ago , and long since bury in ; a proof that good book , no more than good man , do always survive the bad . from [ *] all human action take they spring , the rise of empire and the fall of king ! see the vast theatre of time display ' , while o 'er the scene succeed heroe tread ! with pomp the shining image succeed , what leader triumph , and what monarch bleed ! perform the part thy providence assign ' , they pride , they passion , to thy end inclin ' : awhile they glitter in the face of day , then at thy nod the phantoms pass away ; no trace leave of all the busy scene , but that remembrance say --_ the thing have be !_ [ *] the Deity . in all these , however , and in every other similitude of life to the theatre , the resemblance hath be always take from the stage only . none , as I remember , have at all consider the audience at this great drama . but as often exhibit some of she best performance to a very full house , so will the behaviour of she spectator no less admit the above -mentioned comparison than that of she actor . in this vast theatre of time be seat the friend and the critic ; here be
be clap and shout , hiss and groan ; in short , everything which be ever see or hear at the - . let we examine this in one example ; for instance , in the behaviour of the great audience on that scene which be pleased to exhibit in the twelfth chapter of the preceding book , where she introduce run away with the  500 from he friend and benefactor . those who sit in the world 's upper gallery treat that incident , I be well convince , with they usual vociferation ; and every term of scurrilous reproach be most probably vent on that occasion . if we have descend to the next order of spectator , we should have find a equal degree of abhorrence , though less of noise and scurrility ; yet here the good woman give to the devil , and many of they expect every minute that the cloven - foot gentleman would fetch he own . the pit , as usual , be no doubt divide ; those who delight in heroic virtue and perfect character object to the producing such instance of villany , without punish they very severely for the sake of example . some of the author 's friend cry , " look 'e , gentlemen , the man be a villain , but it be nature for all that . " and all the young critic of the age , the clerk , apprentice , & c. , call it low , and fall a groaning . as for the box , they behave with they accustom politeness . most of they be attend to something else . some of those few who regard the scene at all , declare he be a bad kind of man ; while other refuse to give they opinion , till they have hear that of the best judge . now we , who be admit behind the scene of this great theatre of ( and no author ought to write anything besides dictionary and spelling - book who hath not this privilege ) , can censure the action , without conceive any absolute detestation of the person , whom perhaps may not have design to act a ill part in all she drama ; for in this instance life most exactly resemble the stage , since it be often the same person who represent the villain and the heroe ; and he who engage you admiration to - day will probably attract you contempt to - morrow . as , whom I regard in tragedy to be the greatest genius the world hath ever produce , sometimes condescend to play the fool ; so do the Great , and Laelius the wise , accord to , many year ago ; nay , report they to have be " incredibly childish . " these , it be true , play the fool , like my friend , in jest only ; but several eminent character have , in numberless instance of they life , play the fool egregiously in earnest ; so far as to render it a matter of some doubt whether they wisdom or folly be predominant ; or whether they be better intitle to the applause or censure , the admiration or contempt , the love or hatred , of mankind . those person , indeed , who have pass any time behind the scene of this great theatre , and be thoroughly acquaint not only with the several disguise which be there put on , but also with the fantastic and capricious behaviour of the Passions , who be the manager and directors of this theatre ( for as to , the patantee , he be know to be a very idle fellow and seldom to exert himself ) , may most probably have learn to understand the famous _nil admirari_ of , or in the phrase , to stare at nothing . a single bad act no more constitute a villain in life , than a single bad part on the stage . the passion , like the manager of a playhouse , often force man upon part without consult they judgment , and sometimes without any regard to they talents . thus the man , as well as the player , may condemn what he himself act ; nay , it be common to see vice sit as awkwardly on some man , as the character of would on the honest face of . upon the whole , then , the man of candour and of true understanding be never hasty to condemn . he can censure a imperfection , or even a vice , without rage against the guilty party . in a word , they be the same folly , the same childishness , the same ill - breeding , and the same ill - nature , which raise all the clamour and uproar both in life and on the stage . the worst of man generally have the word rogue and avillain most in they mouth , as the lowest of all wretch be the aptest to cry out low in the pit . . contain a conversation which have with himself . receive he effect from 's early in the morning , with the follow answer to he letter :-- " sir , " I be command by my uncle to acquaint you , that as he do not proceed to those measure he have take with you , without the greatest deliberation , and after the fullest evidence of you unworthiness , so will it be always out of you power to cause the least alteration in he resolution . he express great surprize at you presumption in say you have resign all pretension to a young lady , to whom it be impossible you should ever have have any , she birth and fortune have make she so infinitely
infinitely you superior . Lastly , I be command to tell you , that the only instance of you compliance with my uncle 's inclination which he require , be , you immediately quit this country . I can not conclude this without offer you my advice , as a , that you would seriously think of amend you life . that you may be assist with so to do , will be always the prayer of " you humble servant , " . " many contending passion be raise in we heroe 's mind by this letter ; but the tender prevail at last over the indignant and irascible , and a flood of tear come seasonably to he assistance , and possibly prevent he misfortunes from either turn he head , or burst he heart . he grow , however , soon asham of indulge this remedy ; and start up , he cry , " well , then , I will give the only instance he require of my obedience . I will go this moment -- but whither ?-- why , let direct ; since there be no other who think it of any consequence what become of this wretched person , it shall be a matter of equal indifference to myself . shall I alone regard what no other -- ! have I not reason to think there be another ?--one whose value be above that of the whole world !-- I may , I must imagine my be not indifferent to what become of I . shall I then leave this only friend -- and such a friend ? shall I not stay with she ?--Where -- how can I stay with she ? have I any hope of ever see she , though she be as desirous as myself , without expose she to the wrath of she father , and to what purpose ? can I think of solicite such a creature to consent to she own ruin ? shall I indulge any passion of mine at such a price ? shall I lurk about this country like a thief , with such intention ?-- no , I disdain , I detest the thought . , ; farewell , most lovly , most beloved -- " here passion stop he mouth , and find a vent at he eye . and now have take a resolution to leave the country , he begin to debate with himself whither he should go . the world , as phrase it , lay all before he ; and , no more than , have any man to whom he might resort for comfort or assistance . all he acquaintance be the acquaintance of ; and he have no reason to expect any countenance from they , as that have withdraw he favour from he . man of great and good characters should indeed be very cautious how they discard they dependent ; for the consequence to the unhappy sufferer be be discard by all other . what course of life to pursue , or to what business to apply himself , be a second consideration : and here the prospect be all a melancholy void . every profession , and every trade , require length of time , and what be worse , money ; for matter be so constitute , that " nothing out of nothing " be not a truer maxim in physic than in politics ; and every man who be greatly destitute of money , be on that account entirely exclude from all means of acquire it . at last the , that hospitable friend to the wretch , open she capacious arm to receive he ; and he instantly resolve to accept she kind invitation . to express myself less figuratively , he determine to go to sea . this think indeed no sooner suggest itself , than he eagerly embrace it ; and have presently hire horse , he set out for to put it in execution . but before we attend he on this expedition , we shall resort awhile to 's , and see what further happen to the . chapter iii . contain several dialogue . the morning in which depart , summon into she apartment ; and have first acquaint she that she have obtain she liberty of she father , she proceed to read she a long lecture on the subject of matrimony ; which she treat not as a romantic scheme of happiness arise from love , as it hath be describe by the poet ; nor do she mention any of those purpose for which we be teach by divine to regard it as institute by sacred authority ; she consider it rather as a fund in which prudent woman deposit they fortune to the best advantage , in order to receive a larger interest for they than they could have elsewhere . when have finish , answer , " that she be very incapable of argue with a lady of she aunt 's superior knowledge and experience , especially on a subject which she have so very little consider , as this of matrimony . " " argue with I , child ! " reply the other ; " I do not indeed expect it . I should have see the world to very little purpose truly , if I be to argue with one of you year . I have take this trouble , in order to instruct you . the antient philosopher , such as , , and other , do not use to argue with they scholar . you be to consider I , child , as , not ask you opinion , but only inform you of mine . " from which last word the reader may possibly imagine , that this lady have read no more of the philosophy of , than she have of that of
of ; and indeed we can not resolve he curiosity as to this point . " madam , " cry , " I have never presume to controvert any opinion of yours ; and this subject , as I say , I have never yet think of , and perhaps never may . " " indeed , , " reply the aunt , " this dissimulation with I be very foolish . the french shall as soon persuade I that they take foreign town in defence only of they own country , as you can impose on I to believe you have never yet think seriously of matrimony . how can you , child , affect to deny that you have consider of contract a alliance , when you so well know I be acquaint with the party with whom you desire to contract it ?-- a alliance as unnatural , and contrary to you interest , as a separate league with the french would be to the interest of the Dutch ! but however , if you have not hitherto consider of this matter , I promise you it be now high time , for my brother be resolve immediately to conclude the treaty with ; and indeed I be a sort of guarantee in the affair , and have promise you concurrence . " " indeed , madam , " cry , " this be the only instance in which I must disobey both yourself and my father . for this be a match which require very little consideration in I to refuse . " " if I be not as great a philosopher as himself , " return , " you would overcome my patience . what objection can you have to the young gentleman ? " " a very solid objection , in my opinion , " say --" I hate he . " " will you never learn a proper use of word ? " answer the aunt . " indeed , child , you should consult 's . it be impossible you should hate a man from whom you have receive no injury . by hatred , therefore , you mean no more than dislike , which be no sufficient objection against you marrying of he . I have know many couple , who have entirely dislike each other , lead very comfortable genteel life . believe I , child , I know these thing better than you . you will allow I , I think , to have see the world , in which I have not a acquaintance who would not rather be think to dislike she husband than to like he . the contrary be such out - of - fashion romantic nonsense , that the very imagination of it be shocke . " " indeed , madam , " reply , " I shall never marry a man I dislike . if I promise my father never to consent to any marriage contrary to he inclination , I think I may hope he will never force I into that state contrary to my own . " " Inclination ! " cry the aunt , with some warmth . " Inclination ! I be astonish at you assurance . a young woman of you age , and unmarried , to talk of inclination ! but whatever you inclination may be , my brother be resolve ; nay , since you talk of inclination , I shall advise he to hasten the treaty . Inclination ! " then fling herself upon she knee , and tear begin to trickle from she shining eye . she entreate she aunt , " to have mercy upon she , and not to resent so cruelly she unwillingness to make herself miserable ; " often urge , " that she alone be concerned , and that she happiness only be at stake . " as a bailiff , when well authorize by he writ , have possess himself of the person of some unhappy debtor , view all he tear without concern ; in vain the wretch captive attempt to raise compassion ; in vain the tender wife bereft of she companion , the little prattling boy , or frighted girl , be mention as inducement to reluctance . the noble bumtrap , blind and deaf to every circumstance of distress , greatly rise above all the motives to humanity , and into the hand of the gaoler resolve to deliver he miserable prey . not less blind to the tear , or less deaf to every entreaty of be the polintic aunt , nor less determined be she to deliver over the trembling maid into the arm of the . she answer with great impetuosity , " so far , madam , from you be concerned alone , you concern be the least , or surely the least important . it be the honour of you family which be concerned in this alliance ; you be only the instrument . do you conceive , mistress , that in a intermarriage between kingdom , as when a daughter of be marry into , the princess herself be alone consider in the match ? no ! it be a match between two kingdom , rather than between two person . the same happen in great family such as ours . the alliance between the family be the principal matter . you ought to have a greater regard for the honour of you family than for you own person ; and if the example of a princess can not inspire you with these noble thought , you can not surely complain at be use no worse than all princess be use . " " I hope , madam , " cry , with a little elevation of voice , " I shall never do anything to dishonour my family ; but as for , whatever may be the consequence
consequence , I be resolve against he , and no force shall prevail in he favour . " western , who have be within hearing during the greater part of the preceding dialogue , have now exhaust all he patience ; he therefore enter the room in a violent passion , cry , " d -- and I then if shatunt ha 'un , -- and I if shatunt , that be all -- that be all ; -- and I if shatunt . " have collect a sufficient quantity of wrath for the use of ; but she now transfer it all to the squire . " brother , " say she , " it be astonish that you will interfere in a matter which you have totally left to my negotiation . regard to my family hath make I take upon myself to be the mediating power , in order to rectify those mistakes in policy which you have commit in you daughter 's education . for , brother , it be you -- it be you preposterous conduct which hath eradicate all the seed that I have formerly sown in she tender mind . it be you yourself who have teach she disobedience . " -- " ! " cry the squire , foam at the mouth , " you be enough to conquer the patience of the devil ! have I ever teach my daughter disobedience ?--Here she stand ; speak honestly , girl , do ever I bid you be disobedient to I ? have not I do everything to humwe and to gratify you , and to make you obedient to I ? and very obedient to I she be when a little child , before you take she in hand and spoil she , by fill she head with a pack of court notion . why -- why -- why -- do I not overhear you tell she she must behave like a princess ? you have make a of the girl ; and how should she father , or anybody else , expect any obedience from she ? " --" , " answer , with a air of great disdain , " I can not express the contempt I have for you politics of all kind ; but I will appeal likewise to the young lady herself , whether I have ever teach she any principle of disobedience . on the contrary , niece , have I not endeavoure to inspire you with a true idea of the several relation in which a human creature stand in society ? have I not take infinite pain to show you , that the law of nature hath enjoin a duty on child to they parent ? have I not tell you what say on that subject ?-- a subject on which you be so notoriously ignorant when you come first under my care , that I verily believe you do not know the relation between a daughter and a father . " --" t'Tis a lie , " answer western . " the girl be no such fool , as to live to eleven year old without know that she be she father 's relation . " --" o ! more than ignorance , " answer the lady . " and as for you manners , brother , I must tell you , they deserve a cane . " --" why then you may gi' it I , if you think you be able , " cry the squire ; " nay , I suppose you niece there will be ready enough to help you . " --" , " say , " though I despise you beyond expression , yet I shall endure you insolence no longer ; so I desire my coach may be get ready immediately , for I be resolve to leave you house this very morning . " -- " and a good riddance too , " answer he ; " I can bear you insolence no longer , a you come to that . Blood ! it be almost enough of itself to make my daughter undervalue my sense , when she hear you tell I every minute you despise I . " --" it be impossible , it be impossible , " cry the aunt ; " no one can undervalue such a boor ." --" , " answer the squire , " I be no boar ; no , nor ass ; no , nor rat neither , madam . remember that -- I be no rat . I be a true , and not of you Hanover breed , that have eat up the nation . " --" thou be one of those wise man , " cry she , " whose nonsensical principles have undone the nation ; by weaken the hand of we government at home , and by discourage we friend and encourage we enemy abroad . " --" ! be you come back to you politics ? " cry the squire : " as for those I despise they as much as I do a f -- t . " which last word he accompany and grac with the very action , which , of all other , be the most proper to it . and whether it be this word or the contempt exprest for she politics , which must affect , I will not determine ; but she fly into the most violent rage , uttere phrase improper to be here related , and instantly burst out of the house . do she brother or she niece think proper either to stop or to follow she ; for the one be so much possess by concern , and the other by anger , that they be render almost motionless . the squire , however , send after he sister the same holloa which attend the departure of a hare ,
, when she be first start before the hound . he be indeed a great master of this kind of vociferation , and have a holla proper for most occasion in life . women who , like , know the world , and have apply themselves to philosophy and politics , would have immediately avail themselves of the present disposition of 's mind , by throw in a few artful compliment to he understanding at the expense of he absent adversary ; but poor be all simplicity . by which word we do not intend to insinuate to the reader , that she be silly , which be generally understood as a synonymous term with simple ; for she be indeed a most sensible girl , and she understanding be of the first rate ; but she want all that useful art which female convert to so many good purpose in life , and which , as it rather arise from the heart than from the head , be often the property of the silliest of woman . chapter iv . a picture of a country gentlewoman take from the life . have finish he holla , and take a little breath , begin to lament , in very pathetic term , the unfortunate condition of man , who be , say he , " always whipt in by the humours of some -- and would b -- or other . I think I be hard run enough by you mother for one man ; but after give she a , here be another b -- follow I upon the foil ; but curse my jacket if I will be run down in this manner by any of 'um . " never have a single dispute with she father , till this unlucky affair of , on any account , except in defence of she mother , whom she have love most tenderly , though she lose she in the eleventh year of she age . the squire , to whom that poor woman have be a faithful upper - servant all the time of they marriage , have return that behaviour by make what the world call a good husband . he very seldom swore at she ( perhaps not above once a week ) and never beat she ; she have not the least occasion for jealousy , and be perfect mistress of she time ; for she be never interrupt by she husband , who be engage all the morning in he field exercise , and all the evening with botle companion . she scarce indeed ever see he but at meal ; where she have the pleasure of carve those dish which she have before attend at the dressing . from these meal she retire about five minute after the other servants , have only stay to drink " the king over the water . " such be , it seem , 's order ; for it be a maxim with he , that woman should come in with the first dish , and go out after the first glass . obedience to these order be perhaps no difficult task ; for the conversation ( if it may be call so ) be seldom such as could entertain a lady . it consist chiefly of hallowing , singe , relation of sporting adventur , benefit -- -- y , and abuse of woman , and of the government . these , however , be the only season when see he wife ; for when he repair to she bed , he be generally so drunk that he could not see ; and in the sporting season he always rise from she before it be light . thus be she perfect mistress of she time , and have besides a coach and four usually at she command ; though unhappily , indeed , the badness of the neighbourhood , and of the roads , make this of little use ; for none who have set much value on they neck would have pass through the one , or who have set any value on they hour , would have visit the other . now to deal honestly with the reader , she do not make all the return expect to so much indulgence ; for she have be marry against she will by a fond father , the match have be rather advantageous on she side ; for the squire 's estate be upward of  3000 a year , and she fortune no more than a bare  8000 . hence perhaps she have contract a little gloominess of temper , for she be rather a good servant than a good wife ; nor have she always the gratitude to return the extraordinary degree of roaring mirth , with which the squire receive she , even with a good - humoured smile . she would , moreover , sometimes interfere with matter which do not concern she , as the violent drinking of she husband , which in the gentlest term she would take some of the few opportunity he give she of remonstrat against . and once in she life she very earnestly entreate he to carry she for two month to , which he peremptorily deny ; nay , be angry with he wife for the request ever after , be well assure that all the husband in be cuckold . for this last , and many other good reason , western at length heartily hate he wife ; and as he never conceal this hatred before she death , so he never forget it afterwards ; but when anything in the least sour he , as a bad scenting day , or a distemper among he hound , or any other such misfortune , he constantly vent he spleen by invective against the decease , say , " if my wife be alive now
now , she would be glad of this . " these invective he be especially desirous of throw forth before ; for as he love she more than he do any other , so he be really jealous that she have love she mother better than he . and this jealousy seldom fail of heightening on these occasion ; for he be not contente with violat she ear with the abuse of she mother , but endeavoure to force a explicit approbation of all this abuse ; with which desire he never could prevail upon she by any promise or threats to comply . hence some of my reader will , perhaps , wonder that the squire have not hat as much as he have hate she mother ; but I must inform they , that hatre be not the effect of love , even through the medium of jealousy . it be , indeed , very possible for jealous person to kill the object of they jealousy , but not to hate they . which sentiment be a pretty hard morsel , and bear something of the air of a paradox , we shall leave the reader to chew the cud upon it to the end of the chapter . v. the generous behaviour of towards she aunt . keep silence during the forego speech of she father , nor do she once answer otherwise than with a sigh ; but as he understand none of the language , or , as he call it , lingo of the eyes , so he be not satisfied without some further approbation of he sentiment , which he now demand of he daughter ; tell she , in the usual way , " he expect she be ready to take the part of everybody against he , as she have always do that of the benefit -- she mother . " remain still silent , he cry out , " what , art dumb ? why dost unt speak ? be not thy mother a -- b -- to I ? answer I that . what , I suppose you despise you father too , and do not think he good enough to speak to ? " " for 's sake , sir , " answer , " do not give so cruel a turn to my silence . I be sure I would sooner die than be guilty of any disrespect towards you ; but how can I venture to speak , when every word must either offend my dear papa , or convict I of the blackest ingratitude as well as impiety to the memory of the best of mother ; for such , I be certain , my mamma be always to I ? " " and you aunt , I suppose , be the best of sister too ! " reply the squire . " will you be so kind as to allow that she be a benefit -- ? I may fairly insist upon that , I think ? " " indeed , sir , " say , " I have great obligation to my aunt . she hath be a second mother to I . " " and a second wife to I too , " return western ; " so you will take she part too ! you will not confess that she hath act the part of the vilest sister in the world ? " " upon my word , sir , " cry , " I must belie my heart wickedly if I do . I know my aunt and you differ very much in you way of think ; but I have hear she a thousand time express the greatest affection for you ; and I be convinced , so far from she be the worst sister in the world , there be very few who love a brother better . " " the of all which be , " answer the squire , " that I be in the wrong . ay , certainly . ay , to be sure the woman be in the right , and the man in the wrong always . " " pardon I , sir , " cry . " I do not say so . " " what do not you say ? " answer the father : " you have the impudence to say she be in the right : doth it not follow then of course that I be in the wrong ? and perhaps I be in the wrong to suffer such a Presbyterian Hanoverian b -- to come into my house . she may ' dite I of a plot for anything I know , and give my estate to the government . " " so far , sir , from injur you or you estate , " say , " if my aunt have die yesterday , I be convince she would have leave you she whole fortune . " whether intend it or no , I shall not presume to assert ; but certain it be , these last word penetrate very deep into the ear of she father , and produce a much more sensible effect than all she have say before . he receive the sound with much the same action as a man receive a bullet in he head . he start , stagger , and turn pale . after which he remain silent above a minute , and then begin in the follow hesitating manner : " ! she would have leave I she esteate yesterday ! would she ? why yesterday , of all the day in the year ? I suppose if she die to - morrow , she will leave it to somebody else , and perhaps out of the vamily . " --" my aunt , sir , " cry , " hath very violent passion , and I can
can not answer what she may do under they influence . " " you can not ! " return the father : " and pray who hath be the occasion of put she into those violent passion ? Nay , who hath actually put she into they ? be not you and she hard at it before I come into the room ? besides , be not all we quarrel about you ? I have not quarrell with sister this many year but upon you account ; and now you would throw the whole blame upon I , as thof I should be the occasion of she leave the esteate out of ' the vamily . I could have expect no better indeed ; this be like the return you make to all the rest of my fondness . " " I beseech you then , " cry , " upon my knee I beseech you , if I have be the unhappy occasion of this difference , that you will endeaavor to make it up with my aunt , and not suffer she to leave you house in this violent rage of anger : she be a very good - natured woman , and a few civil word will satisfy she . let I entreat you , sir . " " so I must go and ask pardon for you fault , must I ? " answer western . " you have lose the hare , and I must draw every way to find she again ? indeed , if I be certain " -- here he stopt , and throw in more entreaty , at length prevail upon he ; so that after vent two or three bitter sarcastical expression against he daughter , he depart as fast as he could to recover he sister , before she equipage could be get ready . then return to she chamber of mourning , where she indulge herself ( if the phrase may be allow I ) in all the luxury of tender grief . she read over more than once the letter which she have receive from ; she muff too be use on this occasion ; and she bath both these , as well as herself , with she tear . in this situation the friendly exert she utmost ability to comfort she afflict mistress . she run over the name of many young gentleman : and have greatly commend they part and person , assure that she might take she choice of any . these method must have certainly be use with some success in disorder of the like kind , or so skilful a practitioner as would never have venture to apply they ; nay , I have hear that the college of chambermaid hold they to be as sovereign remedy as any in the female dispensary ; but whether it be that 's disease differ inwardly from those case with which it agree in external symptom , I will not assert ; but , in fact , the good waiting - woman do more harm than good , and at last so incense she mistress ( which be no easy matter ) that with a angry voice she dismiss she from she presence . chapter vi . contain great variety of matter . the squire overtake he sister just as she be step into the coach , and partly by force , and partly by solicitation , prevail upon she to order she horse back into they quarter . he succeed in this attempt without much difficulty ; for the lady be , as we have already hinte , of a most placable disposition , and greatly love she brother , though she despise he part , or rather he little knowledge of the world . poor , who have first set on foot this reconciliation , be now make the sacrifice to it . they both concur in they censure on she conduct ; jointly declare war against she , and directly proceed to counsel , how to carry it on in the most vigorous manner . for this purpose , western propose not only a immediate conclusion of the treaty with , but as immediately to carry it into execution ; say , " that there be no other way to succeed with she niece , but by violent method , which she be convince have not sufficient resolution to resist . by violent , " say she , " I mean rather , hasty measure ; for as to confinement or absolute force , no such thing must or can be attempt . we plan must be concert for a surprize , and not for a storm . " these matter be resolve on , when come to pay a visit to he mistress . the squire no sooner heard of he arrival , than he steep aside , by he sister 's advice , to give he daughter order for the proper reception of she lover : which he do with the most bitter execration and denunciation of judgment on she refusal . the impetuosity of the squire bear down all before he ; and , as she aunt very wisely foresaw , be not able to resist he . she agree , therefore , to see , though she have scarce spirits or strength sufficient to utter she assent . indeed , to give a peremptory denial to a father whom she so tenderly love , be no easy task . have this circumstance be out of the case , much less resolution than what she be really mistress of , would , perhaps , have serve she ; but it be no unusual thing to ascribe those action entirely to fear , which be in a great measure produce by love . in pursuance , therefore , of she father 's peremptory command , now admit 's visit . scene
scene like this , when paint at large , afford , as we have observe , very little entertainment to the reader . here , therefore , we shall strictly adhere to a rule of ; by which writer be direct to pass over all those matters which they despair of placing in a shining light ;-- a rule , we conceive , of excellent use as well to the historian as to the poet ; and which , if follow , must at least have this good effect , that many a great evil ( for so all great book be call ) would thus be reduce to a small one . it be possible the great art use by at this interview would have prevail on to have make another man in he circumstance she confident , and to have reveal the whole secret of she heart to he ; but she have contract so ill a opinion of this young gentleman , that she be resolve to place no confidence in he ; for simplicity , when set on its guard , be often a match for cunning . she behaviour to he , therefore , be entirely force , and indeed such as be generally prescribe to virgin upon the second formal visit from one who be appoint for they husband . but though declare himself to the squire perfectly satisfied with he reception ; yet that gentleman , who , in company with he sister , have overheard all , be not so well please . he resolve , in pursuance of the advice of the sage lady , to push matter as forward as possible ; and address himself to he intend son - in - law in the hunting phrase , he cry , after a loud holla , " follow she , boy , follow she ; run in , run in ; that be it , honey . dead , dead , dead . never be bashful , nor stand shall I , shall I ? and I can finish all matters between we this afternoon , and let we ha ' the wedding to - morrow . " Blifil have convey the utmost satisfaction into he countenance , answer , " as there be nothing , sir , in this world which I so eagerly desire as a alliance with you family , except my union with the most amiable and deserve , you may easily imagine how impatient I must be to see myself in possession of my two highest wish . if I have not therefore importune you on this head , you will impute it only to my fear of offend the lady , by endeavour to hurry on so bless a event faster than a strict compliance with all the rule of decency and decorum will permit . but if , by you interest , sir , she might be induce to dispense with any formality -- " " Formality ! with a pox ! " answer the squire . " Pooh , all stuff and nonsense ! I tell thee , she shall ha ' thee to - morrow : you will know the world better hereafter , when you come to my age . never gi' they consent , man , if they can help it , ' ti not the fashion . if I have stay for she mother 's consent , I might have be a batchelor to this day .-- to she , to she , co to she , that be it , you jolly dog . I tell thee shat ha ' she to - morrow morning . " suffer himself to be overpower by the forcible rhetoric of the squire ; and it be agree that western should close with that very afternoon , the lover depart home , have first earnestly beg that no violence might be offer to the lady by this haste , in the same manner as a popish inquisitor beg the lay power to do no violence to the heretic deliver over to it , and against whom the church hath pass sentence . and , to say the truth , have pass sentence against ; for , however please he have declare himself to western with he reception , he be by no means satisfied , unless it be that he be convince of the hatred and scorn of he mistress : and this have produce no less reciprocal hatred and scorn in he . it may , perhaps , be ask , why then do he not put a immediate end to all further courtship ? I answer , for that very reason , as well as for several other equally good , which we shall now proceed to open to the reader . though be not of the complexion of , nor ready to eat every woman he see ; yet he be far from be destitute of that appetite which be say to be the common property of all animal . with this , he have likewise that distinguishing taste , which serve to direct man in they choice of the object or food of they several appetite ; and this teach he to consider as a most delicious morsel , indeed to regard she with the same desire which a ortolan inspire into the soul of a epicure . now the agony which affect the mind of , rather augmented than impaire she beauty ; for she tear add brightness to she eye , and she breast rise higher with she sigh . indeed , no one hath see beauty in it be highest lustre who hath never see it in distress . therefore look on this human ortolan with greater desire than when he view she last ; nor be he desire at all lessen by the aversion which he discover in she to himself . on the
the contrary , this serve rather to heighten the pleasure he propose in rifl she charms , as it add triumph to lust ; nay , he have some further view , from obtain the absolute possession of she person , which we detest too much even to mention ; and revenge itself be not without its share in the gratification which he promise himself . the rivall poor , and supplant he in she affections , add another spur to he pursuit , and promise another additional rapture to he enjoyment . besides all these views , which to some scrupulous person may seem to saavor too much of malevolence , he have one prospect , which few reader will regard with any great abhorrence . and this be the estate of ; which be all to be settle on he daughter and she issue ; for so extravagant be the affection of that fond parent , that , provide he child would but consent to be miserable with the husband he choose , he care not at what price he purchase he . for these reason be so desirous of the match that he intend to deceive , by pretending love to she ; and to deceive she father and he own uncle , by pretend he be belove by she . in do this he avail himself of the piety of , who hold , that if the end propose be religious ( as surely matrimony be ) , it matter not how wicked be the means . as to other occasion , he use to apply the philosophy of , which teach , that the end be immaterial , so that the means be fair and consistent with moral rectitude . to say truth , there be few occurrence in life on which he could not draw advantage from the precept of one or other of those great master . little deceit be indeed necessary to be practise on ; who think the inclination of he daughter of as little consequence as himself conceive they to be ; but as the sentiment of be of a very different kind , so it be absolutely necessary to impose on he . in this , however , be so well assist by western , that he succeed without difficulty ; for as have be assure by she father that have a proper affection for , and that all which he have suspect concern be entirely false , have nothing more to do than to confirm these assertion ; which he do with such equivocation , that he preserve a salvo for he conscience ; and have the satisfaction of convey a lie to he uncle , without the guilt of tell one . when he be examine touch the inclination of by , who say , " he would on no account be accessary to force a young lady into a marriage contrary to she own will ; " he answer , " that the real sentiment of young lady be very difficult to be understand ; that she behaviour to he be full as forward as he wish it , and that if he could believe she father , she have all the affection for he which any lover could desire . as for , " say he , " whom I be loth to call villain , though he behaviour to you , sir , sufficiently justify the appellation , he own vanity , or perhaps some wicked view , might make he boast of a falsehood ; for if there have be any reality in 's love to he , the greatness of she fortune would never have suffer he to desert she , as you be well inform he hath . Lastly , sir , I promise you I would not myself , for any consideration , no , not for the whole world , consent to marry this young lady , if I be not persuade she have all the passion for I which I desire she should have . " this excellent method of convey a falsehood with the heart only , without make the tongue guilty of a untruth , by the means of equivocation and imposture , hath quiet the conscience of many a notable deceiver ; and yet , when we consider that it be on which these endeavour to impose , it may possibly seem capable of afforde only a very superficial comfort ; and that this artful and refin distinction between communicate a lie , and tell one , be hardly worth the pain it cost they . be pretty well satisfie with what and tell he : and the treaty be now , at the end of two day , conclude . nothing then remain previous to the office of the priest , but the office of the lawyer , which threaten to take up so much time , that western offer to bind himself by all manner of covenant , rather than defer the happiness of the young couple . indeed , he be so very earnest and press , that a indifferent person might have conclude he be more a principal in this match than he really be ; but this eagerness be natural to he on all occasion : and he conduct every scheme he undertake in such a manner , as if the success of that alone be sufficient to constitute the whole happiness of he life . the joint importunity of both father and son - in - law would probably have prevail on , who brook but ill any delay of give happiness to other , have not herself prevent it , and take measure to put a final end to the whole treaty , and to rob both church and law of those tax which these wise body have think proper to receive from the propagation of the human species
species in a lawful manner . of which in the next chapter . chapter vii . a strange resolution of , and a more strange stratagem of . though be principally attach to she own interest , she be not without some little attachment to . to say truth , it be very difficult for any one to know that young lady without love she . she no sooner therefore hear a piece of news , which she imagine to be of great importance to she mistress , than , quite forget the anger which she have conceive two day before , at she unpleasant dismission from 's presence , she run hastily to inform she of the news . the beginning of she discourse be as abrupt as she entrance into the room . " of dear ma 'am ! " say she , " what doth you lag ship think ? to be sure I be frightene out of my wit ; and yet I think it my duty to tell you la'ship , though perhaps it may make you angry , for we servants do not always know what will make we lady angry ; for , to be sure , everything be always laid to the charge of a servant . when we lady be out of humour , to be sure we must be scolde ; and to be sure I should not wonder if you la's ship should be out of humwe ; nay , it must surprize you certainly , ay , and shock you too ." --" good Honour , let I know it without any longer preface , " say ; " there be few thing , I promise you , which will surprize , and fewer which will shock I . " -- " dear ma 'am , " answer , " to be sure , I overhear my master talk to about get a licence this very afternoon ; and to be sure I hear he say , you lag ship should be marry to - morrow morning . " turn pale at these word , and repeat eagerly , " to - morrow morning ! " --" yes , ma 'am , " reply the trusty waiting - woman , " I will take my oath I hear my master say so . " -- " Honou , " say , " you have both surprize and shock I to such a degree that I have scarce any breath or spirit leave . what be to be do in my dreadful situation ? " --" I wish I be able to advise you lag ship , " say she . " do advise I , " cry ; " pray , dear Honou , advise I . think what you would attempt if it be you own case . " -- " indeed , ma 'am , " cry , " I wish you la'ship and I could change situation ; that be , I mean without hurt you lag ship ; for to be sure I do not wish you so bad as to be a servant ; but because that if so be it be my case , I should find no manner of difficulty in it ; for , in my poor opinion , young be a charming , sweet , handsome man ." --" do not mention such stuff , " cry . " such stuff ! " repeat ; " why , there . well , to be sure , what be one man 's meat be another man 's poison , and the same be altogether as true of woman . " -- " Honour , " say , " rather than submit to be the wife of that contemptible wretch , I would plunge a dagger into my heart . " --" of lud ! ma 'am ! " answer the other , " I be sure you frighten I out of my wit now . let I beseech you lag ship not to suffer such wicked thought to come into you head . of lud ! to be sure I tremble every inch of I . dear ma 'am , consider , that to be deny burial , and to have you corpse bury in the highway , and a stake drive through you , as farmer be serve at ; and , to be sure , he ghost hath walk there ever since , for several people have see he . to be sure it can be nothing but the devil which can put such wicked thought into the head of anybody ; for certainly it be less wicked to hurt all the world than one 's own dear self ; and so I have hear say by more parson than one . if you lag ship hath such a violent aversion , and hate the young gentleman so very bad , that you can not bear to think of go into bed to he ; for to be sure there may be such antipathy in nature , and one have lieverer touch a toad than the flesh of some people . " -- have be too much wrapt in contemplation to pay any great attention to the forego excellent discourse of she maid ; interrupt she therefore , without make any answer to it , she say , " Honour , I be come to a resolution . I be determined to leave my father 's house this very night ; and if you have the friendship for I which you have often professed , you will keep I company . " --" that I will , ma 'am , to the world 's end , " answer ; " but I beg you lag ship to consider the consequence before you undertake any rash action . where can you la' ship possibly go ? " --" there be
be , " reply , " a lady of quality in , a relation of mine , who spend several month with my aunt in the country ; during all which time she treat I with great kindness , and express so much pleasure in my company , that she earnestly desire my aunt to suffer I to go with she to . as she be a woman of very great note , I shall easily find she out , and I make no doubt of be very well and kindly receive by she . " --" I would not have you la'ship too confident of that , " cry ; " for the first lady I live with use to invite people very earnestly to she house ; but if she hear afterwards they be come , she use to get out of the way . besides , though this lady would be very glad to see you lag ship , as to be sure anybody would be glad to see you lag ship , yet when she hear you lag ship be run away from my master -- " " you be mistaken , , " say : " she look upon the authority of a father in a much lower light than I do ; for she press I violently to go to with she , and when I refuse to go without my father 's consent , she laugh I to scorn , call I silly country girl , and say , I should make a pure loving wife , since I could be so dutiful a daughter . so I have no doubt but she will both receive I and protect I too , till my father , finde I out of he power , can be bring to some reason . " " well , but , ma 'am , " answer , " how doth you la'ship think of make you escape ? where will you get any horse or conveyance ? for as for you own horse , as all the servant know a little how matter stand between my master and you la'ship , will be hang before he will suffer it to go out of the stable without my master 's express order . " " I intend to escape , " say , " by walk out of the door when they be open . I thank heaven my leg be very able to carry I . they have support I many a long evening " --" yes , to be sure , " cry , " I will follow you la'ship through the world ; but you la' ship have almost as good be alone : for I should not be able to defend you , if any robber , or other villain , should meet with you . Nay , I should be in as horrible a fright as you la' ship ; for to be certain , they would ravish we both . besides , ma 'am , consider how cold the night be now ; we shall be freeze to death . " --" a good brisk pace , " answer , " will preserve we from the cold ; and if you can not defend I from a villain , Honour , I will defend you ; for I will take a pistol with I . there be two always charge in the hall . " --" dear ma 'am , you frighten I more and more , " cry : " sure you lag ship would not venture to fire it off ! I have rather run any chance than you lag ship should do that . " -- " why so ? " say , smile ; " would not you , Honour , fire a pistol at any one who should attack you virtue ? " --" to be sure , ma 'am , " cry , " one 's virtue be a dear thing , especially to we poor servants ; for it be we livelihood , as a body may say : yet I mortally hate fire - arm ; for so many accident happen by they . " -- " well , well , " say , " I believe I may ensure you virtue at a very cheap rate , without carry any arm with we ; for I intend to take horse at the very first town we come to , and we shall hardly be attack in we way thither . look 'ee , Honour , I be resolve to go ; and if you will attend I , I promise you I will reward you to the very utmost of my power . " this last argument have a stronger effect on than all the preceding . and since she see she mistress so determined , she desiste from any further dissuasion . they then enter into a debate on way and means of execute they project . here a very stubborn difficulty occur , and this be the removal of they effect , which be much more easily get over by the mistress than by the maid ; for when a lady hath once take a resolution to run to a lover , or to run from he , all obstacle be consider as trifle . but be inspire by no such motive ; she have no rapture to expect , nor any terror to shin ; and besides the real value of she clothes , in which consist a great part of she fortune , she have a capricious fondness for several gown , and other thing ; either because they become she , or because they be give she by such a particular person ; because she have buy they lately , or because she have have they long ; or for some other reason equally good ; so that she could
could not endure the thought of leave the poor thing behind she expose to the mercy of , who , she doubt not , would in he rage make they suffer martyrdom . the ingenious have apply all she oratory to dissuade she mistress from she purpose , when she find she positively determine , at last start the follow expedient to remove she clothes , viz. , to get herself turn out of door that very evening . highly approve this method , but doubt how it might be bring about . " o , ma 'am , " cry , " you lag ship may trust that to I ; we servant very well know how to obtain this favour of we master and mistress ; though sometimes , indeed , where they owe we more wage than they can readily pay , they will put up with all we affront , and will hardly take any warning we can give they ; but the squire be none of those ; and since you lag ship be resolve upon set out to - night , I warrant I get discharge this afternoon . " it be then resolve that she should pack up some linen and a night - gown for , with she own thing ; and as for all she other clothes , the young lady abandon they with no more remorse than the sailor feel when he throw over the goods of other , in order to save he own life . chapter viii . contain scene of altercation , of no very uncommon kind . have scarce sooner part from she young lady , than something ( for I would not , like the old woman in , injure the devil by any false accusation , and possibly he might have no hand in it ) -- but something , I say , suggest itself to she , that by sacrifice and all she secret to , she might probably make she fortune . many consideration urge this discovery . the fair prospect of a handsome reward for so great and acceptable a service to the squire , tempt she avarice ; and again , the danger of the enterprize she have undertaken ; the uncertainty of its success ; night , cold , robber , ravisher , all alarme she fear . so forcibly do all these operate upon she , that she be almost determined to go directly to the squire , and to lay open the whole affair . she be , however , too upright a judge to decree on one side , before she have hear the other . and here , first , a journey to appear very strongly in support of . she eagerly long to see a place in which she fancie charms short only of those which a rapture saint imagine in heaven . in the next place , as she know to have much more generosity than she master , so she fidelity promise she a greater reward than she could gain by treachery . she then -examin all the article which have raise she fear on the other side , and find , on fairly sift the matter , that there be very little in they . and now both scale be reduce to a pretty even balance , she love to she mistress be throw into the scale of she integrity , make that rather preponderate , when a circumstance struck upon she imagination which might have have a dangerous effect , have its whole weight be fairly put into the other scale . this be the length of time which must intervene before would be able to fulfil she promise ; for though she be intitle to she mother 's fortune at the death of she father , and to the sum of  3000 leave she by a uncle when she come of age ; yet these be distant day , and many accident might prevent the intend generosity of the young lady ; whereas the reward she might expect from be immediate . but while she be pursue this think the good genius of , or that which preside over the integrity of , or perhaps mere chance , send a accident in she way , which at once preserve she fidelity , and even facilitate the intend business . 's maid claim great superiority over on several account . first , she birth be higher ; for she great - grandmother by the mother 's side be a cousin , not far remove , to a irish peer . secondly , she wage be greater . and lastly , she have be at , and have of consequence see more of the world . she have always behaved , therefore , to with that reserve , and have always exact of she those mark of distinction , which every order of female preserve and require in conversation with those of a inferior order . now as Honou do not at all time agree with this doctrine , but would frequently break in upon the respect which the other demand , 's maid be not at all pleased with she company ; indeed , she earnestly long to return home to the house of she mistress , where she domineer at will over all the other servants . she have be greatly , therefore , disappointed in the morning , when have change she mind on the very point of departure ; and have be in what be vulgarly call a glouting humour ever since . in this humour , which be none of the sweetest , she come into the room where be debat with herself in the manner we have above relate . Honou no sooner see she , than she address she in the follow obliging phrase : " Soh , madam , I find we be
be to have the pleasure of you company longer , which I be afraid the quarrel between my master and you lady would have rob we of . " --" I do not know , madam , " answer the other , " what you mean by we and we . I assure you I do not look on any of the servants in this house to be proper company for I . I be company , I hope , for they better every day in the week . I do not speak on you account , ; for you be a civilized young woman ; and when you have see a little more of the world , I should not be asham to walk with you in 's . " -- " Hoity toity ! " cry , " madam be in she air , I protest . , forsooth ! sure , madam , you might call I by my sir - name ; for though my lady call I Honour , I have a sir - name as well as other folk . Asham to walk with I , quotha ! marry , as good as yourself , I hope . " -- " Since you make such a return to my civility , " say the other , " I must acquaint you , , that you be not so good as I . in the country , indeed , one be obliged to take up with all kind of trumpery ; but in town I visit none but the woman of woman of quality . indeed , , there be some difference , I hope , between you and I . " --" I hope so too , " answer : " there be some difference in we age , and -- I think in we persons . " upon speak which last word , she strut by 's maid with the most provoke air of contempt ; turn up she nose , toss she head , and violently brush the hoop of she competitor with she own . the other lady put on one of she most malicious sneer , and say , " creature ! you be below my anger ; and it be beneath I to give ill word to such a audacious saucy trollop ; but , hussy , I must tell you , you breeding show the meanness of you birth as well as of you education ; and both very properly qualify you to be the mean serving - woman of a country girl . " --" do not abuse my lady , " cry : " I will not take that of you ; she be as much better than yours as she be younger , and ten thousand time more handsomer . " here ill luck , or rather good luck , send western to see she maid in tear , which begin to flow plentifully at she approach ; and of which be ask the reason by she mistress , she presently acquaint she that she tear be occasion by the rude treatment of that creature there -- mean . " and , madam , " continue she , " I could have despise all she say to I ; but she hath have the audacity to affro not you ladyship , and to call you ugly -- yes , madam , she call you ugly old cat to my face . I could not bear to hear you ladyship call ugly . " --" why do you repeat she impudence so often ? " say . and then turn to , she ask she " how she have the assurance to mention she name with disrespect ? " --" Disrespect , madam ! " answer ; " I never mention you name at all : I say somebody be not as handsome as my mistress , and to be sure you know that as well as I ." --" Hussy , " reply the lady , " I will make such a saucy trollop as yourself know that I be not a proper subject of you discourse . and if my brother doth not discharge you this moment , I will never sleep in he house again . I will find he out , and have you discharge this moment . " --" Discharge ! " cry Honou ; " and suppose I be : there be more place in the world than one . thank heaven , good servant need not want place ; and if you turn away all who do not think you handsome , you will want servants very soon ; let I tell you that . " spoke , or rather thunder , in answer ; but as she be hardly articulate , we can not be very certain of the identical word ; we shall therefore omin insert a speech which at best would not greatly redound to she honour . she then depart in search of she brother , with a countenance so full of rage , that she resemble one of the fury rather than a human creature . the two chambermaid be again leave alone , begin a second bout at altercation , which soon produce a combat of a more active kind . in this the victory belong to the lady of inferior rank , but not without some loss of blood , of hair , and of lawn and muslin . chapter ix . the wise demeanour of in the character of a magistrate . a hint to justex of peace , concern the necessary qualification of a clerk ; with extraordinary instance of paternal madness and filial affection . Logicians sometimes prove too much by a argument , and politician often overreach themselves in a scheme . thus have it like to have happene to , who , instead of recover the rest of
of she clothes , have like to have stop even those she have on she back from escaping ; for the squire no sooner hear of she have abuse he sister , than he swore twenty oath he would send she to . be a very good - natured woman , and ordinarily of a forgive temper . she have lately remit the trespass of a stage - coachman , who have overturn she post-chaise into a ditch ; nay , she have even break the law , in refuse to prosecute a highwayman who have rob she , not only of a sum of money , but of she ear - ring ; at the same time d -- ne she , and say , " such handsome b -- 's as you do not want jewel to set they off , and be d -- n' to you . " but now , so uncertain be we temper , and so much do we at different time differ from ourselves , she would hear of no mitigation ; nor could all the affect penitence of , nor all the entreaty of for she own servant , prevail with she to desist from earnestly desire she brother to execute justiceship ( for it be indeed a syllable more than justice ) on the wench . but luckily the clerk have a qualification , which no clerk to a justice of peace ought ever to be without , namely , some understanding in the law of this realm . he therefore whisper in the ear of the justice that he would exceed he authority by commit the girl to , as there have be no attempt to break the peace ; " for I be afraid , sir , " say he , " you can not legally commit any one to Bridewell only for ill - breeding . " in matter of high importance , particularly in case relate to the game , the justice be not always attentive to these admonition of he clerk ; for , indeed , in execute the law under that head , many justex of peace suppose they have a large discretionary power , by virtue of which , under the notion of searching for and take away engine for the destruction of the game , they often commit trespass , and sometimes felony , at they pleasure . but this offence be not of quite so high a nature , nor so dangerous to the society . here , therefore , the justice behave with some attention to the advice of he clerk ; for , in fact , he have already have two information exhibit against he in the 's , and have no curiosity to try a third . the squire , therefore , put on a most wise and significant countenance , after a preface of several hum and hah , tell he sister , that upon more mature deliberation , he be of opinion , that " as there be no breaking up of the peace , such as the law , " say he , " call break open a door , or break a hedge , or break a head , or any such sort of breaking , the matter do not amount to a felonious kind of a thing , nor trespass , nor damage , and , therefore , there be no punishment in the law for it . " say , " she know the law much better ; that she have know servants very severely punish for affront they master ; " and then name a certain justice of the peace in , " who , " she say , " would commit a servant to Bridewell at any time when a master or mistress desire it . " " like enough , " cry the squire ; " it may be so in ; but the law be different in the country . " here follow a very learned dispute between the brother and sister concern the law , which we would insert , if we imagine many of we reader could understand it . this be , however , at length refer by both party to the clerk , who decide it in favour of the magistrate ; and be , in the end , oblige to contend herself with the satisfaction of have turn away ; to which herself very readily and cheerfully consent . thus Fortune , after have divert herself , accord to custom , with two or three frolick , at last dispose all matters to the advantage of we heroine ; who indeed succeed admirably well in she deceit , consider it be the first she have ever practise . and , to say the truth , I have often concluded , that the honest part of mankind would be much too hard for the knavish , if they could bring themselves to incur the guilt , or think it worth they while to take the trouble . Honou act she part to the utmost perfection . she no sooner see herself secure from all danger of , a word which have raise most horrible idea in she mind , than she resume those air which she terror before have a little abated ; and laid down she place , with as much affectation of content , and indeed of contempt , as be ever practise at the resignation of place of much greater importance . if the reader pleasis , therefore , we chuse rather to say she resign -- which hath , indeed , be always hold a synonymous expression with be turn out , or turn away . order she to be very expeditious in packing ; for he sister declare she would not sleep another night under the same roof with so impudent a slut . to work therefore she go ,
, and that so earnestly , that everything be ready early in the evening ; when , have receive she wage , away pack bag and baggage , to the great satisfaction of every one , but of none more than of ; who , have appoint she maid to meet she at a certain place not far from the house , exactly at the dreadful and ghostly hour of twelve , begin to prepare for she own departure . but first she be oblige to give two painful audience , the one to she aunt , and the other to she father . in these Mrs western herself begin to talk to she in a more peremptory stile than before : but she father treat she in so violent and outrageous a manner , that he frightene she into a affect compliance with he will ; which so highly please the good squire , that he change he frown into smile , and he menace into promise : he vow he whole soul be wrapt in hers ; that she consent ( for so he construe the word , " you know , sir , I must not , nor can , refuse to obey any absolute command of yours " ) have make he the happiest of mankind . he then give she a large bank - bill to dispose of in any trinket she please , and kiss and embrace she in the fondest manner , while tear of joy trickle from those eyes which a few moment before have dart fire and rage against the dear object of all he affection . instance of this behaviour in parent be so common , that the reader , I doubt not , will be very little astonished at the whole conduct of . if he should , I own I be not able to account for it ; since that he love he daughter most tenderly , be , I think , beyond dispute . so indeed have many other , who have render they child most completely miserable by the same conduct ; which , though it be almost universal in parent , hath always appear to I to be the most unaccountable of all the absurdity which ever enter into the brain of that strange prodigious creature man . the latter part of 's behaviour have so strong a effect on the tender heart of , that it suggest a thought to she , which not all the sophistry of she polintic aunt , nor all the menace of she father , have ever once bring into she head . she reverence she father so piously , and love he so passionately , that she have scarce ever feel more pleasing sensation , than what arise from the share she frequently have of contributing to he amusement , and sometimes , perhaps , to higher gratification ; for he never could contain the delight of hearing she commend , which he have the satisfaction of hearing almost every day of she life . the idea , therefore , of the immense happiness she should convey to she father by she consent to this match , make a strong impression on she mind . again , the extreme piety of such a act of obedience work very forcibly , as she have a very deep sense of religion . Lastly , when she reflect how much she herself be to suffer , be indeed to become little less than a sacrifice , or a martyr , to filial love and duty , she feel a agreeable tickling in a certain little passion , which though it bear no immediate affinity either to religion or virtue , be often so kind as to lend great assistance in execute the purpose of both . be charme with the contemplation of so heroic a action , and begin to compliment herself with much premature flattery , when , who lay hide in she muff , suddenly creep out , and like Punchinello in a puppet - show , kick all out before he . in truth ( for we scorn to deceive we reader , or to vindicate the character of we heroine by ascrib she action to supernatural impulse ) the thought of she belov , and some hope ( however distant ) in which he be very particularly concerned , immediately destroy all which filial love , piety , and pride have , with they jous not endeavour , be labour to bring about . but before we proceed any farther with , we must now look back to . chapter x . contain several matter , natural enough perhaps , but low . the reader will be pleased to remember , that we leave , in the beginning of this book , on he road to ; be determined to seek he fortune at sea , or rather , indeed , to fly away from he fortune on shore . it happen ( a thing not very unusual ) , that the guide who undertake to conduct he on he way , be unluckily unacquainted with the road ; so that have miss he right track , and be asham to ask information , he ramble about backward and forward till night come on , and it begin to grow dark . suspect what have happen , acquaint the guide with he apprehension ; but he insist on it , that they be in the right road , and add , it would be very strange if he should not know the road to ; though , in reality , it would have be much stranger if he have know it , have never past through it in he life before . have not such implicit faith in he guide , but that on they arrival at a village he inquire of the first fellow he see ,
, whether they be in the road to . " Whence do you come ? " cry the fellow . " no matter , " say , a little hastily ; " I want to know if this be the road to ? " --" the road to ! " cry the fellow , scratch he head : " why , measter , I believe you will hardly get to this way to - night . " -- " Prithee , friend , then , " answer , " do tell we which be the way . " --" why , measter , " cry the fellow , " you must be come out of you road the know whither ; for thick way goeth to . " -- " well , and which way go to ? " say . " why , you be go away from , " answer the fellow . " then , " say , " we must go back again ? " --" ay , you must , " say the fellow . " well , and when we come back to the top of the hill , which way must we take ? " --" why , you must keep the strait road . " --" but I remember there be two roads , one to the right and the other to the left . " --" why , you must keep the right - hand road , and then gu strait vorward ; only remember to turn vurst to you right , and then to you left again , and then to you right , and that bring you to the squire 's ; and then you must keep strait vorward , and turn to the left . " another fellow now come up , and ask which way the gentleman be go ; of which be inform by , he first scratch he head , and then lean upon a pole he have in he hand , begin to tell he , " that he must keep the right - hand road for about a mile , or a mile and a half , or such a matter , and then he must turn short to the left , which would bring he round by 's . " --" but which be 's ? " say . " o ! " cry the fellow , " why , do not you know ? Whence then do you come ? " these two fellow have almost conquer the patience of , when a plain well - look man ( who be indeed a Quaker ) accost he thus : " , I perceive thou hast lose thy way ; and if thou will take my advice , thou will not attempt to find it to - night . it be almost dark , and the road be difficult to hit ; besides , there have be several robbery commit lately between this and . here be a very creditable good house just by , where thou may 'st find good entertainment for thyself and thy cattle till morning . " , after a little persuasion , agree to stay in this place till the morning , and be conduct by he friend to the public - house . the landlord , who be a very civil fellow , tell , " he hope he would excuse the badness of he accommodation ; for that he wife be go from home , and have lock up almost everything , and carry the key along with she . " indeed the fact be , that a favourite daughter of hers be just marrie , and go that morning home with she husband ; and that she and she mother together have almost stript the poor man of all he goods , as well as money ; for though he have several child , this daughter only , who be the mother 's favourite , be the object of she consideration ; and to the humour of this one child she would with pleasure have sacrifice all the rest , and she husband into the bargain . though be very unfit for any kind of company , and would have prefer be alone , yet he could not resist the importunity of the honest Quaker ; who be the more desirous of sit with he , from have remark the melancholy which appear both in he countenance and behaviour ; and which the poor Quaker think he conversation might in some measure relieve . after they have past some time together , in such a manner that my honest friend might have think himself at one of he silent meeting , the begin to be move by some spirit or other , probably that of curiosity , and say , " friend , I perceive some sad disaster hath befall thee ; but pray be of comfort . perhaps thou hast lose a friend . if so , thou must consider we be all mortal . and why shouldst thou grieve , when thou knowest thy grief will do thy friend no good ? we be all bear to affliction . I myself have my sorrow as well as thee , and most probably greater sorrow . though I have a clear estate of  100 a year , which be as much as I want , and I have a conscience , I thank the , void of offence ; my constitution be sound and strong , and there be no man can demand a debt of I , nor accuse I of a injury ; yet , friend , I should be concerned to think thee as miserable as myself . " here the end with a deep sigh ; and presently answer , " I be very sorry , sir , for you unhappiness , whatever be the occasion of it .
. " -- " ah ! friend , " reply the Quaker , " one only daughter be the occasion ; one who be my greatest delight upon earth , and who within this week be run away from I , and be marry against my consent . I have provide she a proper match , a sober man and one of substance ; but she , forsooth , would chuse for herself , and away she be go with a young fellow not worth a groat . if she have be dead , as I suppose thy friend be , I should have be happy . " --" that be very strange , sir , " say . " why , would it not be better for she to be dead , than to be a beggar ? " reply the Quaker : " for , as I tell you , the fellow be not worth a groat ; and surely she can not expect that I shall ever give she a shilling . no , as she hath marry for love , let she live on love if she can ; let she carry she love to market , and see whether any one will change it into silver , or even into halfpence . " --" you know you own concern best , sir , " say . " it must have be , " continue the Quaker , " a long premeditated scheme to cheat I : for they have know one another from they infancy ; and I always preach to she against love , and tell she a thousand time over it be all folly and wickedness . Nay , the cunning slut pretend to hearke to I , and to despise all wantonness of the flesh ; and yet at last broke out at a window two pair of stair : for I begin , indeed , a little to suspect she , and have lock she up carefully , intend the very next morning to have marry she up to my liking . but she disappoint I within a few hour , and escape away to the lover of she own chusing ; who lose no time , for they be marry and bed and all within a hour . but it shall be the worst hour 's work for they both that ever they do ; for they may starve , or beg , or steal together , for I . I will never give either of they a farthing . " here start up cry , " I really must be excuse : I wish you would leave I . " -- " come , come , friend , " say the Quaker , " do not give way to concern . you see there be other people miserable besides yourself . " --" I see there be madman , and fools , and villain in the world , " cry . " but let I give you a piece of advice : send for you daughter and son - in - law home , and do not be yourself the only cause of misery to one you pretend to love . " --" send for she and she husband home ! " cry the Quaker loudly ; " I would sooner send for the two greatest enemie I have in the world ! " -- " well , go home yourself , or where you please , " say , " for I will sit no longer in such company . " -- " Nay , friend , " answer the Quaker , " I scorn to impose my company on any one . " he then offer to pull money from he pocket , but push he with some violence out of the room . the subject of the 's discourse have so deeply affect , that he stare very wildly all the time he be speak . this the have observ , and this , add to the rest of he behaviour , inspire honest Broadbrim with a conceit , that he companion be in reality out of he sense . instead of resent the affront , therefore , the Quaker be move with compassion for he unhappy circumstance ; and have communicate he opinion to the landlord , he desire he to take great care of he guest , and to treat he with the highest civility . " indeed , " say the landlord , " I shall use no such civility towards he ; for it seem , for all he lace waistcoat there , he be no more a gentleman than myself , but a poor parish bastard , breed up at a great squire 's about thirty mile off , and now turn out of door ( not for any good to be sure ) . I shall get he out of my house as soon as possible . if I do lose my reckoning , the first loss be always the best . it be not above a year ago that I lose a silver spoon . " " what dost thou talk of a parish bastard , ? " answer the Quaker . " thou must certainly be mistaken in thy man . " " not at all , " reply ; " the guide , who know he very well , tell it I . " for , indeed , the guide have no sooner take he place at the kitchen fire , than he acquaint the whole company with all he know or have ever hear concern . the Quaker be no sooner assure by this fellow of the birth and low fortune of , than all compassion for he vanish ; and the honest plain man go home fire with no less indignation than a duke would have feel at receive a affro nt from such a person
person . the landlord himself conceive a equal disdain for he guest ; so that when ring the bell in order to retire to bed , he be acquaint that he could have no bed there . besides disdain of the mean condition of he guest , entertain violent suspicion of he intention , which be , he suppose , to watch some favourable opportunity of rob the house . in reality , he might have be very well ease of these apprehension , by the prudent precaution of he wife and daughter , who have already remove everything which be not fix to the freehold ; but he be by nature suspicious , and have be more particularly so since the loss of he spoon . in short , the dread of be rob totally absorb the comfortable consideration that he have nothing to lose . be assure that he could have no bed , very contentedly betake himself to a great chair make with rush , when sleep , which have lately shunn he company in much better apartment , generously pay he a visit in he humble cell . as for the landlord , he be prevent by he fear from retire to rest . he return therefore to the kitchen fire , whence he could survey the only door which open into the parlour , or rather hole , where be seat ; and as for the window to that room , it be impossible for any creature larger than a cat to have make he escape through it . chapter xi . the adventure of a company of soldier . the landlord have take he seat directly opposite to the door of the parlour , determine to keep guard there the whole night . the guide and another fellow remain long on duty with he , though they neither know he suspicions , nor have any of they own . the true cause of they watch do , indeed , at length , put a end to it ; for this be no other than the strength and goodness of the beer , of which have tipple a very large quantity , they grow at first very noisy and vociferous , and afterwards fell both asleep . but it be not in the power of liquor to compose the fear of . he continue still wake in he chair , with he eye fix stedfastly on the door which lead into the apartment of , till a violent thundering at he outward gate call he from he seat , and oblige he to open it ; which he have no sooner done , than he kitchen be immediately full of gentleman in red coat , who all rush upon he in as tumultuous a manner as if they intend to take he little castle by storm . the landlord be now force from he post to furnish he numerous guest with beer , which they call for with great eagerness ; and upon he second or third return from the cellar , he see stand before the fire in the midst of the soldier ; for it may easily be believe , that the arrival of so much good company should put a end to any sleep , unless that from which we be to be awaken only by the last trumpet . the company have now pretty well satisfi they thirst , nothing remain but to pay the reckoning , a circumstance often productive of much mischief and discontend among the inferior rank of gentry , who be apt to find great difficulty in assess the sum , with exact regard to distributive justice , which direct that every man shall pay accord to the quantity which he drink . this difficulty occur upon the present occasion ; and it be the greater , as some gentleman have , in they extreme hurry , march off , after they first dratch , and have entirely forget to contribute anything towards the say reckoning . a violent dispute now arise , in which every word may be say to have be depose upon oath ; for the oath be at least equal to all the other word speak . in this controversy the whole company speak together , and every man seem wholly bent to extenuate the sum which fall to he share ; so that the most probable conclusion which could be foreseen be , that a large portion of the reckoning would fall to the landlord 's share to pay , or ( what be much the same thing ) would remain unpaid . all this while be engage in conversation with the serjeant ; for that officer be entirely unconcerned in the present dispute , be privilege by immemorial custom from all contribution . the dispute now grow so very warm that it seem to draw towards a military decision , when , step forward , silence all they clamour at once , by declare that he would pay the whole reckoning , which indeed amount to no more than three shilling and fourpence . this declaration procure the thanks and applause of the whole company . the term honourable , noble , and worthy gentleman , resound through the room ; nay , my landlord himself begin to have a better opinion of he , and almost to disbelieve the account which the guide have give . the serjeant have inform that they be march against the rebel , and expect to be command by the glorious of . by which the reader may perceive ( a circumstance which we have not think necessary to communicate before ) that this be the very time when the late rebellion be at the highest ; and indeed the banditti be now march into , intend , as it be think , to fight the king 's force , and to attempt push forward to
to the metropolis . have some heroic ingredient in he composition , and be a hearty well - wisher to the glorious cause of liberty , and of the Protestant religion . it be no wonder , therefore , that in circumstance which would have warrante a much more romantic and wild undertake , it should occur to he to serve as a volunteer in this expedition . we commanding officer have say all in he power to encourage and promote this good disposition , from the first moment he have be acquaint with it . he now proclaim the noble resolution aloud , which be receive with great pleasure by the whole company , who all cry out , " and you honour ; " and then add , with many oath , " we will stand by you both to the last drop of we blood . " the gentleman who have be all night tippl at the alehouse , be prevail on by some argument which a corporal have put into he hand , to undertake the same expedition . and now the portmanteau belong to be put up in the baggage - cart , the force be about to move forwards ; when the guide , step up to , say , " , I hope you will consider that the horse have be keep out all night , and we have travel a great way out of we way . " be surprize at the impudence of this demand , and acquaint the soldier with the merit of he cause , who be all unanimous in condemn the guide for he endeavour to put upon a gentleman . some say , he ought to be tie neck and heel ; other that he deserv to run the gantlope ; and the serjeant shook he cane at he , and wish he have he under he command , swear heartily he would make a example of he . contente himself however with a negative punishment , and walk off with he new comrade , leave the guide to the poor revenge of cursing and revil he ; in which latter the landlord join , say , " ay , ay , he be a pure one , I warrant you . a pretty gentleman , indeed , to go for a soldier ! he shall wear a laced wastecoat truly . it be a old proverb and a true one , all be not gold that glister . I be glad my house be well rid of he . " all that day the serjeant and the young soldier march together ; and the former , who be a arch fellow , tell the latter many entertaine story of he campaigns , though in reality he have never make any ; for he be but lately come into the service , and have , by he own dexterity , so well ingratiate himself with he officer , that he have promote himself to a halberd ; chiefly indeed by he merit in recruiting , in which he be most excellently well skill . much mirth and festivity pass among the soldier during they march . in which the many occurrences that have pass at they last quarter be remember , and every one , with great freedom , make what joke he please on he officer , some of which be of the coarser kind , and very near border on scandal . this bring to we heroe 's mind the custom which he have read of among the Greeks and Romans , of indulging , on certain festival and solemn occasion , the liberty to slave , of use a uncontrouled freedom of speech towards they master . we little army , which consist of two company of foot , be now arrive at the place where they be to hal that evening . the serjeant then acquaint he lieutenant , who be the commanding officer , that they have pick up two fellows in that day 's march , one of which , he say , be as fine a man as ever he see ( mean the tippler ) , for that he be near six foot , well proportion , and strongly limb ; and the other ( mean ) would do well enough for the rear rank . the new soldier be now produce before the officer , who have examine the six - foot man , he be first produce , come next to : at the first sight of whom , the lieutenant could not help show some surprize ; for besides that he be very well dress , and be naturally genteel , he have a remarkable air of dignity in he look , which be rarely see among the vulgar , and be indeed not inseparably annex to the feature of they superior . " , " say the lieutenant , " my serjeant inform I that you be desirous of enlisting in the company I have at present under my command ; if so , sir , we shall very gladly receive a gentleman who promise to do much honour to the company by bear arm in it . " answer : " that he have not mention anything of enlist himself ; that he be most zealously attach to the glorious cause for which they be go to fight , and be very desirous of serve as a volunteer ; " conclude with some compliment to the lieutenant , and express the great satisfaction he should have in be under he command . the lieutenant return he civility , commend he resolution , shook he by the hand , and invite he to dine with himself and the rest of the officer . chapter xii . the adventure of a company of officer . the lieutenant , whom we mention in the preceding chapter , and
and who command this party , be now near sixty year of age . he have enter very young into the army , and have serve in the capacity of a ensign at the battle of Tanniere ; here he have receive two wound , and have so well distinguished himself , that he be by the of advance to be a lieutenant , immediately after that battle . in this commission he have continue ever since , viz. , near forty year ; during which time he have see vast number prefer over he head , and have now the mortification to be command by boy , whose fathers be at nurse when he first enter into the service . be this ill success in he profession solely owe to he have no friend among the man in power . he have the misfortune to incur the displeasure of he colonel , who for many year continue in the command of this regiment . do he owe the implacable ill - will which this man bear he to any neglect or deficiency as a officer , nor indeed to any fault in himself ; but solely to the indiscretion of he wife , who be a very beautiful woman , and who , though she be remarkably fond of she husband , would not purchase he preferment at the expense of certain favour which the colonel require of she . the poor lieutenant be more peculiarly unhappy in this , that while he feel the effect of the enmity of he colonel , he neither know , nor suspect , that he really bear he any ; for he could not suspect a ill - will for which he be not conscious of give any cause ; and he wife , fear what she husband 's nice regard to he honour might have occasion , contente herself with preserve she virtue without enjoy the triumph of she conquest . this unfortunate officer ( for so I think he may be call ) have many good quality besides he merit in he profession ; for he be a religious , honest , good - natured man ; and have behaved so well in he command , that he be highly esteem and belove not only by the soldier of he own company , but by the whole regiment . the other officer who march with he be a french lieutenant , who have be long enough out of to forget he own language , but not long enough in to learn ours , so that he really speak no language at all , and could barely make himself understand on the most ordinary occasion . there be likewise two ensign , both very young fellow ; one of whom have be breed under a attorney , and the other be son to the wife of a nobleman 's butler . as soon as dinner be end , inform the company of the merriment which have pass among the soldier upon they march ; " and yet , " say he , " notwithstand all they vociferation , I dare swear they will behave more like than when they come to the enemy . " --" and ! " say one of the ensign , " who the be they ? I have hear of all the troops in , but never of any such as these . " " do not pretend to more ignorance than you have , , " say the worthy lieutenant . " I suppose you have hear of the Greeks and Trojans , though perhaps you never read 's ; who , I remember , now the gentleman mentions it , compare the march of the Trojans to the cackling of geese , and greatly commend the silence of the . and upon my honour there be great justice in the cadet 's observation . " " , I remember dem ver well , " say the french lieutenant : " I ave read they at school in dans , des , des , dey fight for von woman -- ouy , ouy , I ave read all dat . " " d -- and with all my heart , " say ; " I have the mark of he on my a -- yet . there be , of we regiment , always carry a homo in he pocket ; -- and I , if ever I come at it , if I do not burn it . and there be , another d -- and ' son of a whore , that hath get I many a flogging . " " then you have be at school , ? " say the lieutenant . " ay , -- and I , have I , " answer he ; " the take my father for send I thither ! the old put want to make a parson of I , but -- and I , think I to myself , I will nick you there , old cull ; the devil a smack of you nonsense shall you ever get into I . there be , of we regiment , he narrowly escape be a pimp too , and that would have be a thousand pity ; for -- and I if he be not one of the prettiest fellow in the whole world ; but he go farther than I with the old cull , for can neither write nor read . " " you give you friend a very good character , " say the lieutenant , " and a very deserve one , I dare say . but prithee , , leave off that foolish as well as wicked custom of swear ; for you be deceive , I promise you , if you think there be wit or politeness in it . I wish , too , you would take my
my advice , and desist from abuse the clergy . Scandalous name , and reflection cast on any body of man , must be always unjustifiable ; but especially so , when throw on so sacr a function ; for to abuse the body be to abuse the function itself ; and I leave to you to judge how inconsistent such behaviour be in man who be go to fight in defence of the Protestant religion . " , which be the name of the other ensign , have sit hithertoo kick he heel and hum a tune , without seem to listen to the discourse ; he now answer , " _O , , on ne parle pa de la religion dans la guerre _. " -- " well say , , " cry : " if religion_ be the only matter , the parson should fight they own battle for I . " " I do not know , gentlemen , " say , " what may be you opinion ; but I think no man can engage in a nobler cause than that of he religion ; and I have observe , in the little I have read of history , that no soldier have fight so bravely as those who have be inspire with a religious zeal : for my own part , though I love my king and country , I hope , as well as any man in it , yet the Protestant interest be no small motive to my become a volunteer in the cause . " now wink on , and whisper to he slily , " smoke the prig , Adderly , smoke he . " then turn to , say to he , " I be very glad , sir , you have choose we regiment to be a volunteer in ; for if we parson should at any time take a cup too much , I find you can supply he place . I presume , sir , you have be at the university ; may I crave the favour to know what college ? " " , " answer , " so far from have be at the university , I have even have the advantage of yourself , for I be never at school . " " I presume , " cry the ensign , " only upon the information of you great learning . " -- " oh ! sir , " answer , " it be as possible for a man to know something without have be at school , as it be to have be at school and to know nothing . " " well say , young volunteer , " cry the lieutenant . " upon my word , , you have better let he alone ; for he will be too hard for you . " do not very well relish the sarcasm of ; but he think the provocation be scarce sufficient to justify a blow , or a rascal , or scoundrel , which be the only repartee that suggest themselves . he be , therefore , silent at present ; but resolve to take the first opportunity of return the jest by abuse . it now come to the turn of to give a toast , as it be call ; who could not refrain from mention he dear . this he do the more readily , as he imagine it utterly impossible that any one present should guess the person he mean . but the lieutenant , who be the toast - master , be not contente with only . he say , he must have she sir - name ; upon which hesitate a little , and presently after name . declare he would not drink she health in the same round with he own toast , unless somebody would vouch for she . " I know one , " say he , " that be lain with by half the young fellow at ; and perhaps this be the same woman . " very solemnly assure he of the contrary ; assert that the young lady he name be one of great fashion and fortune . " ay , ay , " say the ensign , " and so she be : d -- and I , it be the same woman ; and I will hold half a dozen of , of we regiment bring she into company with we at any tavern in - . " he then proceed to describe she person exactly ( for he have see she with she aunt ) , and conclude with say , " that she father have a great estate in . " the tenderness of lover can ill brake the least jesting with the name of they mistress . however , , though he have enough of the lover and of the heroe too in he disposition , do not resent these slander as hastily as , perhaps , he ought to have do . to say the truth , have see but little of this kind of wit , he do not readily understand it , and for a long time imagine have really mistake he charmer for some other . but now , turn to the ensign with a stern aspect , he say , " pray , sir , chuse some other subject for you wit ; for I promise you I will bear no jesting with this lady 's character . " " ! " cry the other , " -- and I if ever I be more in earnest in my life . of we regiment have both she and she aunt at . " " then I must tell you in earnest , " cry , " that you be one of the most impudent rascal upon earth . " he have no sooner spoken these word , than the
the ensign , together with a volley of curse , discharge a bottle full at the head of , which hit he a little above the right temple , bring he instantly to the ground . the conqueror perceive the enemy to lie motionless before he , and blood begin to flow pretty plentifully from he wound , begin now to think of quit the field of battle , where no more honou be to be get ; but the lieutenant interpose , by stepping before the door , and thus cut off he retreat . be very importunate with the lieutenant for he liberty ; urge the ill consequence of he stay , ask he , what he could have do less ? " Zound ! " say he , " I be but in jest with the fellow . I never hear any harm of Western in my life . " " have not you ? " say the lieutenant ; " then you richly deserve to be hang , as well for make such jest , as for use such a weapon : you be my prisoner , sir ; nor shall you stir from hence till a proper guard come to secure you . " such a ascendant have we lieutenant over this ensign , that all that fervency of courage which have level we poor heroe with the floor , would scarce have animate the say ensign to have draw he sword against the lieutenant , have he then have one dangling at he side : but all the sword be hang up in the room , be , at the very beginning of the fray , secure by the french officer . so that be oblige to attend the final issue of this affair . the french gentleman and , at the desire of they commanding officer , have raise up the body of , but as they could perceive but little ( if any ) sign of life in he , they again let he fall , Adderly damne he for have blood he wastecoat ; and the Frenchman declare , " , I no tush the mort : I have hear ley , law , what you call , hang up de man dat tush he last . " when the good lieutenant apply himself to the door , he apply himself likewise to the bell ; and the drawer immediately attend , he dispatch he for a file of musqueteer and a surgeon . these command , together with the drawer 's report of what he have himself see , not only produce the soldier , but presently draw up the landlord of the house , he wife , and servants , and , indeed , every one else who happen at that time to be in the inn . to describe every particular , and to relate the whole conversation of the ensue scene , be not within my power , unless I have forty pens , and could , at once , write with they all together , as the company now speak . the reader must , therefore , contend himself with the most remarkable incidents , and perhaps he may very well excuse the rest . the first thing done be secure the body of , who be deliver into the custody of six man with a corporal at they head , be by they conduct from a place which he be very willing to leave , but it be unluckily to a place whither he be very unwilling to go . to say the truth , so whimsical be the desire of ambition , the very moment this youth have attaine the above -mentioned honour , he would have be well contente to have retire to some corner of the world , where the fame of it should never have reach he ear . it surprize we , and so perhaps , it may the reader , that the lieutenant , a worthy and good man , should have apply he chief care , rather to secure the offender , than to preserve the life of the wounded person . we mention this observation , not with any view of pretend to account for so odd a behaviour , but lest some critic should hereafter plume himself on discover it . we would have these gentleman know we can see what be odd in character as well as themselves , but it be we business to relate fact as they be ; which , when we have do , it be the part of the learned and sagacious reader to consult that original book of nature , whence every passage in we work be transcribe , though we quote not always the particular page for its authority . the company which now arrive be of a different disposition . they suspend they curiosity concern the person of the ensign , till they should see he hereafter in a more engaging attitude . at present , they whole concern and attention be employ about the bloody object on the floor ; which be place upright in a chair , soon begin to discover some symptom of life and motion . these be no sooner perceive by the company ( for be at first generally conclude to be dead ) than they all fell at once to prescrib for he ( for as none of the physical order be present , every one there take that office upon he ) . bleeding be the unanimous voice of the whole room ; but unluckily there be no operator at hand ; every one then cry , " call the barber ; " but none stir a step . several cordial be likewise prescribe in the same ineffective manner ; till the landlord order up a tankard of strong beer , with a toast , which he say be the best
best cordial in . the person principally assistant on this occasion , indeed the only one who do any service , or seem likely to do any , be the landlady : she cut off some of she hair , and apply it to the wound to stop the blood ; she fall to chaf the youth 's temple with she hand ; and have exprest great contempt for she husband 's prescription of beer , she despatch one of she maid to she own closet for a bottle of brandy , of which , as soon as it be bring , she prevail on , who be just return to he sense , to drink a very large and plentiful dratch . afterwards arrive the surgeon , who have view the wound , have shake he head , and blame everything which be do , order he patient instantly to bed ; in which place we think proper to leave he some time to he repose , and shall here , therefore , put a end to this chapter . chapter xiii . contain the great address of the landlady , the great learning of a surgeon , and the solid skill in casuistry of the worthy lieutenant . when the wounded man be carry to he bed , and the house begin again to clear up from the hurry which this accident have occasion , the landlady thus address the commanding officer : " I be afraid , sir , " say she , " this young man do not behave himself as well as he should do to you honour ; and if he have be kill , I suppose he have but he desart : to be sure , when gentleman admit inferior parson into they company , they oft to keep they distance ; but , as my first husband use to say , few of th'ey know how to do it . for my own part , I be sure I should not have suffer any fellow to _include themselves into gentleman 's company ; but I thoft he have be a officer himself , till the serjeant tell I he be but a recruit . " " Landlady , " answer the lieutenant , " you mistake the whole matter . the young man behave himself extremely well , and be , I believe , a much better gentleman than the ensign who abuse he . if the young fellow die , the man who struck he will have most reason to be sorry for it : for the regiment will get rid of a very troublesome fellow , who be a scandal to the army ; and if he escape from the hand of justice , blame I , madam , that be all . " " ay ! ay ! good lack - a - day ! " say the landlady ; " who could have thoft it ? ay , ay , ay , I be satisfy you honou will see justice do ; and to be sure it oft to be to every one . oft not to kill poor folk without answer for it . a poor man hath a soul to be save , as well as he betters . " " indeed , madam , " say the lieutenant , " you do the volunteer wrong : I dare swear he be more of a gentleman than the officer . " " ay ! " cry the landlady ; " why , look you there , now : well , my first husband be a wise man ; he use to say , you can not always know the inside by the outside . Nay , that might have be well enough too ; for I never _saw' he till he be all over blood . who would have thoft it ? mayhap , some young gentleman cross in love . good lack - a - day , if he should die , what a concern it will be to he parent ! why , sure the devil must possess the wicked wretch to do such a act . to be sure , he be a scandal to the army , as you honour say ; for most of the gentleman of the army that ever I see , be quite different sort of people , and look as if they would scorn to spill any Christian blood as much as any man : I mean , that be , in a civil way , as my first husband use to say . to be sure , when they come into the wars , there must be bloodsh : but that they be not to be blame for . the more of we enemy they kill there , the better : and I wish , with all my heart , they could kill every mother 's son of they . " " of fie , madam ! " say the lieutenant , smile ; " _all_ be rather too bloody - mind a wish . " " not at all , sir , " answer she ; " I be not at all bloody - minded , only to we enemy ; and there be no harm in that . to be sure it be natural for we to wish we enemy dead , that the wars may be at a end , and we tax be lower ; for it be a dreadful thing to pay as we do . why now , there be above forty shilling for window - light , and yet we have stopt up all we could ; we have almost blind the house , I be sure . say I to the exciseman , say I , I think you oft to favour we ; I be sure we be very good friend to the government : and so we
we be for sartain , for we pay a mint of money to 'um . and yet I often think to myself the government doth not imagine itself more oblige to we , than to those that do not pay 'um a farthing . ay , ay , it be the way of the world . " she be proceed in this manner when the surgeon enter the room . the lieutenant immediately ask how he patient do . but he resolve he only by say , " better , I believe , than he would have be by this time , if I have not be call ; and even as it be , perhaps it would have be lucky if I could have be call sooner . " --" I hope , sir , " say the lieutenant , " the skull be not fractured . " --" , " cry the surgeon : " fracture be not always the most dangerous symptom . Contusion and laceration be often attend with worse phaenomena , and with more fatal consequence , than fracture . people who know nothing of the matter conclude , if the skull be not fracture , all be well ; whereas , I have rather see a man 's skull break all to piece , than some contusion I have meet with . " --" I hope , " say the lieutenant , " there be no such symptom here . " -- " symptoms , " answer the surgeon , " be not always regular nor constant . I have know very unfavourable symptom in the morning change to favourable one at noon , and return to unfavourable again at night . of wound , indeed , it be rightly and truly say , repente fuit turpissimus _. I be once , I remember , call to a patient who have receive a violent contusion in he tibia , by which the exterior cutis be lacerate , so that there be a profuse sanguinary discharge ; and the interior membrane be so divellicated , that the os or bone very plainly appear through the aperture of the vulnus or wound . some febrile symptom intervene at the same time ( for the pulse be exuberant and indicate much phlebotomy ) , I apprehend a immediate mortification . to prevent which , I presently make a large orifice in the vein of the left arm , whence I draw twenty ounce of blood ; which I expect to have find extremely sizy and glutinous , or indeed coagulate , as it be in pleuretic complaint ; but , to my surprize , it appear rosy and florid , and its consistency differ little from the blood of those in perfect health . I then apply a fomentation to the part , which highly answer the intention ; and after three or four time dressing , the wound begin to discharge a thick pus or matter , by which mean the cohesion -- but perhaps I do not make myself perfectly well understand ? " -- " no , really , " answer the lieutenant , " I can not say I understand a syllable . " -- " well , sir , " say the surgeon , " then I shall not tire you patience ; in short , within six week my patient be able to walk upon he leg as perfectly as he could have do before he receive the contusion . " --" I wish , sir , " say the lieutenant , " you would be so kind only to inform I , whether the wound this young gentleman hath have the misfortune to receive , be likely to prove mortal . " --" , " answer the surgeon , " to say whether a wound will prove mortal or not at first dress , would be very weak and foolish presumption : we be all mortal , and symptom often occur in a cure which the greatest of we profession could never foresee ." --" but do you think he in danger ? " say the other .-- " in danger ! ay , surely , " cry the doctor : " who be there among we , who , in the most perfect health , can be say not to be in danger ? can a man , therefore , with so bad a wound as this be say to be out of danger ? all I can say at present be , that it be well I be call as I be , and perhaps it would have be better if I have be call sooner . I will see he again early in the morning ; and in the meantime let he be keep extremely quiet , and drink liberally of water - gruel . " -- " will not you allow he sack - whey ? " say the landlady .--" ay , ay , sack - whey , " cry the doctor , " if you will , provide it be very small . " -- " and a little chicken broth too ? " add she .--" yes , yes , chicken broth , " say the doctor , " be very good . " --" May not I make he some jelly too ? " say the landlady .-- " ay , ay , " answer the doctor , " jelly be very good for wound , for they promote cohesion . " and indeed it be lucky she have not name soup or high sauces , for the doctor would have comply , rather than have lose the custom of the house . the doctor be no sooner gone , than the landlady begin to trumpet forth he fame to the lieutenant , who have not , from they short acquaintance , conceive quite so favourable a opinion of he physical ability as
as the good woman , and all the neighbourhood , entertain ( and perhaps very rightly ) ; for though I be afraid the doctor be a little of a coxcomb , he might be nevertheless very much of a surgeon . the lieutenant have collect from the learn discourse of the surgeon that be in great danger , give order for keep under a very strict guard , design in the morning to attend he to a justice of peace , and to commit the conduct the troops to to the french lieutenant , who , though he could neither read , write , nor speak any language , be , however , a good officer . in the evening , we commander send a message to , that if a visit would not be troublesome , he would wait on he . this civility be very kindly and thankfully receive by , and the lieutenant accordingly go up to he room , where he find the wounded man much better than he expect ; nay , assure he friend , that if he have not receive express order to the contrary from the surgeon , he should have get up long ago ; for he appear to himself to be as well as ever , and feel no other inconvenience from he wound but a extreme soreness on that side of he head . " I should be very glad , " quoth the lieutenant , " if you be as well as you fancy yourself , for then you could be able to do yourself justice immediately ; for when a matter can not be make up , as in case of a blow , the sooner you take he out the better ; but I be afraid you think yourself better than you be , and he would have too much advantage over you . " " I will try , however , " answer , " if you please , and will be so kind to lend I a sword , for I have none here of my own . " " my sword be heartily at you service , my dear boy , " cry the lieutenant , kiss he ; " you be a brave lad , and I love you spirit ; but I fear you strength ; for such a blow , and so much loss of blood , must have very much weaken you ; and though you feel no want of strength in you bed , yet you most probably would after a thrust or two . I can not consent to you take he out tonight ; but I hope you will be able to come up with we before we get many day ' march advance ; and I give you my honou you shall have satisfaction , or the man who hath injure you sha not stay in we regiment . " " I wish , " say , " it be possible to decide this matter to - night : now you have mention it to I , I shall not be able to rest . " " oh , never think of it , " return the other : " a few day will make no difference . the wound of honou be not like those in you body : they suffer nothing by the delay of cure . it will be altogether as well for you to receive satisfaction a week hence as now . " " but suppose , " say , " I should grow worse , and die of the consequence of my present wound ? " " then you honour , " answer the lieutenant , " will require no reparation at all . I myself will do justice to you character , and testify to the world you intention to have act properly , if you have recover . " " , " reply , " I be concerned at the delay . I be almost afraid to mention it to you who be a soldier ; but though I have be a very wild young fellow , still in my most serious moment , and at the bottom , I be really a . " " so be I too , I assure you , " say the officer ; " and so zealous a one , that I be pleased with you at dinner for take up the cause of you religion ; and I be a little offended with you now , young gentleman , that you should express a fear of declare you faith before any one . " " but how terrible must it be , " cry , " to any one who be really a , to cherish malice in he breast , in opposition to the command of who hath expressly forbid it ? how can I bear to do this on a sick - bed ? or how shall I make up my account , with such a article as this in my bosom against I ? " " why , I believe there be such a command , " cry the lieutenant ; " but a man of honou can not keep it . and you must be a man of honour , if you will be in the army . I remember I once put the case to we chaplain over a bowl of punch , and he confess there be much difficulty in it ; but he say , he hope there might be a latitude grant to soldier in this one instance ; and to be sure it be we duty to hope so ; for who would bear to live without he honour ? no , no , my dear boy , be a good as long as you live ; but be a man of honou too , and never put up a affront
affront ; not all the book , nor all the parson in the world , shall ever persuade I to that . I love my religion very well , but I love my honour more . there must be some mistake in the word the text , or in the translation , or in the understanding it , or somewhere or other . but however that be , a man must run the risque , for he must preserve he honour . so compose yourself to - night , and I promise you you shall have a opportunity of do yourself justice . " here he give a hearty buss , shook he by the hand , and take he leave . but though the lieutenant 's reasoning be very satisfactory to himself , it be not entirely so to he friend . therefore , have revolve this matter much in he thought , at last come to a resolution , which the reader will find in the next chapter . xiv. a most dreadful chapter indeed ; and which few reader ought to venture upon in a evening , especially when alone . swallow a large mess of chicken , or rather cock , broth , with a very good appetite , as indeed he would have do the cock it be make of , with a pound of bacon into the bargain ; and now , find in himself no deficiency of either health or spirit , he resolve to get up and seek he enemy . but first he send for the serjeant , who be he first acquaintance among these military gentleman . Unluckily that worthy officer have , in a literal sense , take he fill of liquor , have be some time retire to he bolster , where he be snor so loud that it be not easy to convey a noise in at he ear capable of drown that which issue from he nostril . however , as persist in he desire of see he , a vociferous drawer at length find mean to disturb he slumber , and to acquaint he with the message . of which the serjeant be no sooner make sensible , than he arise from he bed , and have he clothes already on , immediately attend . do not think fit to acquaint the serjeant with he design ; though he might have do it with great safety , for the halberdier be himself a man of honour , and have kill he man . he would therefore have faithfully keep this secret , or indeed any other which no reward be publish for discovering . but as know not those virtue in so short a acquaintance , he caution be perhaps prudent and commendable enough . he begin therefore by acquaint the serjeant , that as he be now enter into the army , he be asham of be without what be perhaps the most necessary implement of a soldier ; namely , a sword ; add , that he should be infinitely oblige to he , if he could procure one . " for which , " say he , " I will give you any reasonable price ; nor do I insist upon its be silver - hilt ; only a good blade , and such as may become a soldier 's thigh . " the serjeant , who well know what have happen , and have hear that be in a very dangerous condition , immediately conclude , from such a message , at such a time of night , and from a man in such a situation , that he be light - head . now as he have he wit ( to use that word in its common signification ) always ready , he bethotch himself of make he advantage of this humour in the sick man . " Sir , " say he , " I believe I can fit you . I have a most excellent piece of stuff by I . it be not indeed silver - hilt , which , as you say , doth not become a soldier ; but the handle be decent enough , and the blade one of the best in . it be a blade that - - a blade that -- in short , I will fetch it you this instant , and you shall see it and handle it . I be glad to see you honour so well with all my heart . " be instantly return with the sword , he deliver it to , who take it and draw it ; and then tell the serjeant it would do very well , and bid he name he price . the serjeant now begin to harangue in praise of he goods . he say ( nay he swore very heartily ) , " that the blade be take from a french officer , of very high rank , at the battle of . I take it myself , " say he , " from he side , after I have knock he of ' the head . the hilt be a golden one . that I sell to one of we fine gentleman ; for there be some of they , can not please you honour , who value the hilt of a sword more than the blade . " here the other stop he , and beg he to name a price . the serjeant , who think absolutely out of he sense , and very near he end , be afraid lest he should injure he family by ask too little . however , after a moment 's hesitation , he contente himself with name twenty guinea , and swore he would not sell it for less to he own brother . " twenty guinea ! " say , in the utmost surprize : " sure you
you think I be mad , or that I never see a sword in my life . twenty guinea , indeed ! I do not imagine you would endeaavor to impose upon I . here , take the sword -- no , now I think o not , I will keep it myself , and show it you officer in the morning , acquaint he , at the same time , what a price you ask I for it . " the serjeant , as we have say , have always he wit ( _in sensu praedictoo ) about he , and now plainly see that be not in the condition he have apprehend he to be ; he now , therefore , counterfeit as great surprize as the other have show , and say , " I be certain , sir , I have not ask you so much out of the way . besides , you be to consider , it be the only sword I have , and I must run the risque of my officer 's displeasure , by go without one myself . and truly , put all this together , I do not think twenty shilling be so much out of the way . " " twenty shilling ! " cry ; " why , you just now ask I twenty guinea . " --" how ! " cry the serjeant , " sure you honour must have mistake I : or else I mistake myself -- and indeed I be but half awake . twenty guinea , indeed ! no wonder you honou flow into such a passion . I say twenty guinea too . no , no , I mean twenty shilling , I assure you . and when you honour come to consider everything , I hope you will not think that so extravagant a price . it be indeed true , you may buy a weapon which look as well for less money . but ----" here interrupt he , say , " I will be so far from make any word with you , that I will give you a shill more than you demand . " he then give he a guinea , bid he return to he bed , and wish he a good march ; add , he hope to overtake they before the division reach . the serjeant very civilly take he leave , fully satisfied with he merchandize , and not a little pleased with he dexterous recovery from that false step into which he opinion of the sick man 's light - headedness have betraye he . as soon as the serjeant be depart , rise from he bed , and dress himself entirely , put on even he coat , which , as its colour be white , show very visibly the stream of blood which have flow down it ; and now , have grasp he new -purchased sword in he hand , he be go to issue forth , when the thought of what he be about to undertake laid suddenly hold of he , and he begin to reflect that in a few minute he might possibly deprive a human be of life , or might lose he own . " very well , " say he , " and in what cause do I venture my life ? why , in that of my honour . and who be this human being ? a rascal who hath injur and insult I without provocation . but be not revenge forbidden by ? yes , but it be enjoin by the world . well , but shall I obey the world in opposition to the express command of ? shall I incur the divine displeasure rather than be call -- ha--coward -- scoundrel ? --I will think no more ; I be resolve , and must fight he . " the clock have now struck twelve , and every one in the house be in they bed , except the centinel who stand to guard , when softly open he door , issue forth in pursuit of he enemy , of whose place of confinement he have receive a perfect description from the drawer . it be not easy to conceive a much more tremendous figure than he now exhibit . he have on , as we have say , a light - colou coat , cover with stream of blood . he face , which miss that very blood , as well as twenty ounce more draw from he by the surgeon , be pallid . Round he head be a quantity of bandage , not unlike a turban . in the right hand he carry a sword , and in the leave a candle . so that the bloody be not worthy to be compare to he . in fact , I believe a more dreadful apparition be never raise in a church - yard , nor in the imagination of any good people meet in a winter evening over a fire in . when the centinel first see we heroe approach , he hair begin gently to lift up he grenadier cap ; and in the same instant he knee fall to blow with each other . presently he whole body be seize with worse than a ague fit . he then fire he piece , and fall flat on he face . whether fear or courage be the occasion of he firing , or whether he take aim at the object of he terror , I can not say . if he do , however , he have the good fortune to miss he man . see the fellow fall , guess the cause of he fright , at which he could not forbear smile , not in the least reflect on the danger from which he have just escape . he then pass by the fellow
fellow , who still continue in the posture in which he fall , and enter the room where , as he have hear , be confine . here , in a solitary situation , he find -- a empty quart pot stand on the table , on which some beer be spild , it look as if the room have lately be inhabit ; but at present it be entirely vacant . then apprehend it might lead to some other apartment ; but upon search all round it , he could perceive no other door than that at which he enter , and where the centinel have be post . he then proceed to call several time by he name ; but no one answer ; nor do this serve to any other purpose than to confirm the centinel in he terror , who be now convince that the volunteer be dead of he wound , and that he ghost be come in search of the murderer : he now lay in all the agony of horror ; and I wish , with all my heart , some of those actor who be hereafter to represent a man fright out of he wit have see he , that they might be teach to copy nature , instead of perform several antic trick and gesture , for the entertainment and applause of the galleries . perceive the bird be fly , at least despair to find he , and rightly apprehend that the report of the firelock would alarm the whole house , we heroe now blow out he candle , and gently steal back again to he chamber , and to he bed ; whither he would not have be able to have get undiscovered , have any other person be on the same staircase , save only one gentleman who be confine to he be by the gout ; for before he could reach the door to he chamber , the hall where the centinel have be post be half full of people , some in they shirts , and other not half drest , all very earnestly enquir of each other what be the matter . the soldier be now find lie in the same place and posture in which we just now leave he . several immediately apply themselves to raise he , and some conclude he dead ; but they presently see they mistake , for he not only struggle with those who lay they hand on he , but fall a roaring like a bull . in reality , he imagine so many spirit or devils be handle he ; for he imagination be possess with the horror of a apparition , convert every object he see or feel into nothing but ghost and spectre . at length he be overpower by number , and get upon he leg ; when candle be bring , and see two or three of he comrade present , he come a little to himself ; but when they ask he what be the matter ? he answer , " I be a dead man , that be all , I be a dead man , I can not recover it , I have see he . " " what hast thou see , ? " say one of the soldier . " why , I have see the young volunteer that be kill yesterday . " he then imprecate the most heavy curse on himself , if he have not see the volunteer , all over blood , vomit fire out of he mouth and nostril , pass by he into the chamber where be , and then seize the ensign by the throat , fly away with he in a clap of thunder . this relation meet with a gracious reception from the audience . all the woman present believe it firmly , and pray to defend they from murder . amongst the man too , many have faith in the story ; but other turn it into derision and ridicule ; and a serjeant who be present answer very coolly , " young man , you will hear more of this , for go to sleep and dream on you post . " the soldier reply , " you may punish I if you please ; but I be as broad awake as I be now ; and the devil carry I away , as he hath the ensign , if I do not see the dead man , as I tell you , with eye as big and as fiery as two large flambeaux . " the commander of the force , and the commander of the house , be now both arrive ; for the former be awake at the time , and hear the centinel fire he piece , think it he duty to rise immediately , though he have no great apprehension of any mischief ; whereas the apprehension of the latter be much greater , lest she spoon and tankard should be upon the march , without have receive any such order from she . we poor centinel , to whom the sight of this officer be not much more welcome than the apparition , as he think it , which he have see before , again relate the dreadful story , and with many additions of blood and fire ; but he have the misfortune to gain no credit with either of the last - mention person : for the officer , though a very religious man , be free from all terror of this kind ; beside , have so lately leave in the condition we have see , he have no suspicion of he be dead . as for the landlady , though not over religious , she have no kind of aversion to the doctrine of spirit ; but there be a circumstance in the tale which she
she well kknow to be false , as we shall inform the reader presently . but whether be carry away in thunder or fire , or in whatever other manner he be go , it be now certain that he body be no longer in custody . upon this occasion the lieutenant form a conclusion not very different from what the serjeant be just mention to have make before , and immediately order the centinel to be take prisoner . so that , by a strange reverse of fortune ( though not very uncommon in a military life ) , the guard become the guarded . xv. the conclusion of the foregoing adventure . besides the suspicion of sleep , the lieutenant harbour another and worse doubt against the poor centinel , and this be , that of treachery ; for as he believe not one syllable of the apparition , so he imagine the whole to be a invention for only to impose upon he , and that the fellow have in reality be bribe by to let he escape . and this he imagine the rather , as the fright appear to he the more unnatural in one who have the character of as brave and bold a man as any in the regiment , have be in several action , have receive several wound , and , in a word , have behave himself always like a good and valiant soldier . that the reader , therefore , may not conceive the least ill opinion of such a person , we shall not delay a moment in rescue he character from the imputation of this guilt . then , as we have before observe , be fully satisfied with the glory which he have obtain from this action . he have perhaps see , or hear , or guess , that envy be apt to attend fame . not that I would here insinuate that he be heathenishly inclin to believe in or to worship the goddess ; for , in fact , I be convince he never hear of she name . he be , besides , of a active disposition , and have a great antipathy to those close quarter in the castle of , for which a justice of peace might possibly give he a billet . be he moreover free from some uneasy meditation on a certain wooden edifice , which I forbear to name , in conformity to the opinion of mankind , who , I think , rather ought to honour than to be asham of this building , as it be , or at least might be make , of more benefit to society than almost any other public erection . in a word , to hind at no more reason for he conduct , be desirous of depart that evening , and nothing remain for he but to contrive the quomodo , which appear to be a matter of some difficulty . now this young gentleman , though somewhat crooke in he moral , be perfectly straight in he person , which be extremely strong and well make . he face too be account handsome by the generality of woman , for it be broad and ruddy , with tolerably good tooth . such charms do not fail make a impression on my landlady , who have no little relish for this kind of beauty . she have , indeed , a real compassion for the young man ; and hearing from the surgeon that affairs be like to go ill with the volunteer , she suspect they might hereafter wear no benign aspect with the ensign . have obtain , therefore , leave to make he a visit , and find he in a very melancholy mood , which she considerably heighten by tell he there be scarce any hope of the volunteer 's life , she proceed to throw forth some hint , which the other readily and eagerly take up , they soon come to a right understanding ; and it be at length agree that the ensign should , at a certain signal , ascend the chimney , which communicate very soon with that of the kitchen , he might there again let himself down ; for which she would give he a opportunity by keep the coast clear . but lest we reader , of a different complexion , should take this occasion of too hastily condemn all compassion as a folly , and pernicious to society , we think proper to mention another particular which might possibly have some little share in this action . the ensign happen to be at this time possess of the sum of fifty pound , which do indeed belong to the whole company ; for the captain have quarrell with he lieutenant , have entrust the payment of he company to the ensign . this money , however , he think proper to deposit in my landlady 's hand , possibly by way of bail or security that he would hereafter appear and answer to the charge against he ; but whatever be the condition , certain it be , that she have the money and the ensign he liberty . the reader may perhaps expect , from the compassionate temper of this good woman , that when she see the poor centinel take prisoner for a fact of which she know he innocent , she should immediately have interpose in he behalf ; but whether it be that she have already exhaust all she compassion in the above -mentioned instance , or that the feature of this fellow , though not very different from those of the ensign , could not raise it , I will not determine ; but , far from be a advocate for the present prisoner , she urge he guilt to he officer , declare , with uplifted eye and hand ,
, that she would not have have any concern in the escape of a murderer for all the world . everything be now once more quiet , and most of the company return again to they bed ; but the landlady , either from the natural activity of she disposition , or from she fear for she plate , have no propensity to sleep , prevail with the officer , as they be to march within little more than a hour , to spend that time with she over a bowl of punch . have lain awake all this while , and have hear great part of the hurry and bustle that have pass , of which he have now some curiosity to know the particular . he therefore apply to he bell , which he ring at least twenty time without any effect : for my landlady be in such high mirth with she company , that no clapper could be hear there but she own ; and the drawer and chambermaid , who be sit together in the kitchen ( for neither durst he sit up nor she lie in bed alone ) , the more they hear the bell ring the more they be frightene , and as it be nail down in they place . at last , at a lucky interval of chat , the sound reach the ear of we good landlady , who presently send forth she summon , which both she servants instantly obey . " , " say the mistress , " do not you hear the gentleman 's bell ring ? why do not you go up ? " --" it be not my business , " answer the drawer , " to wait upon the chamber -- it be 's . " -- " if you come to that , " answer the maid , " it be not my business to wait upon gentleman . I have do it indeed sometimes ; but the fetch I if ever I do again , since you make you preamble about it . " the bell still ring violently , they mistress fall into a passion , and swore , if the drawer do not go up immediately , she would turn he away that very morning . " if you do , madam , " say he , " I can not help it . I will not do another servant 's business . " she then apply herself to the maid , and endeavoure to prevail by gentle means ; but all in vain : be as inflexible as . both insist it be not there business , and they would not do it . the lieutenant then fall a laughing , and say , " come , I will put a end to this contention ; " and then turn to the servants , commend they for they resolution in not give up the point ; but add , he be sure , if one would consent to go the other would . to which proposal they both agree in a instant , and accordingly go up very lovingly and close together . when they be go , the lieutenant appease the wrath of the landlady , by satisfye she why they be both so unwilling to go alone . they return soon after , and acquaint they mistress , that the sick gentleman be so far from be dead , that he speak as heartily as if he be well ; and that he give he service to the captain , and should be very glad of the favour of see he before he march . the good lieutenant immediately comply with he desire , and sit down by he bed - side , acquaint he with the scene which have happen below , conclude with he intention to make a example of the centinel . upon this related to he the whole truth , and earnestly beg he not to punish the poor soldier , " who , I be confident , " say he , " be as innocent of the ensign 's escape , as he be of for any lie , or of endeavouring to impose on you . " the lieutenant hesitate a few moment , and then answer : " why , as you have clear the fellow of one part of the charge , so it will be impossible to prove the other , because he be not the only centinel . but I have a good mind to punish the rascal for be a coward . yet who know what effect the terror of such a apprehension may have ? and , to say the truth , he hath always behave well against a enemy . come , it be a good thing to see any sign of religion in these fellows ; so I promise you he shall be set at liberty when we march . but hark , the general beats . my dear boy , give I another buss . do not discompose nor hurry yourself ; but remember the doctrine of patience , and I warrant you will soon be able to do yourself justice , and to take a honourable revenge on the fellow who hath injure you . " the lieutenant then depart , and endeavoure to compose himself to rest . . contain about two day . I . a wonderful long chapter concern the marvellous ; be much the longest of all we introductory chapter . as we be now enter upon a book in which the course of we history will oblige we to relate some matters of a more strange and surprize kind than any which have hithertoo occur , it may not be amiss , in the prolegomenous or introductory chapter , to say something of that species of writing which be call the marvellous . to this we
we shall , as well for the sake of ourselves as of other , endeavou to set some certain bounds , and indeed nothing can be more necessary , as critic [ * ] of different complexion be here apt to run into very different extrem ; for while some be , with , ready to allow , that the same thing which be impossible may be yet probable , [* * ] other have so little historic or poetic faith , that they believe nothing to be either possible or probable , the like to which hath not occur to they own observation . [ *] by this word here , and in most other part of we work , we mean every reader in the world . [ **] it be happy for that he be not a . first , then , I think it may very reasonably be require of every writer , that he keep within the bounds of possibility ; and still remember that what it be not possible for man to perform , it be scarce possible for man to believe he do perform . this conviction perhaps give birth to many story of the antient heathan deity ( for most of they be of poetical original ) . the poet , be desirous to indulge a wanton and extravagant imagination , take refuge in that power , of the extent of which he reader be no judge , or rather which they imagine to be infinite , and consequently they could not be shocked at any prodigy related of it . this hath be strongly urge in defence of 's miracle ; and it be perhaps a defence ; not , as would have it , because tell a set of foolish lie to the , who be a very dull nation ; but because the poet himself write to heathen , to whom poetical fable be article of faith . for my own part , I must confess , so compassionate be my temper , I wish have confine himself to he milk diet , and preserve he eye ; nor could be much more concerned than myself , when he companion be turn into swine by , who show , I think , afterwards , too much regard for man 's flesh to be suppose capable of convert it into bacon . I wish , likewise , with all my heart , that Homer could have know the rule prescribe by , to introduce supernatural agent as seldom as possible . we should not then have see he gods come on trivial errand , and often behave themselves so as not only to forfeit all title to respect , but to become the object of scorn and derision . a conduct which must have shocke the credulity of a pious and sagacious heathan ; and which could never have be defend , unless by agree with a supposition to which I have be sometimes almost inclined , that this most glorious poet , as he certainly be , have a intent to burlesque the superstitious faith of he own age and country . but I have rest too long on a doctrine which can be of no use to a writer ; for as he can not introduce into he work any of that heavenly host which make a part of he creed , so it be horrid puerility to search the heathe theology for any of those deity who have be long since dethron from they immortality . observe , that nothing be more cold than the invocation of a muse by a modern ; he might have add , that nothing can be more absurd . a modern may with much more elegance invoke a ballad , as some have think do , or a mug of ale , with the author of ; which latter may perhaps have inspire much more poetry , as well as prose , than all the liquor of or . the only supernatural agent which can in any manner be allow to we modern , be ghost ; but of these I would advise a author to be extremely sparing . these be indeed , like arsenic , and other dangerous drug in physic , to be use with the utmost caution ; nor would I advise the introduction of they at all in those work , or by those author , to which , or to whom , a horse - laugh in the reader would be any great prejudice or mortification . as for elf and fairy , and other such mummery , I purposely omit the mention of they , as I should be very unwilling to confine within any bounds those surprize imagination , for whose vast capacity the limit of human nature be too narrow ; whose work be to be consider as a new creation ; and who have consequently just right to do what they will with they own . Man therefore be the highest subject ( unless on very extraordinary occasion indeed ) which present itself to the pen of we historian , or of we poet ; and , in relate he action , great care be to be take that we do not exceed the capacity of the agent we describe . be possibility alone sufficient to justify we ; we must keep likewise within the rule of probability . it be , I think , the opinion of ; or if not , it be the opinion of some wise man , whose authority will be as weighty when it be as old , " that it be no excuse for a poet who relate what be incredible , that the thing relate be really matter of fact . " this may perhaps be allow true with regard to poetry , but it may be think impracticable to extend it to the
the historian ; for he be obliged to record matter as he find they , though they may be of so extraordinary a nature as will require no small degree of historical faith to swallow they . such be the successless armament of Xerxes describe by , or the successful expedition of relate by . such of later year be the victory of obtain by the , or that of win by the of . all which instance , the more we reflect on they , appear still the more astonishing . such fact , however , as they occur in the thread of the story , nay , indeed , as they constitute the essential part of it , the historian be not only justifiable in recording as they really happen , but indeed would be unpardonable should he omit or alter they . but there be other fact be not of such consequence nor so necessary , which , though ever so well attest , may nevertheless be sacrificed to oblivion in complacence to the scepticism of a reader . be that memorable story of the ghost of , which might with more propriety have be make a present of to , to have keep the ghost of company , at the head of he Discourse upon , than have be introduce into so solemn a work as the History of the . to say the truth , if the historian will confine himself to what really happen , and utterly reject any circumstance , which , though never so well attest , he must be well assure be false , he will sometimes fall into the marvellous , but never into the incredible . he will often raise the wonder and surprize of he reader , but never that incredulous hatred mention by . it be by fall into fiction , therefore , that we generally offmend against this rule , of desert probability , which the historian seldom , if ever , quit , till he forsake he character and commence a writer of romance . in this , however , those historian who relate public transaction , have the advantage of we who confine ourselves to scene of private life . the credit of the former be by common notoriety support for a long time ; and public record , with the concurrent testimony of many author , bear evidence to they truth in future age . thus a and a , a and a , have all meet with the belief of posterity ; and no one doubt but that man so very good , and so very bad , be once the master of mankind . but we who deal in private character , who search into the most retired recess , and draw forth example of virtue and vice from hole and corner of the world , be in a more dangerous situation . as we have no public notoriety , no concurrent testimony , no record to support and corroborate what we deliver , it become we to keep within the limit not only of possibility , but of probability too ; and this more especially in paint what be greatly good and amiable . and folly , though never so exorbitant , will more easily meet with assent ; for ill - nature add great support and strength to faith . thus we may , perhaps , with little danger , relate the history of ; who have long owed he bread to the generosity of , and have one morning receive a considerable bounty from he hand , yet , in order to possess himself of what remain in he friend 's scrutore , conceal himself in a public office of the Temple , through which there be a passage into 's chamber . here he overhear for many hour solace himself at a entertainment which he that evening give he friend , and to which have be invite . during all this time , no tender , no grateful reflection arise to restrain he purpose ; but when the poor gentleman have let he company out through the office , come suddenly from he lurking - place , and walk softly behind he friend into he chamber , discharge a pistol - ball into he head . this may be believe when the bone of be as rotten as he heart . Nay , perhaps , it will be credit , that the villain go two day afterwards with some young lady to the play of ; and with a unaltered countenance hear one of the ladie , who little suspect how near she be to the person , cry out , " ! if the man that murder be now present ! " manifest in this a more seared and callous conscience than even himself ; of whom we be tell by , " that the consciousness of he guilt , after the death of he mother , become immediately intolerable , and so continue ; nor could all the congratulation of the soldier , of the senate , and the people , allay the horror of he conscience . " but now , on the other hand , should I tell my reader , that I have know a man whose penetrat genius have enable he to raise a large fortune in a way where no beginning be chaulk out to he ; that he have do this with the most perfect preservation of he integrity , and not only without the least injustice or injury to any one individual person , but with the highest advantage to trade , and a vast increase of the public revenue ; that he have expend one part of the income of this fortune in discover a taste superior to most , by work where the highest dignity be united with the purest simplicity , and another part in display
display a degree of goodness superior to all man , by act of charity to object whose only recommendation be they merit , or they want ; that he be most industrious in search after merit in distress , most eager to relieve it , and then as careful ( perhaps too careful ) to conceal what he have do ; that he house , he furniture , he garden , he table , he private hospitality , and he public beneficence , all denote the mind from which they flow , and be all intrinsically rich and noble , without tinsel , or external ostentation ; that he fill every relation in life with the most adequate virtue ; that he be most piously religious to he Creator , most zealously loyal to he sovereign ; a most tender husband to he wife , a kind relation , a munificent patron , a warm and firm friend , a knowing and a chearful companion , indulgent to he servants , hospitable to he neighbour , charitable to the poor , and benevolent to all mankind . should I add to these the epithet of wise , brave , elegant , and indeed every other amiable epithet in we language , I might surely say , _-- Quis credet ? nemo Hercule ! nemo ; duo , vel nemo ;_ and yet I know a man who be all I have here describe . but a single instance ( and I really know not such another ) be not sufficient to justify we , while we be write to thousand who never hear of the person , nor of anything like he . such _rara ave should be remit to the epitaph writer , or to some poet who may condescmend to hitch he in a distich , or to slide he into a rhime with a air of carelessness and neglect , without give any offence to the reader . in the last place , the action should be such as may not only be within the compass of human agency , and which human agent may probably be suppose to do ; but they should be likely for the very actor and character themselves to have perform ; for what may be only wonderful and surprize in one man , may become improbable , or indeed impossible , when related of another . this last requisite be what the dramatic critic call conversation of character ; and it require a very extraordinary degree of judgment , and a most exact knowledge of human nature . it be admirably remark by a most excellent writer , that zeal can no more hurry a man to act in direct opposition to itself , than a rapid stream can carry a boat against its own current . I will venture to say , that for a man to act in direct contradiction to the dictate of he nature , be , if not impossible , as improbable and as miraculous as anything which can well be conceive . should the best part of the story of be ascribe to , or should the worst incidents of Nero's life be impute to , what would be more shocking to belief than either instance ? whereas both these be related of they proper agent , constitute the truly marvellous . we modern author of comedy have fall almost universally into the error here hint at ; they hero generally be notorious rogue , and they heroine abandon jade , during the first four act ; but in the fifth , the former become very worthy gentleman , and the latter woman of virtue and discretion : nor be the writer often so kind as to give himself the least trouble to reconcile or account for this monstrous change and incongruity . there be , indeed , no other reason to be assign for it , than because the play be draw to a conclusion ; as if it be no less natural in a rogue to repent in the last act of a play , than in the last of he life ; which we perceive to be generally the case at , a place which might indeed close the scene of some comedy with much propriety , as the heroe in these be most commonly eminent for those very talents which not only bring man to the gallow , but enable they to make a heroic figure when they be there . within these few restriction , I think , every writer may be permit to deal as much in the wonderful as he please ; nay , if he thus keep within the rule of credibility , the more he can surprize the reader the more he will engage he attention , and the more he will charm he . as a genius of the highest rank observe in he fifth chapter of the , " the great art of all poetry be to mix truth with fiction , in order to join the credible with the surprizing . " for though every good author will confine himself within the bounds of probability , it be by no means necessary that he character , or he incident , should be trite , common , or vulgar ; such as happen in every street , or in every house , or which may be meet with in the home article of a newspaper . must he be inhibit from show many person and thing , which may possibly have never fall within the knowledge of great part of he reader . if the writer strictly observe the rule above -mentioned , he hath discharge he part ; and be then intitle to some faith from he reader , who be indeed guilty of critical infidelity if he disbelieve he . for want of a portion of such faith , I remember the character
character of a young lady of quality , which be condemn on the stage for be unnatural , by the unanimous voice of a very large assembly of clerk and apprentice ; though it have the previous suffrage of many lady of the first rank ; one of whom , very eminent for she understanding , declare it be the picture of half the young people of she acquaintance . . in which the landlady pay a visit to . when have take leave of he friend the lieutenant , he endeavoure to close he eye , but all in vain ; he spirit be too lively and wakeful to be lull to sleep . so have amuse , or rather torment , himself with the thought of he till it be open daylight , he call for some tea ; upon which occasion my landlady herself vouchsaf to pay he a visit . this be indeed the first time she have see he , or at least have take any notice of he ; but as the lieutenant have assure she that he be certainly some young gentleman of fashion , she now determi to show he all the respect in she power ; for , to speak truly , this be one of those house where gentlemen , to use the language of advertisement , meet with civil treatment for they money . she have no sooner begin to make he tea , than she likewise begin to discourse :-- " ! sir , " say she , " I think it be great pity that such a pretty young gentleman should under - value himself so , as to go about with these soldier fellow . they call themselves gentleman , I warrant you ; but , as my first husband use to say , they should remember it be we that pay they . and to be sure it be very hard upon we to be oblige to pay they , and to keep 'um too , as we publican be . I have twenty of 'um last night , besides officer : nay , for matter of ' that , I have rather have the soldier than officer : for nothing be ever good enough for those spark ; and I be sure , if you be to see the bill ; la! sir , it be nothing . I have have less trouble , I warrant you , with a good squire 's family , where we take forty or fifty shilling of a night , besides horse . and yet I warrant I , there be narrow a one of those officer fellow but look upon himself to be as good as arrow a squire of  500 a year . to be sure it doth I good to hear they man run about after 'um , cry you honour , and you honour . come up with such honour , and a ordinary at a shilling a head . then there be such swear among , to be sure it frighten I out of ' my wit : I think nothing can ever prosper with such wicked people . and here one of 'um have use you in so barbarous a manner . I think indeed how well the rest would secure he ; they all hang together ; for if you have be in danger of death , which I be glad to see you be not , it would have be all as one to such wicked people . they would have let the murderer go . have mercy upon 'um ; I would not have such a sin to answer for , for the whole world . but though you be likely , with the blessing , to recover , there be laa for he yet ; and if you will employ lawyer Small , I darest be swear he will make the fellow fly the country for he ; though perhaps he will have fle the country before ; for it be here to - day and go to - morrow with such chap . I hope , however , you will learn more wit for the future , and return back to you friend ; I warrant they be all miserable for you loss ; and if they be but to know what have happen -- , my seem ! I would not for the world they should . come , come , we know very well what all the matter be ; but if one will not , another will ; so pretty a gentleman need never want a lady . I be sure , if I be you , I would see the finest she that ever wear a head hang , before I would go for a soldier for she .-- Nay , do not blush so " ( for indeed he do to a violent degree ) . " why , you think , sir , I know nothing of the matter , I warrant you , about " --" how , " say , start up , " do you know my ? " -- " do I ! ay marry , " cry the landlady ; " many be the time hath she lain in this house . " -- " with she aunt , I suppose , " say . " why , there it be now , " cry the landlady . " ay , ay , ay , I know the old lady very well . and a sweet young creature be , that be the truth of not . " --" a sweet creature , " cry ; " of heaven ! " angel be paint fair to look like she . there be in she all that we believe of heav'n , amazing brightness , purity , and truth , Eternal joy and everlast love . "
" and could I ever have imagine that you have know my ! " --" I wish , " say the landlady , " you know half so much of she . what would you have give to have sit by she bed - side ? what a delicious neck she hath ! she lovely limb have stretch themselves in that very be you now lie in . " -- " here ! " cry : " hath ever lay here ? " --" ay , ay , here ; there , in that very bed , " say the landlady ; " where I wish you have she this moment ; and she may wish so too for anything I know to the contrary , for she hath mention you name to I . " -- " ! " cry he ; " do she ever mention she poor ? you flatter I now : I can never believe so much . " -- " why , then , " answer she , " as I hope to be save , and may the fetch I if I speak a syllable more than the truth , I have hear she mention ; but in a civil and modest way , I confess ; yet I could perceive she think a great deal more than she say . " --" of my dear woman ! " cry , " she thought of I I shall never be worthy of . oh , she be all gentleness , kindness , goodness ! why be such a rascal as I bear , ever to give she soft bosom a moment 's uneasiness ? why be I curse ? I , who would undergo all the plague and misery which any daemon ever invent for mankind , to procure she any good ; nay , torture itself could not be misery to I , do I but know that she be happy . " --" why , look you there now , " say the landlady ; " I tell she you be a constant lovier ." --" but pray , madam , tell I when or where you know anything of I ; for I never be here before , nor do I remember ever to have see you . " -- " be it possible you should , " answer she ; " for you be a little thing when I have you in my lap at the squire 's . " -- " how , the squire 's ? " say : " what , do you know that great and good then ? " --" yes , marry , do I , " say she : " who in the country doth not ? " --" the fame of he goodness indeed , " answer , " must have extend farther than this ; but heaven only can know he -- can know that benevolence which it copy from itself , and send upon earth as its own pattern . mankind be as ignorant of such divine goodness , as they be unworthy of it ; but none so unworthy of it as myself . I , who be raise by he to such a height ; take in , as you must well know , a poor base - bear child , adopt by he , and treat as he own son , to dare by my folly to disoblige he , to draw he vengeance upon I . yes , I deserve it all ; for I will never be so ungrateful as ever to think he hath do a act of injustice by I . no , I deserve to be turn out of door , as I be . and now , madam , " say he , " I believe you will not blame I for turn soldier , especially with such a fortune as this in my pocket . " at which word he shook a purse , which have but very little in it , and which still appear to the landlady to have less . my good landlady be ( accord to vulgar phrase ) strike all of a heap by this relation . she answer coldly , " that to be sure people be the best judge what be most proper for they circumstance . but hark , " say she , " I think I hear somebody call . come ! come ! the 's in all we volk ; nobody hath any ears . I must go down - stair ; if you want any more breakfast the maid will come up . come ! " at which word , without take any leave , she fling out of the room ; for the lower sort of people be very tenacious of respect ; and though they be contente to give this gratis to person of quality , yet they never confer it on those of they own order without take care to be well pay for they pain . chapter iii . in which the surgeon make he second appearance . before we proceed any farther , that the reader may not be mistaken in imagine the landlady know more than she do , nor surprize that she know so much , it may be necessary to inform he that the lieutenant have acquaint she that the name of have be the occasion of the quarrel ; and as for the rest of she knowledge , the sagacious reader will observe how she come by it in the preceding scene . great curiosity be indeed mix with she virtue ; and she never willingly suffer any one to depart from she house , without enquir as much as possible into they name , family , and fortune . she be no sooner gone than , instead of animadverting on she behaviour , reflect that he be in the
the same bed which he be inform have hold he dear . this occasion a thousand fond and tender thought , which we would dwell longer upon , do we not consider that such kind of lover will make a very inconsiderable part of we reader . in this situation the surgeon find he , when he come to dress he wound . the doctor perceive , upon examination , that he pulse be disorder , and hear that he have not sleep , declare that he be in great danger ; for he apprehend a fever be come on , which he would have prevent by bleeding , but would not submit , declare he would lose no more blood ; " and , doctor , " say he , " if you will be so kind only to dress my head , I have no doubt of be well in a day or two . " " I wish , " answer the surgeon , " I could assure you be well in a month or two . well , indeed ! no , no , people be not so soon well of such contusion ; but , sir , I be not at this time of day to be instruct in my operation by a patient , and I insist on make a revulsion before I dress you . " persist obstinately in he refusal , and the doctor at last yielded ; tell he at the same time that he would not be answerable for the ill consequence , and hope he would do he the justice to acknowledge that he have give he a contrary advice ; which the patient promise he would . the doctor retire into the kitchen , where , address himself to the landlady , he complain bitterly of the undutiful behaviour of he patient , who would not be blood , though he be in a fever . " it be a eat fever then , " say the landlady ; " for he hath devoure two swing butter toast this morning for breakfast . " " very likely , " say the doctor : " I have know people eat in a fever ; and it be very easily account for ; because the acidity occasion by the febrile matter may stimulate the nerve of the diaphragm , and thereby occasion a craving which will not be easily distinguishable from a natural appetite ; but the aliment will not be concret , nor assimilate into chyle , and so will corrode the vascular orifice , and thus will aggravate the febrific symptom . indeed , I think the gentleman in a very dangerous way , and , if he be not bloode , I be afraid will die . " " every man must die some time or other , " answer the good woman ; " it be no business of mine . I hope , doctor , you would not have I hold he while you bleed he . but , hark 'ee , a word in you ear ; I would advise you , before you proceed too far , to take care who be to be you paymaster . " " Paymaster ! " say the doctor , stare ; " why , I have a gentleman under my hand , have I not ? " " I imagine so as well as you , " say the landlady ; " but , as my first husband use to say , everything be not what it look to be . he be a arrant scrub , I assure you . however , take no notice that I mention anything to you of the matter ; but I think people in business oft always to let one another know such thing . " " and have I suffer such a fellow as this , " cry the doctor , in a passion , " to instruct I ? shall I hear my practice insult by one who will not pay I ? I be glad I have make this discovery in time . I will see now whether he will be bloode or no . " he then immediately go upstairs , and flinge open the door of the chamber with much violence , awak poor from a very sound nap , into which he be fall , and , what be still worse , from a delicious dream concern . " will you be bloode or no ? " cry the doctor , in a rage . " I have tell you my resolution already , " answer , " and I wish with all my heart you have take my answer ; for you have awak I out of the sweetest sleep which I ever have in my life . " " ay , ay , " cry the doctor ; " many a man hath doze away he life . sleep be not always good , no more than food ; but remember , I demand of you for the last time , will you be blood ? " --" I answer you for the last time , " say , " I will not . " --" then I wash my hand of you , " cry the doctor ; " and I desire you to pay I for the trouble I have have already . two journey at 5 . each , two dressing at 5 . more , and half a crown for phlebotomy . " --" I hope , " say , " you do not intend to leave I in this condition . " --" indeed but I shall , " say the other . " then , " say , " you have use I rascally , and I will not pay you a farthing . " --" very well , " cry the doctor ; " the
the first loss be the best . what a pox do my landlady mean by send for I to such vagabonds ! " at which word he fling out of the room , and he patient turn himself about soon recover he sleep ; but he dream be unfortunately gone . chapter iv . in which be introduce one of the pleasantest barber that be ever record in history , the barber of , or he in , not accept . the clock have now struck five when awak from a nap of seven hour , so much refresh , and in such perfect health and spirit , that he resolve to get up and dress himself ; for which purpose he unlock he portmanteau , and take out clean linen , and a suit of cloath ; but first he slipt on a frock , and go down into the kitchen to bespeak something that might pacify certain tumult he find rise within he stomach . meet the landlady , he accost she with great civility , and ask , " what he could have for dinner ? " --" for dinner ! " say she ; " it be a odd time a day to think about dinner . there be nothing drest in the house , and the fire be almost out . " -- " well , but , " say he , " I must have something to eat , and it be almost indifferent to I what ; for , to tell you the truth , I be never more hungry in my life . " -- " then , " say she , " I believe there be a piece of cold buttock and carret , which will fit you . " -- " nothing better , " answer ; " but I should be oblige to you , if you would let it be fry . " to which the landlady consent , and say , smile , " she be glad to see he so well recover ; " for the sweetness of we heroe 's temper be almost irresistible ; beside , she be really no ill - humoured woman at the bottom ; but she love money so much , that she hate everything which have the semblance of poverty . now return in order to dress himself , while he dinner be prepare , and be , accord to he order , attend by the barber . this barber , who go by the name of , be a fellow of great oddity and humour , which have frequently let he into small inconveniency , such as slap in the face , kick in the breech , break bone , &c . for every one doth not understand a jest ; and those who do be often displease with be themselves the subject of it . this vice be , however , incurable in he ; and though he have often smarted for it , yet if ever he conceive a joke , he be certain to be deliver of it , without the least respect of person , time , or place . he have a great many other particularity in he character , which I shall not mention , as the reader will himself very easily perceive they , on he farther acquaintance with this extraordinary person . be impatient to be drest , for a reason which may be easily imagine , think the shaver be very tedious in prepare he sud , and beg he to make haste ; to which the other answer with much gravity , for he never discompose he muscle on any account , " lente_ , be a proverb which I learn long before I ever touch a razor . " --" I find , friend , you be a scholar , " reply . " a poor one , " say the barber , " _non omnia possumus omne ._ " -- " again ! " say ; " I fancy you be good at capping verse . " --" excuse I , sir , " say the barber , " _non tanto I dignor honore_. " and then proceed to he operation , " , " say he , " since I have deal in sud , I could never discover more than two reason for shaving ; the one be to get a beard , and the other to get rid of one . I conjecture , sir , it may not be long since you shave from the former of these motive . upon my word , you have have good success ; for one may say of you beard , that it be _tondenti gravior_. " --" I conjecture , " say , " that thou be a very comical fellow . " --" you mistake I widely , sir , " say the barber : " I be too much addicte to the study of philosophy ; _hinc illa lacryma , sir ; that be my misfortune . too much learning hath be my ruin . " -- " indeed , " say , " I confess , friend , you have more learn than generally belong to you trade ; but I can not see how it can have injure you . " -- " ! sir , " answer the shaver , " my father disinherit I for it . he be a dancing - master ; and because I could read before I could dance , he take a aversion to I , and leave every farthing among he other child .-- will you please to have you temple -- of la ! I ask you pardon , I fancy there be _hiatus in manuscriptis _. I hear you be go to the wars ; but I find it be a mistake . " --" why do you conclude so ?
? " say . " sure , sir , " answer the barber , " you be too wise a man to carry a broken head thither ; for that would be carry coal to . " " upon my word , " cry , " thou be a very odd fellow , and I like thy humour extremely ; I shall be very glad if thou will come to I after dinner , and drink a glass with I ; I long to be better acquaint with thee . " " of dear sir ! " say the barber , " I can do you twenty time as great a favour , if you will accept of it . " --" what be that , my friend ? " cry . " why , I will drink a bottle with you if you please ; for I dearly love good - nature ; and as you have find I out to be a comical fellow , so I have no skill in physiognomy , if you be not one of the best - natured gentleman in the universe . " now walk downstairs neatly drest , and perhaps the fair be not a lovelier figure ; and yet he have no charms for my landlady ; for as that good woman do not resemble Venus at all in she person , so neither do she in she taste . happy have it be for Nanny the chambermaid , if she have see with the eyes of she mistress , for that poor girl fell so violently in love with in five minute , that she passion afterwards cost she many a sigh . this be extremely pretty , and altogether as coy ; for she have refuse a drawer , and one or two young farmer in the neighbourhood , but the bright eye of we heroe thaw all she ice in a moment . when return to the kitchen , he cloth be not yet laid ; nor indeed be there any occasion it should , he dinner remain _in statu quo_ , as do the fire which be to dress it . this disappointment might have put many a philosophical temper into a passion ; but it have no such effect on . he only give the landlady a gentle rebuke , say , " Since it be so difficult to get it heat he would eat the beef cold . " but now the good woman , whether move by compassion , or by shame , or by whatever other motive , I can not tell , first give she servants a round scold for disobey the order which she have never give , and then bid the drawer lay a napkin in the , she set about the matter in good earnest , and soon accomplish it . this , into which be now conduct , be truly name , as _lucus a non lucendo_ ; for it be a apartment into which the sun have scarce ever look . it be indeed the worst room in the house ; and happy be it for that it be so . however , he be now too hungry to find any fault ; but have once satisfy he appetite , he order the drawer to carry a bottle of wine into a better room , and express some resentment at have be show into a dungeon . the drawer have obey he command , he be , after some time , attend by the barber , who would not indeed have suffer he to wait so long for he company have he not be listen in the kitchen to the landlady , who be entertain a circle that she have gather round she with the history of poor Jones , part of which she have extract from he own lip , and the other part be she own ingenious composition ; for she say " he be a poor parish boy , take into the house of , where he be breed up as a apprentice , and now turn out of door for he misdeed , particularly for make love to he young mistress , and probably for rob the house ; for how else should he come by the little money he hath ; and this , " say she , " be you gentleman , forsooth ! " --" a servant of ! " say the barber ; " what be he name ? " --" why he tell I he name be , " say she : " perhaps he go by a wrong name . , and he tell I , too , that the squire have maintain he as he own son , thor he have quarrell with he now . " --" and if he name be , he tell you the truth , " say the barber ; " for I have relation who live in that country ; nay , and some people say he be he son . " --" why doth he not go by the name of he father ? " --" I can not tell that , " say the barber ; " many people 's son do not go by the name of they father . " -- " Nay , " say the landlady , " if I think he be a gentleman 's son , thor he be a bye - blow , I should behave to he in another guess manner ; for many of these bye - blow come to be great man , and , as my poor first husband use to say , never affront any customer that be a gentleman . " v. a dialogue between and the barber . this conversation pass partly while be at dinner in he dungeon , and partly while he be expect the barber in the parlour . and ,
, as soon as it be end , , as we have say , attend he , and be very kindly desire to sit down . then fill out a glass of wine , drank he health by the appellation of _doctissime tonsorum _. " tibi gratia , domine " say the barber ; and then look very steadfastly at , he say , with great gravity , and with a see surprize , as if he have recollect a face he have see before , " , may I crave the favour to know if you name be not ? " to which the other answer , " that it be . " --" _Proh deum atque hominum fidem _! " say the barber ; " how strangely thing come to pass ! , I be you most obedient servant . I find you do not know I , which indeed be no wonder , since you never see I but once , and then you be very young . pray , sir , how doth the good ? how doth _ille optimus omnium patronus _? " --" I find , " say , " you do indeed know I ; but I have not the like happiness of recollect you . " --" I do not wonder at that , " cry ; " but I be surprize I do not know you sooner , for you be not in the least altered . and pray , sir , may I , without offence , enquire whither you be travel this way ? " --" fill the glass , , " say , " and ask no more question . " -- " Nay , sir , " answer , " I would not be troublesome ; and I hope you do not think I a man of a impertinent curiosity , for that be a vice which nobody can lay to my charge ; but I ask pardon ; for when a gentleman of you figure travel without he servants , we may suppose he to be , as we say , _in casu incognito_ , and perhaps I ought not to have mention you name . " --" I own , " say , " I do not expect to have be so well know in this country as I find I be ; yet , for particular reason , I shall be oblige to you if you will not mention my name to any other person till I be go from hence ." --" verba_ , " answer the barber ; " and I wish no other here kknow you but myself ; for some people have tongue ; but I promise you I can keep a secret . my enemy will allow I that virtue . " --" and yet that be not the characteristic of you profession , , " answer . " ! sir , " reply , " non si male nunc et olim sic erit . I be not bear nor breed a barber , I assure you . I have spend most of my time among gentleman , and though I say it , I understand something of gentility . and if you have think I as worthy of you confidence as you have some other people , I should have show you I could have keep a secret better . I should not have degrad you name in a public kitchen ; for indeed , sir , some people have not use you well ; for besides make a public proclamation of what you tell they of a quarrel between yourself and , they add lie of they own , thing which I know to be lie . " --" you surprize I greatly , " cry . " upon my word , sir , " answer , " I tell the truth , and I need not tell you my landlady be the person . I be sure it move I to hear the story , and I hope it be all false ; for I have a great respect for you , I do assure you I have , and have have ever since the good - nature you show to , which be talk of all over the country , and I receive more than one letter about it . indeed , it make you belove by everybody . you will pardon I , therefore ; for it be real concern at what I hear make I ask many question ; for I have no impertinent curiosity about I : but I love good - nature and thence become _amoris abundantia erga te_. " every profession of friendship easily gain credit with the miserable ; it be no wonder therefore , if , who , besides he be miserable , be extremely open - hear , very readily believe all the profession of , and receive he into he bosom . the scrap of , some of which apply properly enough , though it do not saavor of profound literature , see yet to indicate something superior to a common barber ; and so indeed do he whole behaviour . therefore believe the truth of what he have say , as to he original and education ; and at length , after much entreaty , he say , " Since you have hear , my friend , so much of my affair , and seem so desirous to know the truth , if you will have patience to hear it , I will inform you of the whole . " -- " patience ! " cry , " that I will , if the chapter be never so long ; and I be very much oblige to you for the honour you do I . " now begin , and relate the whole history , forget only a circumstance or two , namely , everything which
which pass on that day in which he have fight with ; and end with he resolution to go to sea , till the rebellion in the have make he change he purpose , and have bring he to the place where he then be . , who have be all attention , never once interrupt the narrative ; but when it be end he could not help observe , that there must be surely something more invent by he enemy , and tell against he , or so good a man would never have dismiss one he have love so tenderly , in such a manner . to which answer , " he doubt not but such villanous art have be make use of to destroy he . " and surely it be scarce possible for any one to have avoid make the same remark with the barber , who have not indeed hear from one single circumstance upon which he be condemn ; for he action be not now place in those injuriious lights in which they have be misrepresent to ; nor could he mention those many false accusation which have be from time to time prefer against he to : for with none of these he be himself acquaint . he have likewise , as we have observe , omit many material fact in he present relation . upon the whole , indeed , everything now appear in such favourable colour to , that malice itself would have find it no easy matter to fix any blame upon he . not that desire to conceal or to disguise the truth ; nay , he would have be more unwilling to have suffer any censure to fall on for punishe he , than on he own action for deserve it ; but , in reality , so it happen , and so it always will happen ; for let a man be never so honest , the account of he own conduct will , in spite of himself , be so very favourable , that he vice will come purify through he lip , and , like foul liquor well strain , will leave all they foulness behind . for though the facts themselves may appear , yet so different will be the motive , circumstance , and consequence , when a man tell he own story , and when he enemy tell it , that we scarce can recognise the fact to be one and the same . though the barber have drank down this story with greedy ear , he be not yet satisfied . there be a circumstance behind which he curiosity , cold as it be , most eagerly long for . have mention the fact of he amour , and of he be the rival of , but have cautiously conceal the name of the young lady . the barber , therefore , after some hesitation , and many hum and hah , at last beg leave to crave the name of the lady , who appear to be the principal cause of all this mischief . pause a moment , and then say , " Since I have trust you with so much , and since , I be afraid , she name be become too publick already on this occasion , I will not conceal it from you . she name be western . " " _Proh deum atque hominum fidem _! Squire western hath a daughter grow a woman ! " --" ay , and such a woman , " cry , " that the world can not match . no eye ever see anything so beautiful ; but that be she least excellence . such sense ! such goodness ! oh , I could praise she for ever , and yet should omit half she virtue ! " -- " a daughter grow up ! " cry the barber : " I remember the father a boy ; well , Tempus edax rerum _. " the wine be now at a end , the barber presse very eagerly to be he bottle ; but absolutely refuse , say , " he have already drank more than he ought : and that he now choose to retire to he room , where he wish he could procure himself a book . " --" a book ! " cry ; " what book would you have ? or ? I have some curiious book in both language ; such as , , ad Parnassum ;_ and in I have several of the best book , though some of they be a little torn ; but I have a great part of 's ; the sixth volume of 's ; the third volume of the Spectator ; the second volume of 's ; the Craftsman ; ; a ; and two volume of 's . " " those last , " cry , " be book I never see , so if you please lend I one of those volume . " the barber assure he he would be highly entertained , for he look upon the author to have be one of the greatest wit that ever the nation produce . he then step to he house , which be hard by , and immediately return ; after which , the barber have receive very strict injunction of secrecy from , and have swear inviolably to maintain it , they separate ; the barber go home , and retire to he chamber . chapter vi . in which more of the talents of will appear , as well as who this extraordinary person be . in the morning grow a little uneasy at the desertion of he surgeon , as he apprehend some inconvenience , or even danger , might attend the not dress he wound ; he enquire of the drawer , what other surgeon be to be meet with
with in that neighbourhood . the drawer tell he , there be one not far off ; but he have know he often refuse to be concerned after another have be send before he ; " but , sir , " say he , " if you will take my advice , there be not a man in the kingdom can do you business better than the barber who be with you last night . we look upon he to be one of the ablest man at a cut in all this neighbourhood . for though he hath not be she above three month , he hath do several great cure . " the drawer be presently dispatch for , who be acquaint in what capacity he be want , prepare himself accordingly , and attend ; but with so different a air and aspect from that which he wear when he basin be under he arm , that he could scarce be know to be the same person . " so , tonsor , " say , " I find you have more trade than one ; how come you not to inform I of this last night ? " --" a surgeon , " answer , with great gravity , " be a profession , not a trade . the reason why I do not acquaint you last night that I profess this art , be , that I then conclude you be under the hand of another gentleman , and I never love to interfere with my breth in they business . Ars omnibus communis _. but now , sir , if you please , I will inspect you head , and when I see into you skull , I will give my opinion of you case . " have no great faith in this new professor ; however , he suffer he to open the bandage and to look at he wound ; which as soon as he have do , begin to groan and shake he head violently . upon which , in a peevish manner , bid he not play the fool , but tell he in what condition he find he . " shall I answer you as a surgeon , or a friend ? " say . " as a friend , and seriously , " say . " why then , upon my soul , " cry , " it would require a great deal of art to keep you from be well after a very few dressing ; and if you will suffer I to apply some salve of mine , I will answer for the success . " give he consent , and the plaister be apply accordingly . " there , sir , " cry : " now I will , if you please , resume my former self ; but a man be oblige to keep up some dignity in he countenance whilst he be perform these operation , or the world will not submit to be handle by he . you can not imagine , sir , of how much consequence a grave aspect be to a grave character . a barber may make you laugh , but a surgeon ought rather to make you cry . " " , or , or - surgeon , " say . " of dear sir ! " answer , interrupt he , " _Infandum , regina , jube renovare dolorem_ . you recall to my mind that cruel separation of the united fraternity , so much to the prejudice of both body , as all separation must be , accord to the old adage , fortior ; which to be sure there be not want some of one or of the other fraternity who be able to construe . what a blow be this to I , who unite both in my own person ! " " well , by whatever name you please to be call , " continue , " you certainly be one of the oddest , most comical fellow I ever meet with , and must have something very surprizing in you story , which you must confess I have a right to hear . " --" I do confess it , " answer , " and will very readily acquaint you with it , when you have sufficient leisure , for I promise you it will require a good deal of time . " tell he , he could never be more at leisure than at present . " well , then , " say , " I will obey you ; but first I will fasten the door , that none may interrupt we . " he do so , and then advanc with a solemn air to , say : " I must begin by tell you , sir , that you yourself have be the greatest enemy I ever have . " be a little start at this sudden declaration . " I you enemy , sir ! " say he , with much amazement , and some sternness in he look . " Nay , be not angry , " say , " for I promise you I be not . you be perfectly innocent of have intend I any wrong ; for you be then a infant : but I shall , I believe , unriddle all this the moment I mention my name . do you never hear , sir , of one Partridge , who have the honour of be repute you father , and the misfortune of be ruin by that honour ? " " I have , indeed , heard of that Partridge , " say , " and have always believe myself to be he son . " " well , sir , " answer , " I be that Partridge ; but I here absolve you from all filial duty , for I
I do assure you , you be no son of mine . " " how ! " reply , " and be it possible that a false suspicion should have draw all the ill consequence upon you , with which I be too well acquaint ? " " it be possible , " cry , " for it be so : but though it be natural enough for man to hate even the innocent cause of they suffering , yet I be of a different temper . I have love you ever since I hear of you behaviour to , as I tell you ; and I be convince , from this extraordinary meeting , that you be bear to make I amend for all I have suffer on that account . besides , I dreamt , the night before I see you , that I stumble over a stool without hurt myself ; which plainly show I something good be towards I : and last night I dreamt again , that I ride behind you on a milk - white mare , which be a very excellent dream , and betoken much good fortune , which I be resolve to pursue unless you have the cruelty to deny I . " " I should be very glad , , " answer , " to have it in my power to make you amend for you suffering on my account , though at present I see no likelihood of it ; however , I assure you I will deny you nothing which be in my power to grant . " " it be in you power sure enough , " reply ; " for I desire nothing more than leave to attend you in this expedition . Nay , I have so entirely set my heart upon it , that if you should refuse I , you will kill both a barber and a surgeon in one breath . " answer , smile , that he should be very sorry to be the occasion of so much mischief to the public . he then advanc many prudential reason , in order to dissuade ( whom we shall hereafter call ) from he purpose ; but all be in vain . rely strongly on he dream of the milk - white mare . " besides , sir , " say he , " I promise you I have as good a inclination to the cause as any man can possibly have ; and go I will , whether you admit I to go in you company or not . " , who be as much pleased with as could be with he , and who have not consult he own inclination but the good of the other in desire he to stay behind , when he find he friend so resolute , at last give he consent ; but then recollect himself , he say , " perhaps , , you think I shall be able to support you , but I really be not ; " and then take out he purse , he tell out nine guinea , which he declare be he whole fortune . answer , " that he dependence be only on he future favour ; for he be thoroughly convince he would shortly have enough in he power . at present , sir , " say he , " I believe I be rather the richer man of the two ; but all I have be at you service , and at you disposal . I insist upon you take the whole , and I beg only to attend you in the quality of you servant ; _Nil desperandum est Teucro duce et auspice teucro_ " : but to this generous proposal concern the money , would by no means submit . it be resolve to set out the next morning , when a difficulty arose concern the baggage ; for the portmanteau of be too large to be carry without a horse . " if I may presume to give my advice , " say , " this portmanteau , with everything in it , except a few shirts , should be leave behind . those I shall be easily able to carry for you , and the rest of you cloath will remain very safe lock up in my house . " this method be no sooner propose than agree to ; and then the barber depart , in order to prepare everything for he intended expedition . chapter vii . contain better reason than any which have yet appear for the conduct of ; a apology for the weakness of ; and some further anecdote concern my landlady . though be one of the most superstitious of man , he would hardly perhaps have desire to accompany on he expedition merely from the omen of the joint - stool and white mare , if he prospect have be no better than to have share the plunder gain in the field of battle . in fact , when come to ruminate on the relation he have hear from , he could not reconcile to himself that should turn he son ( for so he most firmly believe he to be ) out of door , for any reason which he have hear assigne . he conclude , therefore , that the whole be a fiction , and that , of whom he have often from he correspondent hear the wildest character , have in reality run away from he father . it come into he head , therefore , that if he could prevail with the young gentleman to return back to he father , he should by that mean render a service to , which would obliterate all he former anger ; nay , indeed , he conceive that very anger be counterfeit , and that have sacrifice he to he own reputation
reputation . and this suspicion indeed he well account for , from the tender behaviour of that excellent man to the foundl child ; from he great severity to , who , knowe himself to be innocent , could not conceive that any other should think he guilty ; lastly , from the allowance which he have privately receive long after the annuity have be publickly take from he , and which he look upon as a kind of smart - money , or rather by way of atonement for injustice ; for it be very uncommon , I believe , for man to ascribe the benefaction they receive to pure charity , when they can possibly impute they to any other motive . if he could by any means therefore persuade the young gentleman to return home , he doubt not but that he should again be receive into the favour of , and well reward for he pain ; nay , and should be again restore to he native country ; a restoration which Ulyss himself never wish more heartily than poor Partridge . as for , he be well satisfied with the truth of what the other have assert , and believe that have no other inducement but love to he , and zeal for the cause ; a blameable want of caution and diffidence in the veracity of other , in which he be highly worthy of censure . to say the truth , there be but two way by which man become possessed of this excellent quality . the one be from long experience , and the other be from nature ; which last , I presume , be often mean by genius , or great natural part ; and it be infinitely the better of the two , not only as we be master of it much earlier in life , but as it be much more infallible and conclusive ; for a man who hath be impos on by ever so many , may still hope to find other more honest ; whereas he who receive certain necessary admonition from withing , that this be impossible , must have very little understanding indeed , if he ever render himself liable to be once deceive . as have not this gift from nature , he be too young to have gain it by experience ; for at the diffident wisdom which be to be acquire this way , we seldom arrive till very late in life ; which be perhaps the reason why some old man be apt to despise the understanding of all those who be a little younger than themselves . spend most part of the day in the company of a new acquaintance . this be no other than the landlord of the house , or rather the husband of the landlady . he have but lately make he descent downstair , after a long fit of the gout , in which distemper he be generally confin to he room during one half of the year ; and during the rest , he walk about the house , smoak he pipe , and drank he bottle with he friend , without concern himself in the least with any kind of business . he have be breed , as they call it , a gentleman ; that be , breed up to do nothing ; and have spend a very small fortune , which he inherit from a industrious farmer he uncle , in hunting , horse - racing , and cock -fighting , and have be marry by my landlady for certain purpose , which he have long since desiste from answer ; for which she hate he heartily . but as he be a surly kind of fellow , so she contente herself with frequently upbraid he by disadvantageous comparison with she first husband , whose praise she have eternally in she mouth ; and as she be for the most part mistress of the profit , so she be satisfied to take upon herself the care and government of the family , and , after a long successless struggle , to suffer she husband to be master of himself . in the evening , when retir to he room , a small dispute arise between this fond couple concern he :--" what , " say the wife , " you have be tippl with the gentleman , I see ? " --" yes , " answer the husband , " we have crack a bottle together , and a very gentlemanlike man he be , and hath a very pretty notion of horse - flesh . indeed , he be young , and hath not see much of the world ; for I believe he hath be at very few horse - races . " -- " Oho ! he be one of you order , be he ? " reply the landlady : " he must be a gentleman to be sure , if he be a horse - racer . the fetch such gentry ! I be sure I wish I have never see any of they . I have reason to love horse - racer truly ! " --" that you have , " say the husband ; " for I be one , you know . " --" yes , " answer she , " you be a pure one indeed . as my first husband use to say , I may put all the good I have ever get by you in my eye , and see never the worse . " --" d --n you first husband ! " cry he . " do not d -- and a better man than yourself , " answer the wife : " if he have be alive , you durst not have do it . " --" then you think , " say he , "
" I have not so much courage as yourself ; for you have d -- n' he often in my hearing . " --" if I do , " say she , " I have repent of it many 's the good time and oft . and if he be so good to forgive I a word speak in haste or so , it doth not become such a one as you to twitter I . he be a husband to I , he be ; and if ever I do make use of a ill word or so in a passion , I never call he rascal ; I should have tell a lie , if I have call he rascal . " much more she say , but not in he hearing ; for have light he pipe , he stagger off as fast as he could . we shall therefore transcribe no more of she speech , as it approach still nearer and nearer to a subject too indelicate to find any place in this history . Early in the morning appear at the bedside of , ready equip for the journey , with he knapsack at he back . this be he own workmanship ; for besides he other trade , he be no indifferent taylor . he have already put up he whole stock of linen in it , consiste of four shirt , to which he now add eight for ; and then pack up the portmanteau , he be depart with it towards he own house , but be stopt in he way by the landlady , who refuse to suffer any removal till after the payment of the reckoning . the landlady be , as we have say , absolute governess in these region ; it be therefore necessary to comply with she rule ; so the bill be presently writ out , which amounte to a much larger sum than might have be expect , from the entertainment which have meet with . but here we be oblige to disclose some maxim , which publican hold to be the grand mystery of they trade . the first be , if they have anything good in they house ( which indeed very seldom happen ) to produce it only to person who travel with great equipage . 2dly , to charge the same for the very worst provision , as if they be the best . and lastly , if any of they guest call but for little , to make they pay a double price for everything they have ; so that the amount by the head may be much the same . the bill be make and discharge , set forward with Partridge , carry he knapsack ; nor do the landlady condescend to wish he a good journey ; for this be , it seem , a inn frequent by people of fashion ; and I know not whence it be , but all those who get they livelihood by people of fashion , contract as much insolence to the rest of mankind , as if they really belong to that rank themselves . chapter viii . arrive at , and go to the ; the character of that house , and of a petty -fogger which he there meet with . and , or ( which epithet of be perhaps give he ironically , he be in reality near six foot high ) , have leave they last quarter in the manner before describe , travel on to without meet any adventure worth relate . be arrive here , they choose for they house of entertainment the sign of the , a excellent house indeed , and which I do most seriously recommend to every reader who shall visit this antient city . the master of it be brother to the great preacher ; but be absolutely untainted with the pernicious principles of , or of any other heretical sect . he be indeed a very honest plain man , and , in my opinion , not likely to create any disturbance either in church or state . he wife hath , I believe , have much pretension to beauty , and be still a very fine woman . she person and deportment might have make a shining figure in the politest assemblie ; but though she must be conscious of this and many other perfections , she seem perfectly contente with , and resign to , that state of life to which she be call ; and this resignation be entirely owe to the prudence and wisdom of she temper ; for she be at present as free from any Methodistical notion as she husband : I say at present ; for she freely confess that she brother 's document make at first some impression upon she , and that she have put herself to the expense of a long hood , in order to attend the extraordinary emotion of the Spirit ; but have find , during a experiment of three week , no emotion , she say , worth a farthing , she very wisely laid by she hood , and abandon the sect . to be concise , she be a very friendly good - natured woman ; and so industrious to oblige , that the guest must be of a very morose disposition who be not extremely well satisfied in she house . happen to be in the yard when and he attendant march in . she sagacity soon discover in the air of we heroe something which distinguished he from the vulgar . she order she servants , therefore , immediately to show he into a room , and presently afterwards invite he to dinner with herself ; which invitation he very thankfully accept ; for indeed much less agreeable company than that of , and a much worse entertainment than she have
have provide , would have be welcome after so long fasting and so long a walk . besides and the good governess of the mansion , there sit down at table a attorney of , indeed the very same who have bring the news of 's death to , and whose name , which I think we do not before mention , be Dow : there be likewise present another person , who stil himself a lawyer , and who liv somewhere near , in . this fellow , I say , stil himself a lawyer , but be indeed a most vile petty -fogger , without sense or knowledge of any kind ; one of those who may be term train - bearer to the law ; a sort of supernumerary in the profession , who be the hackney of attorney , and will ride more mile for half - a - crown than a postboy . during the time of dinner , the lawyer recollect the face of , which he have see at 's ; for he have often visit in that gentleman 's kitchen . he therefore take occasion to enquire after the good family there with that familiarity which would have become a intimate friend or acquaintance of ; and indeed he do all in he power to insinuate himself to be such , though he have never have the honour of speak to any person in that family higher than the butler . answer all he question with much civility , though he never remember to have see the petty -fogger before ; and though he conclude , from the outward appearance and behaviour of the man , that he usur a freedom with he betters , to which he be by no means intitle . as the conversation of fellow of this kind be of all other the most detestable to man of any sense , the cloth be no sooner remove than withdrew , and a little barbarously leave poor to do a penance , which I have often hear , and other publican of good taste , lament , as the severest lot annex to they calling , namely , that of be oblige to keep company with they guest . have no sooner quit the room , than the petty -fogger , in a whispering tone , ask , " if she know who that fine spark be ? " she answer , " she have never see the gentleman before . " --" the gentleman , indeed ! " reply the petty -fogger ; " a pretty gentleman , truly ! why , he be the bastard of a fellow who be hang for horse - stealing . he be dropt at 's door , where one of the servants find he in a box so full of rain - water , that he would certainly have be drown , have he not be reserve for another fate . " --" ay , ay , you need not mention it , I protest : we understand what that fate be very well , " cry Dowling , with a most facetious grin .-- " well , " continue the other , " the squire order he to be take in ; for he be a timbersome man everybody know , and be afraid of draw himself into a scrape ; and there the bastard be breed up , and feed , and cloathify all to the world like any gentleman ; and there he get one of the servant - maid with child , and persuade she to swear it to the squire himself ; and afterwards he break the arm of one a clergyman , only because he reprimand he for follow whore ; and afterwards he snapt a pistol at behind he back ; and once , when be sick , he get a drum , and beat it all over the house to prevent he from sleeping ; and twenty other prank he hath play , for all which , about four or five day ago , just before I leave the country , the squire stripp he stark naked , and turn he out of door . " " and very justly too , I protest , " cry Dowling ; " I would turn my own son out of door , if he be guilty of half as much . and pray what be the name of this pretty gentleman ? " " the name o' un ? " answer - fogger ; " why , he be call . " " ! " answer Dow a little eagerly ; " what , that live at 's ? be that the gentleman that dine with we ? " --" the very same , " say the other . " I have hear of the gentleman , " cry Dowling , " often ; but I never hear any ill character of he . " -- " and I be sure , " say , " if half what this gentleman hath say be true , hath the most deceitful countenance I ever see ; for sure he look promise something very different ; and I must say , for the little I have see of he , he be as civil a well - breed man as you would wish to converse with . " -fogger call to mind that he have not be swear , as he usually be , before he give he evidence , now bound what he have declare with so many oath and imprecation that the landlady 's ears be shocked , and she put a stop to he swear , by assure he of she belief . upon which he say , " I hope , madam , you imagine I would scorn to tell such thing of any man , unless I know they to be true .
. what interest have I in take away the reputation of a man who never injure I ? I promise you every syllable of what I have say be fact , and the whole country know it . " as have no reason to suspect that the petty -fogger have any motive or temptation to abuse , the reader can not blame she for believe what he so confidently affir with many oath . she accordingly give up she skill in physiognomy , and hence - forward conceived so ill a opinion of she guest , that she heartily wish he out of she house . this dislike be now farther increase by a report which make from the kitchen , where have inform the company , " that though he carry the knapsack , and contente himself with stay among servants , while ( as he call he ) be regal in the parlour , he be not he servant , but only a friend and companion , and as good a gentleman as himself . " Dowl sit all this while silent , bite he finger , make face , grinning , and look wonderfully arch ; at last he open he lip , and protest that the gentleman look like another sort of man . he then call for he bill with the utmost haste , declare he must be at that even , lament he great hurry of business , and wish he could divide himself into twenty piece , in order to be at once in twenty place . the petty -fogger now likewise depart , and then desire the favour of 's company to drink tea with he ; but she refuse , and with a manner so different from that with which she have receive he at dinner , that it a little surprize he . and now he soon perceive she behaviour totally change ; for instead of that natural affability which we have before celebrate , she wear a constrain severity on she countenance , which be so disagreeable to , that he resolve , however late , to quit the house that even . he do indeed account somewhat unfairly for this sudden change ; for besides some hard and unjust surmise concern female fickleness and mutability , he begin to suspect that he owe this want of civility to he want of horse ; a sort of animal which , as they dirty no sheet , be think in inns to pay better for they bed than they rider , and be therefore consider as the more desirable company ; but , to do she justice , have a much more liberal way of thinking . she be perfectly well - breed , and could be very civil to a gentleman , though he walk on foot . in reality , she look on we heroe as a sorry scoundrel , and therefore treat he as such , for which not even himself , have he know as much as the reader , could have blame she ; nay , on the contrary , he must have approve she conduct , and have esteem she the more for the disrespect show towards himself . this be indeed a most aggravating circumstance , which attend deprive man unjustly of they reputation ; for a man who be conscious of have a ill character , can not justly be angry with those who neglect and slight he ; but ought rather to despise such as affect he conversation , unless where a perfect intimacy must have convince they that they friend 's character hath be falsely and injuriously asperse . this be not , however , the case of ; for as he be a perfect stranger to the truth , so he be with good reason offend at the treatment he receive . he therefore pay he reckoning and depart , highly against the will of , who have remonstrate much against it to no purpose , at last condescended to take up he knapsack and to attend he friend . chapter ix . contain several dialogue between and , concern love , cold , hunger , and other matter ; with the lucky and narrow escape of , as he be on the very brink of make a fatal discovery to he friend . the shadow begin now to descmend larger from the high mountain ; the feathered creation have betake themselves to they rest . now the highest order of mortal be sit down to they dinner , and the lowest order to they supper . in a word , the clock struck five just as take he leave of ; a hour at which ( as it be now mid-winter ) the dirty finger of night would have draw she sable curtain over the universe , have not the moon forbid she , who now , with a face as broad and as red as those of some jolly mortal , who , like she , turn night into day , begin to rise from she bed , where she have slumber away the day , in order to sit up all night . have not travel far before he pay he compliment to that beautiful planet , and , turn to he companion , ask he if he have ever beheld so delicious a evening ? Partridge make no ready answer to he question , he proceed to comment on the beauty of the moon , and repeat some passage from , who hath certainly excel all other poet in he description of the heavenly luminary . he then tell the story from the Spectator , of two lover who have agree to entertain themselves when they be at a great distance from each other , by repairing , at a certain fix hour , to look at the moon ; thus please themselves with the thought
thought that they be both employ in contemplate the same object at the same time . " those lover , " add he , " must have have soul truly capable of feel all the tenderness of the sublimest of all human passion . " --" very probably , " cry : " but I envy they more , if they have body incapable of feeling cold ; for I be almost freeze to death , and be very much afraid I shall lose a piece of my nose before we get to another house of entertainment . Nay , truly , we may well expect some judgment should happen to we for we folly in run away so by night from one of the most excellent inns I ever set my foot into . I be sure I never see more good thing in my life , and the greatest lord in the land can not live better in he own house than he may there . and to forsake such a house , and go a rambling about the country , the know whither , _per devia rura viarum _, I say nothing for my part ; but some people might not have charity enough to conclude we be in we sober sense . " --" Fie upon it , ! " say , " have a better heart ; consider you be go to face a enemy ; and be you afraid of face a little cold ? I wish , indeed , we have a guide to advise which of these roads we should take . " --" may I be so bold , " say , " to offer my advice ? _Interdum stultus opportuna loquitur_ " --" why , which of they , " cry , " would you recommend ? " --" truly neither of they , " answer . " the only road we can be certain of finding , be the road we come . a good hearty pace will bring we back to in a hour ; but if we go forward , the know when we shall arrive at any place ; for I see at least fifty mile before I , and no house in all the way . " --" you see , indeed , a very fair prospect , " say , " which receive great additional beauty from the extreme lustre of the moon . however , I will keep the left - hand track , as that seem to lead directly to those hill , which we be inform lie not far from . and here , if you be inclin to quit I , you may , and return back again ; but for my part , I be resolve to go forward . " " it be unkind in you , sir , " say , " to suspect I of any such intention . what I have advise hath be as much on you account as on my own : but since you be determined to go on , I be as much determined to follow . _I prae sequar te_. " they now travel some mile without speak to each other , during which suspense of discourse often sigh , and groan as bitterly , though from a very different reason . at length make a full stop , and turn about , cry , " who know , , but the loveliest creature in the universe may have she eye now fix on that very moon which I behold at this instant ? " " very likely , sir , " answer ; " and if my eye be fix on a good surloin of roast beef , the devil might take the moon and she horn into the bargain . " " do ever make such a answer ? " cry . " Prithee , Partridge , wast thou ever susceptible of love in thy life , or hath time wear away all the trace of it from thy memory ? " " - a - day ! " cry , " well would it have be for I if I have never know what love be . jube renovare dolorem . I be sure I have taste all the tenderness , and sublimity , and bitterness of the passion . " " be you mistress unkind , then ? " say . " very unkind , indeed , sir , " answer ; " for she marry I , and make one of the most confounded wife in the world . however , heaven be praise , she be go ; and if I believe she be in the moon , accord to a book I once read , which teach that to be the receptacle of depart spirit , I would never look at it for fear of see she ; but I wish , sir , that the moon be a look - glass for you sake , and that be now place before it . " " my dear Partridge , " cry , " what a thought be there ! a thought which I be certain could never have enter into any mind but that of a lover . of ! could I hope once again to see that face ; but , alas ! all those golden dream be vanish for ever , and my only refuge from future misery be to forget the object of all my former happiness . " " and do you really despair of ever see again ? " answer ; " if you will follow my advice I will engage you shall not only see she but have she in you arm . " " ! do not awake a thought of that nature , " cry : " I have struggle sufficiently to conquer all such wish already . " " Nay , " answer ,
, " if you do not wish to have you mistress in you arm you be a most extraordinary lover indeed . " " well , well , " say , " let we avoid this subject ; but pray what be you advice ? " " to give it you in the military phrase , then , " say , " as we be soldier , ` to the right about . ' let we return the way we come ; we may yet reach to - night , though late ; whereas , if we proceed , we be likely , for atch I see , to ramble about for ever without come either to house or home . " " I have already tell you my resolution be to go on , " answer ; " but I would have you go back . I be oblige to you for you company hither ; and I beg you to accept a guinea as a small instance of my gratitude . Nay , it would be cruel in I to suffer you to go any farther ; for , to deal plainly with you , my chief end and desire be a glorious death in the service of my king and country . " " as for you money , " reply , " I beg , sir , you will put it up ; I will receive none of you at this time ; for at present I be , I believe , the richer man of the two . and as you resolution be to go on , so mine be to follow you if you do . Nay , now my presence appear absolutely necessary to take care of you , since you intention be so desperate ; for I promise you my view be much more prudent ; as you be resolve to fall in battle if you can , so I be resolve as firmly to come to no hurt if I can help it . and , indeed , I have the comfort to think there will be but little danger ; for a popish priest tell I the other day the business would soon be over , and he believe without a battle . " " a popish priest ! " cry , " I have hear be not always to be believe when he speak in behalf of he religion . " " yes , but so far , " answer the other , " from speaking in behalf of he religion , he assure I the do not expect to be any gainer by the change ; for that be as good a Protestant as any in ; and that nothing but regard to right make he and the rest of the popish party to be . " --" I believe he to be as much a protestant as I believe he hath any right , " say ; " and I make no doubt of we success , but not without a battle . so that I be not so sanguine as you friend the popish priest . " " Nay , to be sure , sir , " answer , " all the prophecy I have ever read speak of a great deal of blood to be spild in the quarrel , and the miller with three thumb , who be now alive , be to hold the horse of three king , up to he knee in blood . , have mercy upon we all , and send better time ! " " with what stuff and nonsense hast thou fill thy head ! " answer : " this too , I suppose , come from the popish priest . Monster and prodigy be the proper argument to support monstrous and absurd doctrine . the cause of be the cause of liberty and true religion . in other word , it be the cause of common sense , my boy , and I warrant you will succeed , though himself be to rise again with he hundred thumb , and to turn miller . " Partridge make no reply to this . he be , indeed , cast into the utmost confusion by this declaration of . for , to inform the reader of a secret , which he have no proper opportunity of revealing before , be in truth a , and have conclude that be of the same party , and be now proceed to join the rebel . a opinion which be not without foundation . for the tall , long - sided dame , mention by -- that many - eyed , many - tongue , many - mouthed , many - eared monster of , have relate the story of the quarrel between and the officer , with the usual regard to truth . she have , indeed , change the name of into that of the Pretender , and have report , that drink he health be the cause for which be knock down . this Partridge have hear , and most firmly believe . ' tTis no wonder , therefore , that he have thence entertaine the above -mentioned opinion of ; and which he have almost discovered to he before he find out he own mistake . and at this the reader will be the less inclin to wonder , if he please to recollect the doubtful phrase in which first communicate he resolution to ; and , indeed , have the word be less ambiguous , Partridge might very well have construe they as he do ; be persuade as he be that the whole nation be of the same inclination in they heart ; nor do it stagger he that have travel in the company of soldier ; for he have the same opinion of the army which he have of the rest of the people .
. but however well affect he might be to or , he be still much more attach to than to either ; for which reason he no sooner discover the principle of he fellow - traveller than he think proper to conceal and outwardly give up he own to the man on whom he depend for the make he fortune , since he by no means believ the affair of to be so desperate as they really be with ; for as he have keep a constant correspondence with some of he neighbour since he leave that country , he have hear much , indeed more than be true , of the great affection bear this young man , who , as have be instruct , be to be that gentleman 's heir , and whom , as we have say , he do not in the least doubt to be he son . he imagine therefore that whatever quarrel be between they , it would be certainly make up at the return of ; a event from which he promise great advantage , if he could take this opportunity of ingratiat himself with that young gentleman ; and if he could by any means be instrumental in procure he return , he doubt not , as we have before say , but it would as highly advance he in the favour of . we have already observ , that he be a very good - natured fellow , and he hath himself declare the violent attachment he have to the person and character of ; but possibly the view which I have just before mention , might likewise have some little share in prompt he to undertake this expedition , at least in urge he to continue it , after he have discover that he master and himself , like some prudent fathers and son , though they travel together in great friendship , have embrace opposite party . I be lead into this conjecture , by have remark , that though love , friendship , esteem , and such like , have very powerful operation in the human mind ; interest , however , be a ingredient seldom omit by wise man , when they would work other to they own purpose . this be indeed a most excellent medicine , and , like 's pill , fly at once to the particular part of the body on which you desire to operate , whether it be the tongue , the hand , or any other member , where it scarce ever fail of immediately produce the desire effect . chapter x . in which we traveller meet with a very extraordinary adventure . just as and he friend come to the end of they dialogue in the preceding chapter , they arrive at the bottom of a very steep hill . here stopt short , and direct he eye upward , stand for a while silent . at length he call to he companion , and say , " Partridge , I wish I be at the top of this hill ; it must certainly afford a most charming prospect , especially by this light ; for the solemn gloom which the moon cast on all object , be beyond expression beautiful , especially to a imagination which be desirous of cultivat melancholy idea . " --" very probably , " answer ; " but if the top of the hill be properest to produce melancholy thought , I suppose the bottom be the likeliest to produce merry one , and these I take to be much the better of the two . I protest you have make my blood run cold with the very mention the top of that mountain ; which seem to I to be one of the highest in the world . no , no , if we look for anything , let it be for a place under ground , to scree ourselves from the frost . " --" do so , " say ; " let it be but within hearing of this place , and I will hallow to you at my return back . " --" surly , sir , you be not mad , " say .--" indeed , I be , " answer , " if ascend this hill be madness ; but as you complain so much of the cold already , I would have you stay below . I will certainly return to you within a hour . " -- " pardon I , sir , " cry ; " I have determine to follow you wherever you go . " indeed he be now afraid to stay behind ; for though he be coward enough in all respects , yet he chief fear be that of ghost , with which the present time of night , and the wildness of the place , extremely well sui . at this instant Partridge espy a glimmering light through some tree , which seem very near to they . he immediately cry out in a rapture , " oh , sy ! heaven hath at last hear my prayer , and hath bring we to a house ; perhaps it may be a inn . let I beseech you , sir , if you have any compassion either for I or yourself , do not despise the goodness of , but let we go directly to yon light . whether it be a public - house or no , I be sure if they be that dwell there , they will not refuse a little house - room to person in we miserable condition . " Jones at length yield to the earnest supplication of , and both together make directly towards the place whence the light issue . they soon arrive at the door of this house , or cottage , for it might be call either
either , without much impropriety . here knock several time without receive any answer from within ; at which , whose head be full of nothing but of ghost , devils , witch , and such like , begin to tremble , cry , " , have mercy upon we ! surely the people must be all dead . I can see no light neither now , and yet I be certain I see a candle burn but a moment before .-- well ! I have hear of such thing . " -- " what hast thout heard of ? " say . " the people be either fast asleep , or probably , as this be a lonely place , be afraid to open they door . " he then begin to vociferate pretty loudly , and at last a old woman , open a upper casement , ask , who they be , and what they want ? answer , they be traveller who have lose they way , and have see a light in the window , have be lead thither in hope of find some fire to warm themselves . " whoever you be , " cry the woman , " you have no business here ; nor shall I open the door to any one at this time of night . " , whom the sound of a human voice have recovere from he fright , fall to the most earnest supplication to be admit for a few minute to the fire , say , he be almost dead with the cold ; to which fear have indeed contribute equally with the frost . he assure she that the gentleman who speak to she be one of the greatest squire in the country ; and make use of every argument , save one , which Jones afterwards effectually add ; and this be , the promise of half - a - crown ;-- a bribe too great to be resist by such a person , especially as the genteel appearance of , which the light of the moon plainly discover to she , together with he affable behaviour , have entirely subdue those apprehension of thief which she have at first conceive . she agree , therefore , at last , to let they in ; where , to he infinite joy , find a good fire ready for he reception . the poor fellow , however , have no sooner warm himself , than those thought which be always uppermost in he mind , begin a little to disturb he brain . there be no article of he creed in which he have a stronger faith than he have in witchcraft , nor can the reader conceive a figure more adapt to inspire this idea , than the old woman who now stand before he . she answer exactly to that picture draw by in he . indeed , if this woman have live in the reign of the , she appearance alone would have hang she , almost without any evidence . many circumstance likewise conspire to confirm in he opinion . she live , as he then imagine , by herself in so lonly a place ; and in a house , the outside of which see much too good for she , but it be inside be furnish in the most neat and elegant manner . to say the truth , himself be not a little surprize at what he see ; for , besides the extraordinary neatness of the room , it be adorn with a great number of nicknack and curiosity , which might have engage the attention of a virtuoso . while be admir these thing , and sit trembl with the firm belief that he be in the house of a witch , the old woman say , " I hope , gentlemen , you will make what haste you can ; for I expect my master presently , and I would not for double the money he should find you here . " --" then you have a master ? " cry . " indeed , you will excuse I , good woman , but I be surprize to see all those fine thing in you house . " -- " ah , sir , " say she , " if the twentieth part of these thing be mine , I should think myself a rich woman . but pray , sir , do not stay much longer , for I look for he in every minute . " --" why , sure he would not be angry with you , " say , " for do a common act of charity ? " --" Alack - a - day , sir ! " say she , " he be a strange man , not at all like other people . he keep no company with anybody , and seldom walk out but by night , for he doth not care to be see ; and all the country people be as much afraid of meet he ; for he dress be enough to frighten those who be not use to it . they call he , the man of the ( for there he walk by night ) , and the country people be not , I believe , more afraid of the himself . he would be terribly angry if he find you here . " -- " pray , sir , " say , " do not let we offend the gentleman ; I be ready to walk , and be never warmer in my life . do pray , sy , let we go . here be pistol over the chimney : who know whether they be charge or no , or what he may do with they ? " --" fear nothing , Partridge , " cry ; " I will secure
secure thee from danger . " -- " Nay , for matter of ' that , he never doth any mischief , " say the woman ; " but to be sure it be necessary he should keep some arm for he own safety ; for he house hath be beset more than once ; and it be not many night ago that we think we hear thief about it : for my own part , I have often wonder that he be not murder by some villain or other , as he walk out by himself at such hour ; but then , as I say , the people be afraid of he ; and beside , they think , I suppose , he hath nothing about he worth take . " --" I should imagine , by this collection of rarity , " cry , " that you master have be a traveller . " --" yes , sir , " answer she , " he hath be a very great one : there be few gentleman that know more of all matters than he . I fancy he hath be crost in love , or whatever it be I know not ; but I have live with he above these thirty year , and in all that time he hath hardly speak to six liive people . " she then again solicit they departure , in which she be back by ; but purposely protract the time , for he curiosity be greatly raise to see this extraordinary person . though the old woman , therefore , conclude every one of she answer with desire he to be go , and proceed so far as to pull he by the sleeve , he still continue to invent new question , till the old woman , with a affrighted countenance , declare she hear she master 's signal ; and at the same instant more than one voice be hear without the door , cry , " d -- and you blood , show we you money this instant . you money , you villain , or we will blow you brain about you ear . " " o , good heaven ! " cry the old woman , " some villain , to be sure , have attack my master . of la ! what shall I do ? what shall I do ? " --" how ! " cry , " how !-- be these pistol load ? " --" o , good sir , there be nothing in they , indeed . of pray do not murder we , gentlemen ! " ( for in reality she now have the same opinion of those within as she have of those without ) . make she no answer ; but snatch a old broad sword which hang in the room , he instantly sally out , where he find the old gentleman struggle with two ruffian , and begge for mercy . ask no question , but fall so briskly to work with he broad sword , that the fellow immediately quit they hold ; and without offer to attack we heroe , betake themselves to they heel and make they escape ; for he do not attempt to pursue they , be contente with have deliver the old gentleman ; and indeed he conclude he have pretty well do they business , for both of they , as they run off , cry out with bitter oath that they be dead man . presently run to lift up the old gentleman , who have be throw down in the scuffle , express at the same time great concern lest he should have receive any harm from the villain . the old man star a moment at , and then cry , " no , sir , no , I have very little harm , I thank you . have mercy upon I ! " --" I see , sir , " say , " you be not free from apprehension even of those who have have the happiness to be you deliverer ; nor can I blame any suspicions which you may have ; but indeed you have no real occasion for any ; here be none but you friend present . have mist we way this cold night , we take the liberty of warm ourselves at you fire , whence we be just depart when we hear you call for assistance , which , I must say , alone seem to have send you . " --" Providence , indeed , " cry the old gentleman , " if it be so . " -- " so it be , I assure you , " cry . " here be you own sword , sir ; I have use it in you defence , and I now return it into you hand . " the old man have receive the sword , which be stain with the blood of he enemy , look stedfastly at during some moment , and then with a sigh cry out , " you will pardon I , young gentleman ; I be not always of a suspicious temper , nor be I a friend to ingratitude . " " be thankful then , " cry , " to that Providence to which you owe you deliverance : as to my part , I have only discharge the common duty of humanity , and what I would have do for any fellow - creature in you situation . " --" let I look at you a little longer , " cry the old gentleman . " you be a human creature then ? well , perhaps you be . come pray walk into my little hutt . you have be my deliverer indeed . " the old woman be distract between the fear which she have of she master
master , and for he ; and be , if possible , in a greater fright . the former of these , however , when she hear she master speak kindly to , and perceive what have happen , come again to herself ; but no sooner see the gentleman , than the strangeness of he dress infus greater terror into that poor fellow than he have before feel , either from the strange description which he have hear , or from the uproar which have happene at the door . to say the truth , it be a appearance which might have affect a more constant mind than that of . this person be of the tallest size , with a long beard as white as snow . he body be cloath with the skin of a ass , make something into the form of a coat . he wear likewise boot on he leg , and a cap on he head , both compose of the skin of some other animal . as soon as the old gentleman come into he house , the old woman begin she congratulation on he happy escape from the ruffian . " yes , " cry he , " I have escape , indeed , thanks to my preserver . " --" of the blessing on he ! " answer she : " he be a good gentleman , I warrant he . I be afraid you worship would have be angry with I for let he in ; and to be certain I should not have do it , have not I see by the moon - light , that he be a gentleman , and almost freeze to death . and to be certain it must have be some good angel that send he hither , and temp I to do it . " " I be afraid , sir , " say the old gentleman to , " that I have nothing in this house which you can either eat or drink , unless you will accept a dram of brandy ; of which I can give you some most excellent , and which I have have by I these thirty year . " decline this offer in a very civil and proper speech , and then the other ask he , " Whither he be travel when he mist he way ? " say , " I must own myself surprize to see such a person as you appear to be , journey on foot at this time of night . I suppose , sir , you be a gentleman of these part ; for you do not look like one who be use to travel far without horse ? " " Appearance , " cry , " be often deceitful ; man sometimes look what they be not . I assure you I be not of this country ; and whither I be travel , in reality I scarce know myself . " " whoever you be , or whithersoever you be go , " answer the old man , " I have obligation to you which I can never return . " " I once more , " reply , " affirm that you have none ; for there can be no merit in have hazard that in you service on which I set no value ; and nothing be so contemptible in my eye as life . " " I be sorry , young gentleman , " answer the stranger , " that you have any reason to be so unhappy at you year . " " indeed I be , sir , " answer , " the most unhappy of mankind . " -- " perhaps you have have a friend , or a mistress ? " reply the other . " how could you , " cry , " mention two word sufficient to drive I to distraction ?" --" either of they be enough to drive any man to distraction , " answer the old man . " I enquire no farther , sir ; perhaps my curiosity hath lead I too far already . " " indeed , sir , " cry , " I can not censure a passion which I feel at this instant in the highest degree . you will pardon I when I assure you , that everything which I have see or hear since I first enter this house hath conspire to raise the greatest curiosity in I . something very extraordinary must have determine you to this course of life , and I have reason to fear you own history be not without misfortune . " here the old gentleman again sigh , and remain silent for some minute : at last , look earnestly on , he say , " I have read that a good countenance be a letter of recommendation ; if so , none ever can be more strongly recommend than yourself . if I do not feel some yearning towards you from another consideration , I must be the most ungrateful monster upon earth ; and I be really concerned it be no otherwise in my power than by word to convince you of my gratitude . " , after a moment 's hesitation , answer , " that it be in he power by word to gratify he extremely . I have confest a curiosity , " say he , " sir ; need I say how much oblige I should be to you , if you would condescmend to gratify it ? will you suffer I therefore to beg , unless any consideration restrain you , that you would be pleased to acquaint I what motives have induce you thus to withdraw from the society of mankind , and to betake yourself to a course of life to which it sufficiently appear you be not bear ? " "
" I scarce think myself at liberty to refuse you anything after what hath happen , " reply the old man . " if you desire therefore to hear the story of a unhappy man , I will relate it to you . indeed you judge rightly , in think there be commonly something extraordinary in the fortune of those who fly from society ; for however it may seem a paradox , or even a contradiction , certain it be , that great philanthropy chiefly incline we to avoid and detest mankind ; not on account so much of they private and selfish vex , but for those of a relative kind ; such as envy , malice , treachery , cruelty , with every other species of malevolence . these be the vice which true philanthropy abhor , and which rather than see and converse with , she avoid society itself . however , without a compliment to you , you do not appear to I one of those whom I should shin or detest ; nay , I must say , in what little hath dropt from you , there appear some parity in we fortune : I hope , however , yours will conclude more successfully . " here some compliment pass between we heroe and he host , and then the latter be go to begin he history , when interrupt he . he apprehension have now pretty well leave he , but some effect of he terror remain ; he therefore remind the gentleman of that excellent brandy which he have mention . this be presently bring , and swallow a large bumper . the gentleman then , without any farther preface , begin as you may read in the next chapter . chapter xi . in which the Man of the begin to relate he history . " I be bear in a village of , call , in the year 1657 . my father be one of those whom they call gentleman farmers . he have a little estate of about  300 a year of he own , and rent another estate of near the same value . he be prudent and industrious , and so good a husbandman , that he might have lead a very easy and comfortable life , have not a arrant vixen of a wife sour he domestic quiet . but though this circumstance perhaps make he miserable , it do not make he poor ; for he confin she almost entirely at home , and rather choose to bear eternal upbraiding in he own house , than to injure he fortune by indulge she in the extravagancy she desire abroad . " by this " ( so be the wife of call , say ) --" by this Xanthippe he have two son , of which I be the younger . he desig to give we both good education ; but my elder brother , who , unhappily for he , be the favourite of my mother , utterly neglect he learning ; insomuch that , after have be five or six year at school with little or no improvement , my father , be tell by he master that it would be to no purpose to keep he longer there , at last complied with my mother in take he home from the hand of that tyrant , as she call he master ; though indeed he give the lad much less correction than he idleness deserve , but much more , it seem , than the young gentleman like , who constantly complain to he mother of he severe treatment , and she as constantly give he a hearing . " " yes , yes , " cry , " I have see such mother ; I have be abuse myself by they , and very unjustly ; such parent deserve correction as much as they child . " chide the pedagogue for he interruption , and then the stranger proceed . " my brother now , at the age of fifteen , bade adieu to all learn , and to everything else but to he dog and gun ; with which latter he become so expert , that , though perhaps you may think it incredible , he could not only hit a standing mark with great certainty , but hath actually shoot a crow as it be fly in the air . he be likewise excellent at find a hare sitting , and be soon repute one of the best sportsman in the country ; a reputation which both he and he mother enjoy as much as if he have be think the finest scholar . " the situation of my brother make I at first think my lot the harder , in be continue at school : but I soon change my opinion ; for as I advance pretty fast in learning , my labour become easy , and my exercise so delightful , that holiday be my most unpleasant time ; for my mother , who never love I , now apprehend that I have the greater share of my father 's affection , and finding , or at least think , that I be more take notice of by some gentleman of learning , and particularly by the parson of the parish , than my brother , she now hate my sight , and make home so disagreeable to I , that what be call by school - boy , be to I the whitest in the whole year . " have at length go through the school at , I be thence remove to in , where I remain four year ; at the end of which a accident take I off entirely from my study ; and hence , I may truly date the rise of all which happen to I afterwards in life . " there
there be at the same college with myself one , a young fellow who be intitle to a very considerable fortune , which he be not , by the will of he father , to come into full possession of till he arrive at the age of twenty - five . however , the liberality of he guardians give he little cause to regret the abundant caution of he father ; for they allow he five hundred pound a year while he remain at the university , where he keep he horse and he whore , and live as wicked and as profligate a life as he could have do have he be never so entirely master of he fortune ; for besides the five hundred a year which he receive from he guardian , he find mean to spend a thousand more . he be above the age of twenty - one , and have no difficulty in gain what credit he please . " this young fellow , among many other tolerable bad quality , have one very diabolical . he have a great delight in destroy and ruin the youth of inferior fortune , by draw they into expense which they could not afford so well as himself ; and the better , and worthier , and soberer any young man be , the greater pleasure and triumph have he in he destruction . thus act the character which be record of the , and go about seek whom he might deavor . " it be my misfortune to fall into a acquaintance and intimacy with this gentleman . my reputation of diligence in my study make I a desirable object of he mischievous intention ; and my own inclination make it sufficiently easy for he to effect he purpose ; for though I have apply myself with much industry to book , in which I take great delight , there be other pleasur in which I be capable of take much greater ; for I be high - mettle , have a violent flow of animal spirit , be a little ambitious , and extremely amorous . " I have not long contract a intimacy with before I become a partaker of all he pleasure ; and when I be once enter on that scene , neither my inclination nor my spirit would suffer I to play a under part . I be second to none of the company in any act of debauchery ; nay , I soon distinguished myself so notably in all riot and disorder , that my name generally stand first in the roll of delinquent ; and instead of be lament as the unfortunate pupil of , I be now accuse as the person who have misl and debauch that hopeful young gentleman ; for though he be the ringleader and promoter of all the mischief , he be never so consider . I fall at last under the censure of the vice - chancellor , and very narrowly escape expulsion . " you will easily believe , sir , that such a life as I be now describe must be incompatible with my further progress in learn ; and that in proportion as I addict myself more and more to loose pleasure , I must grow more and more remiss in application to my study . this be truly the consequence ; but this be not all . my expensis now greatly exceed not only my former income , but those addition which I extort from my poor generous father , on pretence of sum be necessary for prepare for my approaching degree of batchelor of arts . these demand , however , grow at last so frequent and exorbitant , that my father by slow degree open he ear to the account which he receive from many quarter of my present behaviour , and which my mother fail not to echo very faithfully and loudly ; add , ` ay , this be the fine gentleman , the scholar who doth so much honour to he family , and be to be the making of it . I think what all this learning would come to . he be to be the ruin of we all , I find , after he elder brother hath be deny necessary for he sake , to perfect he education forsooth , for which he be to pay we such interest : I think what the interest would come to , ' with much more of the same kind ; but I have , I believe , satisfy you with this taste . " my father , therefore , begin now to return remonstrance instead of money to my demand , which bring my affair perhaps a little sooner to a crisis ; but have he remit I he whole income , you will imagine it could have suffice a very short time to support one who keep pace with the expense of . " it be more than possible that the distress I be now in for money , and the impracticability of go on in this manner , might have restore I at once to my sense and to my study , have I open my eye before I become involved in debt from which I see no hope of ever extricat myself . this be indeed the great art of , and by which he accomplish the ruin of many , whom he afterwards laugh at as fools and coxcomb , for vying , as he call it , with a man of he fortune . to bring this about , he would now and then advance a little money himself , in order to support the credit of the unfortunate youth with other people ; till , by means of that very credit , he be irretrievably undone . " my mind be by these means grow as desperate as
as my fortune , there be scarce a wickedness which I do not meditate , in order for my relief . self -murder itself become the subject of my serious deliberation ; and I have certainly resolve on it , have not a more shameful , though perhaps less sinful , thought expel it from my head . " -- here he hesitate a moment , and then cry out , " I protest , so many year have not wash away the shame of this act , and I shall blush while I relate it . " desire he to pass over anything that might give he pain in the relation ; but eagerly cry out , " oh , pray , sir , let we hear this ; I have rather hear this than all the rest ; as I hope to be save , I will never mention a word of it . " be go to rebuke he , but the stranger prevent it by proceeding thus : " I have a chum , a very prudent , frugal young lad , who , though he have no very large allowance , have by he parsimony heape up upward of forty guinea , which I know he keep in he escritore . I take therefore a opportunity of purloin he key from he breech - pocket , while he be asleep , and thus make myself master of all he riche : after which I again convey he key into he pocket , and counterfeit sleep -- though I never once close my eye , lay in bed till after he arise and go to prayer -- a exercise to which i have long be unaccustomed . " Timorous thief , by extreme caution , often subject themselves to discoveries , which those of a bolder kind escape . thus it happen to I ; for have I boldly break open he escritore , I have , perhaps , escape even he suspicion ; but as it be plain that the person who rob he have possess himself of he key , he have no doubt , when he first miss he money , but that he chum be certainly the thief . now as he be of a fearful disposition , and much my inferior in strength , and I believe in courage , he do not dare to confront I with my guilt , for fear of worse bodily consequence which might happen to he . he repai therefore immediately to the vice - chancellor , and upon swear to the robbery , and to the circumstance of it , very easily obtain a warrant against one who have now so bad a character through the whole university . " luckily for I , I lay out of the college the next evening ; for that day I attend a young lady in a chaise to , where we stay all night , and in we return , the next morning , to , I meet one of my crony , who acquaint I with sufficient news concern myself to make I turn my horse another way . " " pray , sir , do he mention anything of the warrant ? " say . but beg the gentleman to proceed without regard any impertinent question ; which he do as follow :-- " have now abandon all thought of return to , the next thing which offer itself be a journey to . I impart this intention to my female companion , who at first remonstrate against it ; but upon produce my wealth , she immediately consent . we then strike across the country , into the great Cirencester road , and make such haste , that we spend the next evening , save one , in . " when you consider the place where I now be , and the company with whom I be , you will , I fancy , conceive that a very short time bring I to a end of that sum of which I have so iniquitously possess myself . " I be now reduce to a much higher degree of distress than before : the necessary of life begin to be number among my want ; and what make my case still the more grievous be , that my paramour , of whom I be now grow immoderately fond , share the same distress with myself . to see a woman you live in distress ; to be unable to relieve she , and at the same time to reflect that you have bring she into this situation , be perhaps a curse of which no imagination can represent the horror to those who have not feel it . " --" I believe it from my soul , " cry , " and I pity you from the bottom of my heart : " he then take two or three disorderly turn about the room , and at last beg pardon , and fling himself into he chair , cry , " I thank Heaven , I have escape that ! " " this circumstance , " continue the gentleman , " so severely aggravate the horror of my present situation , that they become absolutely intolerable . I could with less pain endure the raging in my own natural unsatisfied appetite , even hunger or thirst , than I could submit to leave ungratify the most whimsical desire of a woman on whom I so extravagantly doate , that , though I know she have be the mistress of half my acquaintance , I firmly intend to marry she . but the good creature be unwilling to consent to a action which the world might think so much to my disadvantage . and as , possibly , she compassionate the daily anxiety which she must have perceive I suffer on she account , she resolve
resolve to put a end to my distress . she soon , indeed , find means to relieve I from my troublesome and perplex situation ; for while I be distract with various invention to supply she with pleasur , she very kindly -- betraye I to one of she former lover at , by whose care and diligence I be immediately apprehend and commit to gaol . " here I first begin seriously to reflect on the miscarriage of my former life ; on the error I have be guilty of ; on the misfortune which I have bring on myself ; and on the grief which I must have occasion to one of the best of fathers . when I add to all these the perfidy of my mistress , such be the horror of my mind , that life , instead of be longer desirable , grow the object of my abhorrence ; and I could have gladly embrace death as my dearest friend , if it have offer itself to my choice unattend by shame . " the time of the assize soon come , and I be remove by habea corpus to , where I expect certain conviction and condemnation ; but , to my great surprize , none appear against I , and I be , at the end of the session , dischar for want of prosecution . in short , my chum have leave , and whether from indolence , or from what other motive I be ignorant , have decline concern himself any farther in the affair . " " perhaps , " cry , " he do not care to have you blood upon he hand ; and he be in the right o not . if any person be to be hang upon my evidence , I should never be able to lie alone afterwards , for fear of see he ghost . " " I shall shortly doubt , , " say , " whether thou be more brave or wise . " --" you may laugh at I , sir , if you please , " answer ; " but if you will hear a very short story which I can tell , and which be most certainly true , perhaps you may change you opinion . in the parish where I be bear -- " here would have silence he ; but the stranger interced that he might be permit to tell he story , and in the meantime promise to recollect the remainder of he own . then proceed thus : " in the parish where I be bear , there liv a farmer whose name be , and he have a son name , a good hopeful young fellow : I be at the grammar - school with he , where I remember he be get into 's , and he could construe you three line together sometimes without look into a dictionary . besides all this , he be a very good lad , never miss church o' , and be reckon one of the best psalm -singer in the whole parish . he would indeed now and then take a cup too much , and that be the only fault he have . " -- " well , but come to the ghost , " cry . " never fear , sir ; I shall come to he soon enough , " answer . " you must know , then , that farmer lose a mare , a sorrel one , to the best of my remembrance ; and so it fall out that this young shortly afterward be at a fair at , and as I think it be on --, I can not remember the day ; and be as he be , what should he happen to meet but a man upon he father 's mare . call out presently , thiefinitely ; and it be in the middle of the fair , it be impossible , you know , for the man to make he escape . so they apprehend he and carry he before the justice : I remember it be , of , a very worthy good gentleman ; and he commit he to prison , and bound in a recognisance , I think they call it -- a hard word compound of _re_ and _cognosco_ ; but it differ in its meaning from the use of the simple , as many other compound do . well , at last down come my to hold the assize ; and so the fellow be have up , and be have up for a witness . to be sure , I shall never forget the face of the judge , when he begin to ask he what he have to say against the prisoner . he make poor tremble and shake in he shoe . ` well you , fellow , ' say my lord , ` what have you to say ? do not stand hum and haw , but speak out . ' but , however , he soon turn altogether as civil to , and begin to thunder at the fellow ; and when he ask he if he have anything to say for himself , the fellow say , he have find the horse . ` ay ! ' answer the judge , ` thou be a lucky fellow : I have travel the circuit these forty year , and never find a horse in my life : but I will tell thee what , friend , thou wast more lucky than thou didst know of ; for thou didst not only find a horse , but a halter too , I promise thee . ' to be sure , I shall never forget the word . upon which everybody fall a laughing , as how could they help it ? , and twenty other
other jest be he make , which I can not remember now . there be something about he skill in horse - flesh which make all the folk laugh . to be certain , the judge must have be a very brave man , as well as a man of much learning . it be indeed charme sport to hear trial upon life and death . one thing I own I think a little hard , that the prisoner 's counsel be not suffer to speak for he , though he desire only to be hear one very short word , but my lord would not hearke to he , though he suffer a counsellor to talk against he for above half - a - hour . I think it hard , I own , that there should be so many of they ; my lord , and the court , and the jury , and the counsellor , and the witness , all upon one poor man , and he too in chain . well , the fellow be hang , as to be sure it could be no otherwise , and poor could never be easy about it . he never be in the dark alone , but he fancie he see the fellow 's spirit . " -- " well , and be this thy story ? " cry . " no , no , " answer . " o have mercy upon I ! I be just now come to the matter ; for one night , come from the alehouse , in a long , narrow , dark lane , there he run directly up against he ; and the spirit be all in white , and fall upon ; and , who be a sturdy lad , fall upon the spirit again , and there they have a tussel together , and poor be dreadfully beat : indeed he make a shift at last to crawl home ; but what with the beating , and what with the fright , he lay ill above a fortnight ; and all this be most certainly true , and the whole parish will bear witness to it . " the stranger smile at this story , and burst into a loud fit of laughter ; upon which Partridge cry , " ay , you may laugh , sir ; and so do some other , particularly a squire , who be think to be no better than a atheist ; who , forsooth , because there be a calf with a white face find dead in the same lane the next morning , would afain have it that the battle be between and that , as if a calf would set upon a man . besides , tell I he know it to be a spirit , and could swear to he in any court in ; and he have not drank above a quart or two or such a matter of liquor , at the time . have mercy upon we , and keep we all from dip we hand in blood , I say ! " " well , sir , " say to the stranger , " hath finish he story , and I hope will give you no future interruption , if you will be so kind to proceed . " he then resume he narration ; but as he hath take breath for a while , we think proper to give it to we reader , and shall therefore put a end to this chapter . chapter xii . in which the Man of the continue he history . " I have now regain my liberty , " say the stranger ; " but I have lose my reputation ; for there be a wide difference between the case of a man who be barely acquit of a crime in a court of justice , and of he who be acquit in he own heart , and in the opinion of the people . I be conscious of my guilt , and asham to look any one in the face ; so resolve to leave the next morning , before the daylight discover I to the eyes of any beholder . " when I have get clear of the city , it first enter into my head to return home to my father , and endeavou to obtain he forgiveness ; but as I have no reason to doubt he knowledge of all which have past , and as I be well assure of he great aversion to all act of dishonesty , I could entertain no hope of be receive by he , especially since I be too certain of all the good office in the power of my mother ; nay , have my father 's pardon be as sure , as I conceive he resentment to be , I yet question whether I could have have the assurance to behold he , or whether I could , upon any term , have submit to live and converse with those who , I be convince , know I to have be guilty of so base a action . " I hasten therefore back to , the best retirement of either grief or shame , unless for person of a very public character ; for here you have the advantage of solitude without its disadvantage , since you may be alone and in company at the same time ; and while you walk or sit unobserved , noise , hurry , and a constant succession of object , entertain the mind , and prevent the spirits from prey on themselves , or rather on grief or shame , which be the most unwholesome diet in the world ; and on which ( though there be many who never taste either but in public ) there be some who can feed very plentifully
plentifully and very fatally when alone . " but as there be scarce any human good without its concomitant evil , so there be people who find a inconvenience in this unobserving temper of mankind ; I mean person who have no money ; for as you be not put out of countenance , so neither be you cloath or feed by those who do not know you . and a man may be as easily starve in - market as in the desert of . " it be at present my fortune to be destitute of that great evil , as it be apprehend to be by several writer , who I suppose be overburthen with it , namely , money . " -- " with submission , sir , " say , " I do not remember any writer who have call it _malorum ; but _irritamenta malorum _. yo_Effodiuntu ope , irritamenof malorum_" -- " well , sir , " continue the stranger , " whether it be a evil , or only the cause of evil , I be entirely void of it , and at the same time of friend , and , as I think , of acquaintance ; when one evening , as I be pass through the , very hungry , and very miserable , I hear a voice on a sudden haile I with great familiarity by my name ; and upon turn about , I presently recollect the person who so salute I to have be my fellow - collegiate ; one who have leave the university above a year , and long before any of my misfortune have befall I . this gentleman , whose name be , shook I heartily by the hand ; and express great joy at meet I , propose we immediately drink a bottle together . I first decline the proposal , and pretend business , but as he be very earnest and pressing , hunger at last overcame my pride , and I fairly confess to he I have no money in my pocket ; yet not without fram a lie for a excuse , and imput it to my have change my breech that morning . answer , ` I think , , you and I have be too old acquaintance for you to mention such a matter . ' he then take I by the arm , and be pull I along ; but I give he very little trouble , for my own inclination pull I much stronger than he could do . " we then go into the , which you know be the scene of all mirth and jollity . here , when we arrive at the tavern , apply himself to the drawer only , without take the least notice of the cook ; for he have no suspicion but that I have dine long since . however , as the case be really otherwise , I forge another falsehood , and tell my companion I have be at the further end of the city on business of consequence , and have snapt up a mutton - chop in haste ; so that I be again hungry , and wish he would add a beef - steak to he bottle . " -- " some people , " cry , " ought to have good memory ; or do you find just money enough in you breech to pay for the mutton - chop ? " --" you observation be right , " answer the stranger , " and I believe such blunder be inseparable from all deal in untruth . -- but to proceed -- I begin now to feel myself extremely happy . the meat and wine soon revive my spirits to a high pitch , and I enjoy much pleasure in the conversation of my old acquaintance , the rather as I think he entirely ignorant of what have happene at the university since he leave it . " but he do not suffer I to remain long in this agreeable delusion ; for take a bumper in one hand , and hold I by the other , ` here , my boy , ' cry he , ` here 's wish you joy of you be so honourably acquit of that affair laid to you charge . ' I be thunderstruck with confusion at those word , which obserive , proceed thus : ` Nay , never be asham , man ; thou hast be acquit , and no one now dare call thee guilty ; but , prithee , do tell I , who be thy friend -- I hope thou didst really rob he ? for rat I if it be not a meritorious action to strip such a sneaking , pitiful rascal ; and instead of the two hundred guinea , I wish you have take as many thousand . come , come , my boy , do not be shy of confess to I : you be not now bring before one of the pimp . d -- n I if I do not honour you for it ; for , as I hope for salvation , I would have make no manner of scruple of do the same thing . ' " this declaration a little relieve my abashment ; and as wine have now somewhat open my heart , I very freely acknowledge the robbery , but acquaint he that he have be misinform as to the sum take , which be little more than a fifth part of what he have mention . " `I be sorry for it with all my heart , ' quoth he , ` and I wish thee better success another time . though , if you will take my advice , you shall have no occasion to run any such risque . here , ' say he , take some dice
dice out of he pocket , ` here be the stuff . here be the implement ; here be the little doctor which cure the distemper of the purse . follow but my counsel , and I will show you a way to empty the pocket of a queer cull without any danger of the nubbing cheat . ' " " Nubb cheat ! " cry : " pray , sir , what be that ? " " why that , sir , " say the stranger , " be a cant phrase for the gallow ; for as gamester differ little from highwayman in they moral , so do they very much resemble they in they language . " we have now each drank we bottle , when say , the board be sit , and that he must attend , earnestly press I at the same time to go with he and try my fortune . I answer he know that be at present out of my power , as I have inform he of the emptiness of my pocket . to say the truth , I doubt not from he many strong expression of friendship , but that he would offer to lend I a small sum for that purpose , but he answer , ` never mind that , man ; e'en boldly run a levant ' [ be go to inquire the meaning of that word , but stop he mouth ] : ` but be circumspect as to the man . I will tip you the proper person , which may be necessary , as you do not know the town , nor can distinguish a rum cull from a queer one . " " the bill be now bring , when pay he share , and be depart . I remind he , not without blushing , of my have no money . he answer , ` that signify nothing ; score it behind the door , or make a bold brush and take no notice .--Or -- stay , ' say he ; ` I will go down - stair first , and then do you take up my money , and score the whole reckoning at the bar , and I will wait for you at the corner . ' I express some dislike at this , and hint my expectation that he would have deposit the whole ; but he swore he have not another sixpence in he pocket . " he then go down , and I be prevail on to take up the money and follow he , which I do close enough to hear he tell the drawer the reckoning be upon the table . the drawer past by I up - stair ; but i make such haste into the street , that I hear nothing of he disappointment , nor do I mention a syllable at the bar , accord to my instruction . " we now go directly to the gaming - table , where , to my surprize , pull out a large sum of money and place it before he , as do many other ; all of they , no doubt , consider they own heap as so many decoy bird , which be to intice and draw over the heap of they neighbour . " here it would be tedious to relate all the freak which Fortune , or rather the dice , play in this she temple . mountain of gold be in a few moments reduce to nothing at one part of the table , and rise as suddenly in another . the rich grow in a moment poor , and the poor as suddenly become rich ; so that it see a philosopher could nowhere have so well instruct he pupil in the contempt of riche , at least he could nowhere have better inculcate the incertainty of they duration . " for my own part , after have considerably improve my small estate , I at last entirely demolish it . too , after much variety of luck , rise from the table in some heat , and declare he have lose a cool hundr , and would play no longer . then come up to I , he ask I to return with he to the tavern ; but I positively refuse , say , I would not bring myself a second time into such a dilemma , and especially as he have lose all he money and be now in my own condition . ` Pooh ! ' say he , ` I have just borrowed a couple of guinea of a friend , and one of they be at you service . ' he immediately put one of they into my hand , and I no longer resist he inclination . " I be at first a little shocked at return to the same house whence we have depart in so unhandsome a manner ; but when the drawer , with very civil address , tell we , ` he believe we have forget to pay we reckoning ,' I become perfectly easy , and very readily give he a guinea , bid he pay himself , and acquiesce in the unjust charge which have be laid on my memory . " now bespeak the most extravagant supper he could well think of ; and though he have contente himself with simple claret before , nothing now but the most precious would serve he purpose . " we company be soon encrease by the addition of several gentleman from the gaming - table ; most of whom , as I afterwards find , come not to the tavern to drink , but in the way of business ; for the true gamester pretend to be ill , and refuse they glass , while they ply heartily two young fellow , who be to be
be afterwards pillaged , as indeed they be without mercy . of this plunder I have the good fortune to be a sharer , though I be not yet let into the secret . " there be one remarkable accident attend this tavern play ; for the money by degree totally disappear ; so that though at the begin the table be half cover with gold , yet before the play end , which it do not till the next day , be , at noon , there be scarce a single guinea to be see on the table ; and this be the stranger as every person present , except myself , declare he have lose ; and what be become of the money , unless the devil himself carry it away , be difficult to determine . " " most certainly he do , " say , " for evil spirit can carry away anything without be see , though there be never so many folk in the room ; and I should not have be surprize if he have carry away all the company of a set of wicked wretch , who be at play in sermon time . and I could tell you a true story , if I would , where the take a man out of bed from another man 's wife , and carry he away through the keyhole of the door . I have see the very house where it be do , and nobody hath live in it these thirty year . " though be a little offended by the impertinence of , he could not however avoid smiling at he simplicity . the stranger do the same , and then proceed with he story , as will be see in the next chapter . chapter xiii . in which the foregoing story be farther continue . " my fellow - collegiate have now enter I in a new scene of life . I soon become acquainted with the whole fraternity of sharper , and be let into they secret ; I mean , into the knowledge of those gross cheat which be proper to impose upon the raw and unexperienced ; for there be some trick of a finer kind , which be know only to a few of the gang , who be at the head of they profession ; a degree of honour beyond my expectation ; for drink , to which I be immoderately addict , and the natural warmth of my passion , prevent I from arrive at any great success in a art which require as much coolness as the most austere school of philosophy . " , with whom I now live in the closest amity , have unluckily the former failing to a very great excess ; so that instead of make a fortune by he profession , as some other do , he be alternately rich and poor , and be often obliged to surrender to he cooler friend , over a bottle which they never taste , that plunder that he have take from cull at the public table . " however , we both make a shift to pick up a uncomfortable livelihood ; and for two year I continue of the calling ; during which time I taste all the variety of fortune , sometimes flourish in affluence , and at other be oblige to struggle with almost incredible difficulty . to -day wallow in luxury , and to - morrow reduce to the coarsest and most homely fare . my fine clothes be often on my back in the evening , and at the pawn - shop the next morning . " one night , as I be return pennyless from the gaming - table , I observe a very great disturbance , and a large mob gather together in the street . as I be in no danger from pickpocket , I venture into the croud , where upon enquiry I find that a man have be rob and very ill use by some ruffian . the wounded man appear very bloody , and see scarce able to support himself on he leg . as I have not therefore be deprive of my humanity by my present life and conversation , though they have leave I very little of either honesty or shame , I immediately offer my assistance to the unhappy person , who thankfully accept it , and , put himself under my conduct , beg I to convey he to some tavern , where he might send for a surgeon , be , as he say , faint with loss of blood . he seem indeed highly pleased at find one who appear in the dress of a gentleman ; for as to all the rest of the company present , they outside be such that he could not wisely place any confidence in they . " I take the poor man by the arm , and lead he to the tavern where we keep we rendezvous , as it happen to be the nearest at hand . a surgeon happen luckily to be in the house , immediately attend , and apply himself to dress he wound , which I have the pleasure to hear be not likely to be mortal . " the surgeon have very expeditiously and dextrously finish he business , begin to enquire in what part of the town the wounded man lod ; who answer , ` that he be come to tow that very morning ; that he horse be at a inn in , and that he have no other lodging , and very little or no acquaintance in town . ' " this surgeon , whose name I have forget , though I remember it begin with a , have the first character in he profession , and be serjeant - surgeon to the king .
. he have moreover many good quality , and be a very generous good - natured man , and ready to do any service to he fellow - creature . he offer he patient the use of he chariot to carry he to he inn , and at the same time whisper in he ear , ` that if he want any money , he would furnish he . ' " the poor man be not now capable of return thanks for this generous offer ; for have have he eye for some time stedfastly on I , he throw himself back in he chair , cry , ` oh , my son ! my son ! ' and then faint away . " many of the people present imagin this accident have happene through he loss of blood ; but I , who at the same time begin to recollect the feature of my father , be now confirm in my suspicion , and satisfy that it be he himself who appear before I . I presently run to he , raise he in my arm , and kiss he cold lip with the utmost eagerness . here I must draw a curtain over a scene which I can not describe ; for though I do not lose my being , as my father for a while do , my sense be however so overpowered with affright and surprize , that I be a stranger to what pass during some minute , and indeed till my father have again recover from he swoon , and I find myself in he arm , both tenderly embrace each other , while the tear trickle a - pace down the cheek of each of we . " most of those present seem affect by this scene , which we , who might be consider as the actor in it , be desirous of remove from the eyes of all spectator as fast as we could ; my father therefore accept the kind offer of the surgeon 's chariot , and I attend he in it to he inn . " when we be alone together , he gently upbraide I with have neglect to write to he during so long a time , but entirely omit the mention of that crime which have occasion it . he then inform I of my mother 's death , and insist on my return home with he , say , ` that he have long suffer the greatest anxiety on my account ; that he know not whether he have most fear my death or wish it , since he have so many more dreadful apprehension for I . at last , he say , a neighbour gentleman , who have just recover a son from the same place , inform he where I be ; and that to reclaim I from this course of life be the sole cause of he journey to . ' he thank he have succeed so far as to find I out by means of a accident which have like to have prove fatal to he ; and have the pleasure to think he partly owed he preservation to my humanity , with which he profest himself to be more delighted than he should have be with my filial piety , if I have know that the object of all my care be my own father . " Vice have not so deprave my heart as to excite in it a insensibility of so much paternal affection , though so unworthily bestow . I presently promise to obey he command in my return home with he , as soon as he be able to travel , which indeed he be in a very few day , by the assistance of that excellent surgeon who have undertake he cure . " the day precede my father 's journey ( before which time I scarce ever leave he ) , I go to take my leave of some of my most intimate acquaintance , particularly of , who dissuad I from bury myself , as he call it , out of a simple compliance with the fond desire of a foolish old fellow . such sollicitation , however , have no effect , and I once more see my own home . my father now greatly sollicit I to think of marriage ; but my inclination be utterly averse to any such thought . I have taste of love already , and perhaps you know the extravagant excess of that most tender and most violent passion . " -- here the old gentleman pause , and look earnestly at ; whose countenance , within a minute 's space , display the extremity of both red and white . upon which the old man , without make any observation , renew he narrative . " be now provide with all the necessary of life , I betake myself once again to study , and that with a more inordinate application than I have ever do formerly . the book which now employ my time solely be those , as well antient as modern , which treat of true philosophy , a word which be by many think to be the subject only of farce and ridicule . I now read over the work of and , with the rest of those inestimable treasure which antient have bequeath to the world . " these author , though they instruct I in no science by which man may promise to themselves to acquire the least riche or worldly power , teach I , however , the art of despise the highest acquisition of both . they elevate the mind , and steel and hare it against the capricious invasion of fortune . they not only instruct in the knowledge of , but confirm man in she habits , and demonstrate plainly , that this must
must be we guide , if we propose ever to arrive at the greatest worldly happiness , or to defend ourselves , with any tolerable security , against the misery which everywhere surround and invest we . " to this I add another study , compare to which , all the philosophy teach by the wisest heathen be little better than a dream , and be indeed as full of vanity as the silliest jester ever please to represent it . this be that wisdom which be alone to be find in the ; for they impart to we the knowledge and assurance of thing much more worthy we attention than all which this world can offer to we acceptance ; of thing which heave itself hath condescende to reveal to we , and to the smallest knowledge of which the highest human wit unassisted could never ascend . I begin now to think all the time I have spend with the best heathan writer be little more than labour lose : for , however pleasant and delightful they lesson may be , or however adequate to the right regulation of we conduct with respect to this world only ; yet , when compare with the glory reveal in , they highest document will appear as trifling , and of as little consequence , as the rule by which child regulate they childish little game and pastime . true it be , that philosophy make we wiser , but make we better man . elevate and steel the mind , soften and sweeten it . the former make we the object of human admiration , the latter of divine love . that insure we a temporal , but this a eternal happiness .-- but I be afraid I tire you with my rhapsody . " " not at all , " cry ; " Lud forbid we should be tired with good thing ! " " I have spend , " continue the stranger , " about four year in the most delightful manner to myself , totally give up to contemplation , and entirely unembarrassed with the affair of the world , when I lose the best of fathers , and one whom I so entirely love , that my grief at he loss exceed all description . I now abandon my book , and give myself up for a whole month to the effect of melancholy and despair . time , however , the best physician of the mind , at length bring I relief . " -- " ay , ay ; _Tempus edax rerum " say .--" I then , " continue the stranger , " betake myself again to my former study , which I may say perfecte my cure ; for philosophy and religion may be call the exercise of the mind , and when this be disorder , they be as wholesome as exercise can be to a distemper body . they do indeed produce similar effect with exercise ; for they strengthen and confirm the mind , till man become , in the noble strain of Horace -- _Fortis , et in seipso totus tere atque rotundus , ne quid valeat per laeve morari ; in quem mancan ruit semper fortuna._ " [ *] [ *] firm in himself , who on himself rely , polish ' and round , who run he proper course and break misfortunes with superior force .-- . here smile at some conceit which intrude itself into he imagination ; but the stranger , I believe , perceive it not , and proceed thus :-- " my circumstance be now greatly alter by the death of that best of man ; for my brother , who be now become master of the house , differ so widely from I in he inclination , and we pursuit in life have be so very various , that we be the worst of company to each other : but what make we live together still more disagreeable , be the little harmony which could subsist between the few who resort to I , and the numerous train of sportsman who often attend my brother from the field to the table ; for such fellows , besides the noise and nonsense with which they persecute the ear of sober man , endeaavor always to attack they with affront and contempt . this be so much the case , that neither I myself , nor my friend , could ever sit down to a meal with they without be treat with derision , because we be unacquainted with the phrase of sportsman . for man of true learning , and almost universal knowledge , always compassionate the ignorance of other ; but fellow who excel in some little , low , contemptible art , be always certain to despise those who be unacquainted with that art . " in short , we soon separate , and I go , by the advice of a physician , to drink the Bath water ; for my violent affliction , add to a sedentary life , have throw I into a kind of paralytic disorder , for which those water be account a almost _certain_ cure . the second day after my arrival , as I be walk by the river , the sun shone so intensely hot ( though it be early in the year ) , that I retire to the shelter of some willows , and sit down by the river side . here I have not be seat long before I hear a person on the other side of the willows sighing and bemoan himself bitterly . on a sudden , have utter a most impious oath , he cry , ` I be resolve to bear it no longer , ' and directly throw himself into the water . I immediately start , and run towards the place , call at
at the same time as loudly as I could for assistance . a angler happen luckily to be a - fish a little below I , though some very high sedge have hide he from my sight . he immediately come up , and both of we together , not without some hazard of we life , draw the body to the shore . at first we perceive no sign of life remain ; but have hold the body up by the heel ( for we soon have assistance enough ) , it discharge a vast quantity of water at the mouth , and at length begin to discover some symptom of breathing , and a little afterwards to move both it be hand and its leg . " a apothecary , who happen to be present among other , advise that the body , which seem now to have pretty well empty itself of water , and which begin to have many convulsive motion , should be directly take up , and carry into a warm bed . this be accordingly perform , the apothecary and myself attend . " as we be go towards a inn , for we know not the man 's lodging , luckily a woman meet we , who , after some violent screaming , tell we that the gentleman lod at she house . " when I have see the man safely deposite there , I leave he to the care of the apothecary ; who , I suppose , use all the right method with he , for the next morning I hear he have perfectly recover he sense . " I then go to visit he , intend to search out , as well as I could , the cause of he have attempt so desperate a act , and to prevent , as far as I be able , he pursue such wicked intention for the future . I be no sooner admit into he chamber , than we both instantly know each other ; for who should this person be but my good friend ! here I will not trouble you with what past at we first interview ; for I would avoid prolixity as much as possible . " -- " pray let we hear all , " cry ; " I want mightily to know what bring he to . " " you shall hear everything material , " answer the stranger ; and then proceed to relate what we shall proceed to write , after we have give a short breathing time to both ourselves and the reader . xiv. in which the Man of the conclude he history . " , " continue the stranger , " very freely acquaint I , that the unhappy situation of he circumstance , occasion by a tide of ill luck , have in a manner force he to a resolution of destroy himself . " I now begin to argue very seriously with he , in opposition to this heathenish , or indeed diabolical , principle of the lawfulness of self - murder ; and say everything which occur to I on the subject ; but , to my great concern , it seem to have very little effect on he . he seem not at all to repent of what he have do , and give I reason to fear he would soon make a second attempt of the like horrible kind . " when I have finish my discourse , instead of endeavouring to answer my argument , he look I stedfastly in the face , and with a smile say , ` you be strangely alte , my good friend , since I remember you . I question whether any of we bishop could make a better argument against suicide than you have entertain I with ; but unless you can find somebody who will lend I a cool hundr , I must either hang , or dry , or starve ; and , in my opinion , the last death be the most terrible of the three . ' " I answer he very gravely that I be indeed alte since I have see he last . that I have find leisure to look into my folly and to repent of they . I then advise he to pursue the same step ; and at last conclude with a assurance that I myself would lend he a hundr pound , if it would be of any service to he affair , and he would not put it into the power of a die to deprive he of it . " , who seem almost compose in slumber by the former part of my discourse , be rouse by the latter . he seize my hand eagerly , give I a thousand thanks , and declare I be a friend indeed ; add that he hope I have a better opinion of he than to imagine he have profit so little by experience , as to put any confidence in those damned dice which have so often deceive he . ` no , no ,' cry he ; ` let I but once handsomely be set up again , and if ever make a broken merchant of I afterwards , I will forgive she . ' " I very well understand the language of set up , and break merchant . I therefore say to he , with a very grave face , , you must endeaavor to find out some business or employment , by which you may procure yourself a livelihood ; and I promise you , could I see any probability of be repay hereafter , I would advance a much larger sum than what you have mention , to equip you in any fair and honourable call ; but as to game , besides the baseness and wickedness of make it a
a profession , you be really , to my own knowledge , unfit for it , and it will end in you certain ruin . " ` why now , that be strange , ' answer he ; ` neither you , nor any of my friend , would ever allow I to know anything of the matter , and yet I believe I _am_ as good a hand at every game as any of you all ; and I heartily wish I be to play with you only for you whole fortune : I should desire no better sport , and I would let you name you game into the bargain : but come , my dear boy , have you the hundr in you pocket ? " " I answer I have only a bill for  50 , which I deliver he , and promise to bring he the rest next morning ; and after give he a little more advice , take my leave . " I be indeed better than my word ; for I return to he that very afternoon . when I enter the room , I find he sit up in he bed at card with a notorious gamester . this sight , you will imagine , shock I not a little ; to which I may add the mortification of see my bill deliver by he to he antagonist , and thirty guinea only give in exchange for it . " the other gamester presently quit the room , and then declare he be asham to see I ; ` but , ' say he , ` I find luck run so damnably against I , that I will resolve to leave off play for ever . I have think of the kind proposal you make I ever since , and I promise you there shall be no fault in I , if I do not put it in execution . ' " though I have no great faith in he promise , I produce he the remainder of the hundr in consequence of my own ; for which he give I a note , which be all I ever expect to see in return for my money . " we be prevent from any further discourse at present by the arrival of the apothecary ; who , with much joy in he countenance , and without even ask he patient how he do , proclaim there be great news arrive in a letter to himself , which he say would shortly be public , ` that the of be land in the west with a vast army of ; and that another vast fleet hover over the coast of , and be to make a descent there , in order to favour the duke 's enterprize with a diversion on that side . ' " this apothecary be one of the greatest politician of he time . he be more delighted with the most paultry packet , than with the best patient , and the highest joy he be capable of , he receive from have a piece of news in he possession a hour or two sooner than any other person in the town . he advice , however , be seldom authentic ; for he would swallow almost anything as a truth -- a humour which many make use of to impose upon he . " thus it happen with what he at present communicate ; for it be know within a short time afterwards that the duke be really landed , but that he army consist only of a few attendants ; and as to the diversion in , it be entirely false . " the apothecary stay no longer in the room than while he acquaint we with he news ; and then , without say a syllable to he patient on any other subject , depart to spread he advice all over the town . " event of this nature in the public be generally apt to eclipse all private concern . we discourse therefore now become entirely political . [ *] for my own part , I have be for some time very seriously affect with the danger to which the Protestant religion be so visibly expose under a prince , and think the apprehension of it alone sufficient to justify that insurrection ; for no real security can ever be find against the persecuting spirit of , when armed with power , except the deprive it of that power , as woeful experience presently show . you know how behave after get the better of this attempt ; how little he value either he royal word , or coronation oath , or the libertie and rights of he people . but all have not the sense to foresee this at first ; and therefore the of be weakly support ; yet all could feel when the evil come upon they ; and therefore all united , at last , to drive out that king , against whose exclusion a great party among we have so warmly contende during the reign of he brother , and for whom they now fight with such zeal and affection . " " what you say , " interrupt , " be very true ; and it have often strike I , as the most wonderful thing I ever read of in history , that so soon after this convincing experience which bring we whole nation to join so unanimously in expel , for the preservation of we religion and libertie , there should be a party among we mad enough to desire the place he family again on the throne . " " you be not in earnest ! " answer the old man ; " there can be no such party . as bad a opinion as I have of mankind , I can not believe they
they infatuate to such a degree . there may be some hot - head Papists lead by they priests to engage in this desperate cause , and think it a holy war ; but that , that be member of the of , should be such apostate , such _felo de se_, I can not believe it ; no , no , young man , unacquainted as I be with what have past in the world for these last thirty year , I can not be so imposed upon as to credit so foolish a tale ; but I see you have a mind to sport with my ignorance . " --" can it be possible , " reply , " that you have liv so much out of the world as not to know that during that time there have be two rebellions in favour of the son of , one of which be now actually rage in the very heart of the kingdom . " at these word the old gentleman start up , and in a most solemn tone of , conjure by he maker to tell he if what he say be really true ; which the other as solemnly affirme , he walk several turn about the room in a profound silence , then cry , then laugh , and at last fell down on he knee , and bless , in a loud thanksgiving prayer , for have deliver he from all society with human nature , which could be capable of such monstrous extravagance . after which , be remind by that he have break off he story , he resume it again in this manner :-- " as mankind , in the day I be speak of , be not yet arrive at that pitch of madness which I find they be capable of now , and which , to be sure , I have only escape by live alone , and at a distance from the contagion , there be a considerable rising in favour of ; and my principle strongly inclin I to take the same part , I determine to join he ; and , from different motive concurr in the same resolution ( for the spirit of a gamester will carry a man as far upon such a occasion as the spirit of patriotism ) , we soon provide ourselves with all necessary , and go to the duke at . " the unfortunate event of this enterprize , you be , I conclude , as well acquaint with as myself . I escape , together with , from the battle at , in which action I receive a slight wound . we ride near forty mile together on the road , and then abandon we horse , scramble as well as we could through the field and bye - road , till we arrive at a little wild hut on a common , where a poor old woman take all the care of we she could , and dress my wound with salve , which quickly heale it . " " pray , sir , where be the wound ? " say . the stranger satisfie he it be in he arm , and then continue he narrative . " here , sir , " say he , " leave I the next morning , in order , as he pretend , to get we some provision from the town of ; but -- can I relate it , or can you believe it ?-- this , this friend , this base , barbarous , treacherous villain , betraye I to a party of horse belong to , and at he return deliver I into they hand . " the soldier , be six in number , have now seize I , and be conduct I to gaol ; but neither my present situation , nor the apprehension of what might happen to I , be half so irksome to my mind as the company of my false friend , who , have surrender himself , be likewise consider as a prisoner , though he be better treat , as be to make he peace at my expense . he at first endeavoure to excuse he treachery ; but when he receive nothing but scorn and upbraid from I , he soon change he note , abuse I as the most atrocious and malicious rebel , and lay all he own guilt to my charge , who , as he declare , have solicite , and even threaten he , to make he take up arm against he gracious as well as lawful sovereign . " this false evidence ( for in reality he have be much the forwarder of the two ) sting I to the quick , and raise a indignation scarce conceivable by those who have not feel it . however , fortune at length take pity on I ; for as we be get a little beyond , in a narrow lane , my guard receive a false alarm , that near fifty of the enemy be at hand ; upon which they shift for themselves , and leave I and my betrayer to do the same . that villain immediately run from I , and I be glad he do , or I should have certainly endeavoure , though I have no arm , to have execute vengeance on he baseness . " I be now once more at liberty ; and immediately withdraw from the highway into the field , I travel on , scarce know which way I go , and make it my chief care to avoid all public road and all town -- nay , even the most homely house ; for I imagine every human creature whom I see desirous of betraie I . " at last , after rambl several day about the country , during which
which the field afforde I the same bed and the same food which nature bestow on we savage brothers of the creation , I at length arrive at this place , where the solitude and wildness of the country invite I to fix my abode . the first person with whom I take up my habitation be the mother of this old woman , with whom I remain conceal till the news of the glorious revolution put a end to all my apprehension of danger , and give I a opportunity of once more visit my own home , and of enquir a little into my affair , which I soon settle as agreeably to my brother as to myself ; have resign everything to he , for which he pay I the sum of a thousand pound , and settle on I a annuity for life . " he behaviour in this last instance , as in all other , be selfish and ungenerous . I could not look on he as my friend , nor indeed do he desire that I should ; so I presently take my leave of he , as well as of my other acquaintance ; and from that day to this , my history be little better than a blank . " " and be it possible , sir , " say , " that you can have reside here from that day to this ? " --" o no , sir , " answer the gentleman ; " I have be a great traveller , and there be few part of with which i be not acquaint . " " I have not , sir , " cry , " the assurance to ask it of you now ; indeed it would be cruel , after so much breath as you have already spend : but you will give I leave to wish for some further opportunity of hear the excellent observation which a man of you sense and knowledge of the world must have make in so long a course of travels . " --" indeed , young gentleman , " answer the stranger , " I will endeaavor to satisfy you curiosity on this head likewise , as far as I be able . " attempt fresh apology , but be prevent ; and while he and sit with greedy and impatient ear , the stranger proceed as in the next chapter . [ *] the rest of this paragraph and the two follow paragraph in the first edition be as follow _: " for my own part , I have be for some time very seriously affect with the danger to which the Protestant religion be so visibly expose , that nothing but the immediate interposition of seem capable of preserve it ; for have indeed declare war against the Protestant cause . he have bring know papist into the army and attempt to bring they into the and into the . Popish priest swarm through the nation , appear publicly in they habits , and boast that they should shortly walk in procession through the street . we own clergy be forbid to preach against popery , and bishop be order to supend those who do ; and to do the business at once a illegal ecclesiastical commission be erected , little inferior to a inquisition , of which , probably , it be intend to be the ringleader . thus , as we duty to the king can never be call more than we second duty , he have discharge we from this by make it incompatible with we preserve the first , which be surely to heave . besides this , he have dissolve he subject from they allegiance by break he Coronation , to which they allegiance be annex ; for he have imprison bishops because they would not give up they religion , and turn out judge because they would not absolutely surrender the law into he hand ; nay , he seize this himself , and when he claim a dispensing power , he declare himself , in fact , as absolute as any tyrant ever be or can be . I have recapitulate these matters in full lest some of they should have be omit in history ; and I think nothing less than such provocation as I have here mention , nothing less than certain and imminent danger to they religion and libertie , can justify or even mitigate the dreadful sin of rebellion in any people . " " I promise you , sir , " say , " all these fact , and more , I have read in history , but I will tell you a fact which be not yet record and of which I suppose you be ignorant . there be actually now a rebellion on foot in this kingdom in favour of the son of that very , a profess papist , more bigoted , if possible , than he father , and this carry on by against a king who hath never in one single instance make the least invasion on we libertie . " " Prodigious indeed ! " answer the stranger . " you tell I what would be incredible of a nation which do not deserve the character that give of a woman , _varium et mutabile semper _. surely this be to be unworthy of the care which seem to have take of we in the preservation of we religion against the powerful design and constant machination of , a preservation so strange and unaccountable that I almost think we may appeal to it as to a miracle for the proof of its holiness . Prodigious indeed ! a Protestant rebellion in favour of a popish prince ! the folly of mankind be as wonderful as they knavery -- but to conclude my story : I resolve to take arm in
in defence of my country , of my religion , and my liberty , and join in the same resolution . we soon provide ourselves with a necessary and join the at . " " the unfortunate event of this enterprise you be perhaps better acquaint with than myself . I escape together with from the battle at , ... xv. a brief history of ; and a curiious discourse between and the man of the . " in the landlord be very silent . in they be more talkative , but yet civil . in and they be generally very impertinent . and as for they honesty , I believe it be pretty equal in all those country . the _laquais  louange_ be sure to lose no opportunity of cheat you ; and as for the postilion , I think they be pretty much alike all the world over . these , sir , be the observation on man which I make in my travels ; for these be the only man I ever converse with . my design , when I go abroad , be to divert myself by see the wondrous variety of prospect , beasts , bird , fishes , insect , and vegetable , with which have be pleased to enrich the several part of this globe ; a variety which , as it must give great pleasure to a contemplative beholder , so doth it admirably display the power , and wisdom , and goodness of the Creator . indeed , to say the truth , there be but one work in he whole creation that doth he any dishonour , and with that I have long since avoid hold any conversation . " " you will pardon I , " cry ; " but I have always imagine that there be in this very work you mention as great variety as in all the rest ; for , besides the difference of inclination , custom and climates have , I be tell , introduce the utmost diversity into human nature . " " very little indeed , " answer the other : " those who travel in order to acquaint themselves with the different manners of man might spare themselves much pain by go to a at ; for there they will see at once all which they can discover in the several court of . the same hypocrisy , the same fraud ; in short , the same folly and vex dress in different habit . in , these be equip with much gravity ; and in , with vast splendor . in , a knave be dress like a fop ; and in the northern country , like a sloven . but human nature be everywhere the same , everywhere the object of detestation and scorn . " as for my own part , I past through all these nation as you perhaps may have do through a croud at a shew - jostl to get by they , hold my nose with one hand , and defend my pocket with the other , without speak a word to any of they , while I be press on to see what I want to see ; which , however entertaine it might be in itself , scarce make I amend for the trouble the company give I . " " do not you find some of the nation among which you travel less troublesome to you than other ? " say . " o yes , " reply the old man : " the be much more tolerable to I than the ; for they be man of profound taciturnity , and never disturb a stranger with question . now and then indeed they bestow a short curse upon he , or spit in he face as he walk the street , but then they have do with he ; and a man may live a age in they country without hear a dozen word from they . but of all the people I ever see , heaven defend I from the french ! with they damned prate and civility , and do the honour of they nation to strangers ( as they be pleased to call it ) , but indeed set forth they own vanity ; they be so troublesome , that I have infinitely rather pass my life with the than set my foot in again . they be a nasty people , but they nastiness be mostly without ; whereas , in , and some other nation that I will not name , it be all within , and make they stink much more to my reason than that of do to my nose . " thus , sir , I have end the history of my life ; for as to all that series of year during which I have liv retire here , it afford no variety to entertain you , and may be almost consider as one day . [ *] the retirement have be so compleat , that I could hardly have enjoy a more absolute solitude in the desert of the than here in the midst of this populious kingdom . as I have no estate , I be plague with no tenant or steward : my annuity be pay I pretty regularly , as indeed it ought to be ; for it be much less than what I might have expect in return for what I give up . visit I admit none ; and the old woman who keep my house know that she place entirely depend upon she save I all the trouble of buy the thing that I want , keep off all sollicitation or business from I , and hold she tongue whenever I be within hearing . as my walks be all by night , I be pretty secure in this wild unfrequented place from meet
meet any company . some few person I have meet by chance , and send they home heartily frighted , as from the oddness of my dress and figure they take I for a ghost or a hobgoblin . but what have happen to - night show that even here I can not be safe from the villany of man ; for without you assistance I have not only be rob , but very probably murder . " [ *] the rest of this paragraph be omit in the third edition thanke the stranger for the trouble he have take in relate he story , and then express some wonder how he could possibly endure a life of such solitude ; " in which , " say he , " you may well complain of the want of variety . indeed I be astonish how you have fill up , or rather kill , so much of you time . " " I be not at all surprize , " answer the other , " that to one whose affections and thought be fix on the world my hour should appear to have want employment in this place : but there be one single act , for which the whole life of man be infinitely too short : what time can suffice for the contemplation and worship of that glorious , immortal , and eternal , among the work of whose stupendous creation not only this globe , but even those numberless luminary which we may here behold spangl all the sky , though they should many of they be suns light different system of worlds , may possibly appear but as a few atom oppose to the whole earth which we inhabit ? can a man who by divine meditation be admit as it be into the conversation of this ineffable , incomprehensible Majesty , think day , or year , or ag , too long for the continuance of so ravish a honour ? shall the trifling amusement , the palling pleasur , the silly business of the world , roll away we hour too swiftly from we ; and shall the pace of time seem sluggish to a mind exercise in study so high , so important , and so glorious ? as no time be sufficient , so no place be improper , for this great concern . on what object can we cast we eye which may not inspire we with idea of he power , of he wisdom , and of he goodness ? it be not necessary that the rise sun should dart he fiery glory over the eastern horizon ; nor that the boisterous wind should rush from they cavern , and shake the lofy forest ; nor that the opening clouds should pour they deluge on the plain : it be not necessary , I say , that any of these should proclaim he majesty : there be not a insect , not a vegetable , of so low a order in the creation as not to be honoure with bearing mark of the attribute of its great Creator ; mark not only of he power , but of he wisdom and goodness . Man alone , the king of this globe , the last and greatest work of the , below the sun ; man alone hath basely dishonoure he own nature ; and by dishonesty , cruelty , ingratitude , and treachery , hath call he maker 's goodness in question , by puzzl we to account how a benevolent be should form so foolish and so vile a animal . yet this be the be from whose conversation you think , I suppose , that I have be unfortunately restrain , and without whose bless society , life , in you opinion , must be tedious and insipid . " " in the former part of what you say , " reply , " I most heartily and readily concur ; but I believe , as well as hope , that the abhorrence which you express for mankind in the conclusion , be much too general . indeed , you here fall into a error , which in my little experience I have observe to be a very common one , by take the character of mankind from the worst and basest among they ; whereas , indeed , as a excellent writer observe , nothing should be esteem as characteristical of a species , but what be to be find among the best and most perfect individual of that species . this error , I believe , be generally commit by those who from want of proper caution in the choice of they friend and acquaintance , have suffer injury from bad and worthless man ; two or three instance of which be very unjustly charge on all human nature . " " I think I have experience enough of it , " answer the other : " my first mistress and my first friend betraye I in the basest manner , and in matter which threaten to be of the worst of consequence -- even to bring I to a shameful death . " " but you will pardon I , " cry , " if I desire you to reflect who that mistress and who that friend were . what better , my good sir , could be expect in love derive from the stew , or in friendship first produce and nourished at the gaming - table ? to take the character of woman from the former instance , or of man from the latter , would be as unjust as to assert that air be a nauseous and unwholesome element , because we find it so in a jake . I have liv but a short time in the world , and yet have know man worthy of the highest friendship , and woman
woman of the highest love . " " ! young man , " answer the stranger , " you have liv , you confess , but a very short time in the world : I be somewhat older than you when I be of the same opinion . " " you might have remain so still , " reply , " if you have not be unfortunate , I will venture to say incautious , in the place you affections . if there be , indeed , much more wickedness in the world than there be , it would not prove such general assertion against human nature , since much of this arrive by mere accident , and many a man who commit evil be not totally bad and corrupt in he heart . in truth , none seem to have any title to assert human nature to be necessarily and universally evil , but those whose own mind afford they one instance of this natural depravity ; which be not , I be convince , you case . " " and such , " say the stranger , " will be always the most backward to assert any such thing . Knaves will no more endeavour to persuade we of the baseness of mankind , than a highwayman will inform you that there be thief on the road . this would , indeed , be a method to put you on you guard , and to defeat they own purpose . for which reason , though knave , as I remember , be very apt to abuse particular person , yet they never cast any reflection on human nature in general . " the old gentleman speak this so warmly , that as despair of make a convert , and be unwilling to offend , he return no answer . the day now begin to send forth its first stream of light , when make a apology to the stranger for have staid so long , and perhaps detain he from he rest . the stranger answer , " he never want rest less than at present ; for that day and night be indifferent season to he ; and that he commonly make use of the former for the time of he repose and of the latter for he walk and lucubration . however , " say he , " it be now a most lovely morning , and if you can bear any longer to be without you own rest or food , I will gladly entertain you with the sight of some very fine prospect which I believe you have not yet see . " very readily embrace this offer , and they immediately set forward together from the cottage . as for , he have fall into a profound repose just as the stranger have finish he story ; for he curiosity be satisfied , and the subsequent discourse be not forcible enough in its operation to conjure down the charms of sleep . therefore leave he to enjoy he nap ; and as the reader may perhaps be at this season glad of the same favour , we will here put a end to the eighth book of we history . . . I . of those who lawfully may , and of those who may not , write such histories as this . among other good use for which I have think proper to institute these several introductory chapter , I have consider they as a kind of mark or stamp , which may hereafter enable a very indifferent reader to distinguish what be true and genuine in this historic kind of writing , from what be false and counterfeit . indeed , it seem likely that some such mark may shortly become necessary , since the favourable reception which two or three author have lately procure for they work of this nature from the public , will probably serve as a encouragement to many other to undertake the like . thus a swarm of foolish novel and monstrous romance will be produce , either to the great impoverishing of bookseller , or to the great loss of time and depravation of moral in the reader ; nay , often to the spreading of scandal and calumny , and to the prejudice of the character of many worthy and honest people . I question not but the ingenious author of the Spectator be principally induce to prefix and latin motto to every paper , from the same consideration of guarding against the pursuit of those scribbler , who have no talents of a writer but what be teach by the writing - master , be yet nowise afraid nor asham to assume the same title with the greatest genius , than they good brother in the fable be of braying in the lion 's skin . by the device therefore of he motto , it become impracticable for any man to presume to imitate the Spectator , without understand at least one sentence in the learned language . in the same manner I have now secure myself from the imitation of those who be utterly incapable of any degree of reflection , and whose learn be not equal to a essay . I would not be here understand to insinuate , that the greatest merit of such historical productions can ever lie in these introductory chapter ; but , in fact , those part which contain mere narrative only , afford much more encouragement to the pen of a imitator , than those which be compose of observation and reflection . here I mean such imitator as Rowe be of , or as hint some of the be of , by bare foot and sour face . to invent good story , and to tell they well , be possibly very rare talents , and yet I have observe few person who have scruple
scruple to aim at both : and if we examine the romance and novel with which the world abound , I think we may fairly conclude , that most of the author would not have attempt to show they tooth ( if the expression may be allow I ) in any other way of writing ; nor could indeed have strung together a dozen sentence on any other subject whatever . _Scribimus iindoct doctique passim _, [ *] [ *] -- each desperate blockhead dare to write : Verse be the trade of every live wight.-- . may be more truly say of the historian and biographer , than of any other species of writing ; for all the art and sciences ( even criticism itself ) require some little degree of learning and knowledge . Poetry , indeed , may perhaps be think a exception ; but then it demand number , or something like number : whereas , to the composition of novel and romance , nothing be necessary but paper , pens , and ink , with the manual capacity of use they . this , I conceive , they productions show to be the opinion of the author themselves : and this must be the opinion of they reader , if indeed there be any such . hence we be to derive that universal contempt which the world , who always denominate the whole from the majority , have cast on all historical writer who do not draw they material from record . and it be the apprehension of this contempt that hath make we so cautiously avoid the term romance , a name with which we might otherwise have be well enough contente . though , as we have good authority for all we character , no less indeed than the vast authentic doomsday - book of nature , as be elsewhere hinted , we labour have sufficient title to the name of history . certainly they deserve some distinction from those work , which one of the wittiest of man regard only as proceed from a _pruritus , or indeed rather from a looseness of the brain . but besides the dishonour which be thus cast on one of the most useful as well as entertaining of all kind of writing , there be just reason to apprehend , that by encourage such authors we shall propagate much dishonour of another kind ; I mean to the character of many good and valuable member of society ; for the dullest writer , no more than the dullest companion , be always inoffensive . they have both enough of language to be indecent and abusive . and surely if the opinion just above cite be true , we can not wonder that work so nastily derive should be nasty themselves , or have a tendency to make other so . to prevent therefore , for the future , such intemperate abuse of leisure , of letter , and of the liberty of the press , especially as the world seem at present to be more than usually threaten with they , I shall here venture to mention some qualifications , every one of which be in a pretty high degree necessary to this order of historian . the first be , genius , without a full vein of which no study , say , can avail we . by genius I would understand that power or rather those power of the mind , which be capable of penetrat into all thing within we reach and knowledge , and of distinguishe they essential difference . these be no other than invention and judgament ; and they be both call by the collective name of genius , as they be of those gift of nature which we bring with we into the world . concern each of which many seem to have fall into very great error ; for by invention , I believe , be generally understand a creative faculty , which would indeed prove most romance writer to have the highest pretension to it ; whereas by invention be really meant no more ( and so the word signify ) than discovery , or find out ; or to explain it at large , a quick and sagacious penetration into the true essence of all the object of we contemplation . this , I think , can rarely exist without the concomitancy of judgment ; for how we can be say to have discover the true essence of two thing , without discern they difference , seem to I hard to conceive . now this last be the undisputed province of judgament , and yet some few man of wit have agree with all the dull fellow in the world in represent these two to have be seldom or never the property of one and the same person . but though they should be so , they be not sufficient for we purpose , without a good share of learn ; for which i could again cite the authority of , and of many other , if any be necessary to prove that tool be of no service to a workman , when they be not sharpen by art , or when he want rule to direct he in he work , or hath no matter to work upon . all these use be supply by learn ; for nature can only furnish we with capacity ; or , as I have choose to illustrate it , with the tool of we profession ; learn must fit they for use , must direct they in it , and , lastly , must contribute part at least of the material . a competent knowledge of history and of the belle - lettre be here absolutely necessary ; and without this share of knowledge at least , to affect the character of a historian , be as vain
vain as to endeaavor at building a house without timber or mortar , or brick or stone . and , who , though they add the ornament of number to they work , be both historian of we order , be masters of all the learning of they time . again , there be another sort of knowledge , beyond the power of learn to bestow , and this be to be have by conversation . so necessary be this to the understanding the character of man , that none be more ignorant of they than those learn pedant whose life have be entirely consum in colleges , and among book ; for however exquisitely human nature may have be describe by writer , the true practical system can be lear not only in the world . indeed the like happen in every other kind of knowledge . neither physic nor law be to be practically know from book . Nay , the farmer , the planter , the gardener , must perfect by experience what he hath acquire the rudiment of by reading . how accuritely soever the ingenious may have describe the plant , he himself would advise he disciple to see it in the garden . as we must perceive , that after the nicest stroke of a or a , of a or a Otway , some touch of nature will escape the reader , which the judicious action of a , of a Cibber , or a Clive , [ * ] can convey to he ; so , on the real stage , the character show himself in a stronger and bolder light than he can be describe . and if this be the case in those fine and nervous description which great author themselves have take from life , how much more strongly will it hold when the writer himself take he line not from nature , but from book ? such characters be only the faint copy of a copy , and can have neither the justness nor spirit of a original . [ *] there be a peculiar propriety in mention this great actor , and these two most justly celebrate actress , in this place , as they have all form themselves on the study of nature only , and not on the imitation of they predecessor . hence they have be able to excel all who have go before they ; a degree of merit which the servile herd of imitator can never possibly arrive at . now this conversation in we historian must be universal , that be , with all rank and degrees of man ; for the knowledge of what be call high life will not instruct he in low ; nor , _e converso_ , will he be acquaint with the inferior part of mankind teach he the manners of the superior . and though it may be think that the knowledge of either may sufficiently enable he to describe at least that in which he hath be conversant , yet he will even here fall greatly short of perfection ; for the folly of either rank do in reality illustrate each other . for instance , the affectation of high life appear more glaring and ridiculous from the simplicity of the low ; and again , the rudeness and barbarity of this latter , strike with much stronger idea of absurdity , when contrast with , and oppose to , the politeness which controul the former . besides , to say the truth , the manners of we historian will be improve by both these conversation ; for in the one he will easily find example of plainness , honesty , and sincerity ; in the other of refinement , elegance , and a liberality of spirit ; which last quality I myself have scarce ever see in man of low birth and education . will all the quality I have hithertoo give my historian avail he , unless he have what be generally mean by a good heart , and be capable of feeling . the author who will make I weep , say , must first weep himself . in reality , no man can paint a distress well which he doth not feel while he be paint it ; nor do I doubt , but that the most pathetic and affect scene have be writ with tear . in the same manner it be with the ridiculous . I be convince I never make my reader laugh heartily but where I have laugh before he ; unless it should happen at any time , that instead of laugh with I he should be inclin to laugh at I . perhaps this may have be the case at some passage in this chapter , from which apprehension I will here put a end to it . . contain a very surprizing adventure indeed , which meet with in he walk with the man of the . Aurora now first open she casement , _Anglice_ the day begin to break , when walk forth in company with the stranger , and mount ; of which they have no sooner gain the summit than one of the most noble prospects in the world present itself to they view , and which we would likewise present to the reader , but for two reason : first , we despair of make those who have see this prospect admire we description ; secondly , we very much doubt whether those who have not see it would understand it . stand for some minute fix in one posture , and direct he eye towards the south ; upon which the old gentleman ask , what he be look at with so much attention ? " ! sir , " answer he with a sigh , " I be endeavour to trace out my own journey hither . good
good heaven ! what a distance be from we ! what a vast track of land must be between I and my own home ! " -- " ay , ay , young gentleman , " cry the other , " and by you sighing , from what you love better than you own home , or I be mistaken . I perceive now the object of you contemplation be not within you sight , and yet I fancy you have a pleasure in look that way . " answer with a smile , " I find , old friend , you have not yet forget the sensation of you youth . I own my thought be employ as you have guesse . " they now walk to that part of the hill which look to the north - west , and which hang over a vast and extensive wood . here they be no sooner arrive than they hear at a distance the most violent scream of a woman , proceed from the wood below they . listen a moment , and then , without say a word to he companion ( for indeed the occasion seem sufficiently pressing ) , run , or rather slid , down the hill , and , without the least apprehension or concern for he own safety , make directly to the thicket , whence the sound have issue . he have not enter far into the wood before he beheld a most shocking sight indeed , a woman stript half naked , under the hand of a ruffian , who have put he garter round she neck , and be endeavour to draw she up to a tree . ask no question at this interval , but fall instantly upon the villain , and make such good use of he trusty oaken stick that he lay he sprawl on the ground before he could defend himself , indeed almost before he know he be attack ; nor do he cease the prosecution of he blow till the woman herself beg he to forbear , say , she believe he have sufficiently do he business . the poor wretch then fall upon she knee to , and give he a thousand thanks for she deliverance . he presently lift she up , and tell she he be highly pleased with the extraordinary accident which have send he thither for she relief , where it be so improbable she should find any ; add , that seem to have design he as the happy instrument of she protection . " Nay , " answer she , " I could almost conceive you to be some good angel ; and , to say the truth , you look more like a angel than a man in my eye . " indeed he be a charming figure ; and if a very fine person , and a most comely set of feature , adorn with youth , health , strength , freshness , spirit , and good - nature , can make a man resemble a angel , he certainly have that resemblance . the redeemed captive have not altogether so much of the human - angelic species : she seem to be at least of the middle age , nor have she face much appearance of beauty ; but she cloath be tear from all the upper part of she body , she breast , which be well for and extremely white , attract the eye of she deliverer , and for a few moment they stand silent , and gaze at each other ; till the ruffian on the ground begin to move , take the garter which have be intend for another purpose , and bound both he hand behind he . and now , on contemplate he face , he discover , greatly to he surprize , and perhaps not a little to he satisfaction , this very person to be no other than ensign . have the ensign forget he former antagonist , whom he know the moment he come to himself . he surprize be equal to that of ; but I conceive he pleasure be rather less on this occasion . help upon he leg , and then look he stedfastly in the face , " I fancy , sir , " say he , " you do not expect to meet I any more in this world , and I confess I have as little expectation to find you here . however , fortune , I see , hath bring we once more together , and hath give I satisfaction for the injury I have receive , even without my own knowledge . " " it be very much like a man of honour , indeed , " answer , " to take satisfaction by knock a man down behind he back . neither be I capable of give you satisfaction here , as I have no sword ; but if you dare behave like a gentleman , let we go where I can furnish myself with one , and I will do by you as a man of honou ought . " " Doth it become such a villain as you be , " cry , " to contaminate the name of honour by assume it ? but I shall waste no time in discourse with you . require satisfaction of you now , and shall have it . " then turn to the woman , he ask she , if she be near she home ; or if not , whether she be acquaint with any house in the neighbourhood , where she might procure herself some decent cloath , in order to proceed to a justice of the peace . she answer she be a entire stranger in that part of the world . then recollect himself , say , he have a friend near who
who would direct they ; indeed , he wonder at he not follow ; but , in fact , the good man of the , when we heroe depart , sit himself down on the brow , where , though he have a gun in he hand , he with great patience and unconcern have attend the issue . then step without the wood , perceive the old man sit as we have just describe he ; he presently exert he utmost agility , and with surprizing expedition ascend the hill . the old man advise he to carry the woman to , which , he say , be the nearest town , and there he would be sure of furnish she with all manner of conveniency . have receive he direction to the place , take he leave of the man of the , and , desire he to direct the same way , return hastily to the wood . we heroe , at he departure to make this enquiry of he friend , have consider , that as the ruffian 's hand be tie behind he , he be incapable of execute any wicked purpose on the poor woman . besides , he know he should not be beyond the reach of she voice , and could return soon enough to prevent any mischief . he have moreover declare to the villain , that if he attempt the least insult , he would be himself immediately the executioner of vengeance on he . but unluckily forget , that though the hand of be tie , he leg be at liberty ; nor do he lay the least injunction on the prisoner that he should not make what use of these he please . therefore have give no parole of that kind , think he might without any breach of honour depart ; not be oblige , as he imagine , by any rule , to wait for a formal discharge . he therefore take up he leg , which be at liberty , and walk off through the wood , which favour he retreat ; nor do the woman , whose eye be perhaps rather turn toward she deliverer , once think of he escape , or give herself any concern or trouble to prevent it . therefore , at he return , find the woman alone . he would have spend some time in searching for , but she would not permit he ; earnestly entreat that he would accompany she to the town whither they have be direct . " as to the fellow 's escape , " say she , " it give I no uneasiness ; for philosophy and both preach up forgiveness of injury . but for you , sir , I be concerned at the trouble I give you ; nay , indeed , my nakedness may well make I asham to look you in the face ; and if it be not for the sake of you protection , I should wish to go alone . " offer she he coat ; but , I know not for what reason , she absolutely refuse the most earnest solicitation to accept it . he then beg she to forget both the cause of she confusion . " with regard to the former , " say he , " I have do no more than my duty in protect you ; and as for the latter , I will entirely remove it , by walking before you all the way ; for I would not have my eye offend you , and I could not answer for my power of resist the attractive charms of so much beauty . " thus we heroe and the redeem lady walk in the same manner as and march heretofore ; but though I can not believe that be designedly temp by he fair one to look behind he , yet as she frequently want he assistance to help she over stile , and have besides many trip and other accident , he be often obliged to turn about . however , he have better fortune than what attend poor , for he bring he companion , or rather follower , safe into the famious town of . chapter iii . the arrival of with he lady at the inn ; with a very full description of the battle of . though the reader , we doubt not , be very eager to know who this lady be , and how she fall into the hand of , we must beg he to suspend he curiosity for a short time , as we be oblige , for some very good reason which hereafter perhaps he may guess , to delay he satisfaction a little longer . and he fair companion no sooner enter the town , than they go directly to that inn which in they eye present the fairest appearance to the street . here , have order a servant to show a room above stair , be ascend , when the dishevelled fair , hastily follow , be laid hold on by the master of the house , who cry , " , where be that beggar wench go ? stay below stair , I desire you . " but at that instant thunder from above , " let the lady come up , " in so authoritative a voice , that the good man instantly withdraw he hand , and the lady make the best of she way to the chamber . here wish she joy of she safe arrival , and then depart , in order , as he promise , to send the landlady up with some cloath . the poor woman thank he heartily for all he kindness , and say , she hope she should see he again soon , to thank he a thousand time more . during this short
short conversation , she cover she white bosom as well as she could possibly with she arm ; for could not avoid steal a sly peep or two , though he take all imaginable care to avoid give any offence . we traveller have happen to take up they residence at a house of exceed good repute , whither irish lady of strict virtue , and many northern lass of the same predicament , be accustom to resort in they way to . the landlady therefore would by no means have admit any conversation of a disreputable kind to pass under she roof . indeed , so foul and contagious be all such proceedings , that they contaminate the very innocent scene where they be commit , and give the name of a bad house , or of a house of ill repute , to all those where they be suffer to be carry on . not that I would intimate that such strict chastity as be preserve in the temple of can possibly be maintain at a public inn . my good landlady do not hope for such a blessing , nor would any of the ladie I have speak of , or indeed any other of the most rigid note , have expect or insist on any such thing . but to exclude all vulgar concubinage , and to drive all whore in rag from within the wall , be within the power of every one . this my landlady very strictly adhere to , and this she virtuous guest , who do not travel in rag , would very reasonably have expect of she . now it require no very blameable degree of suspicion to imagine that and he rag companion have certain purpose in they intention , which , though tolerate in some country , connive at in other , and practise in all , be however as expressly forbidden as murder , or any other horrid vice , by that religion which be universally believe in those country . the landlady , therefore , have no sooner receive a intimation of the entrance of the above -said person than she begin to meditate the most expeditious means for they expulsion . in order to this , she have provide herself with a long and deadly instrument , with which , in time of peace , the chambermaid be will not to demolish the labour of the industrious spider . in vulgar phrase , she have take up the broomstick , and be just about to sally from the kitchen , when accost she with a demand of a gown and other vestment , to cover the half - naked woman upstairs . nothing can be more provoke to the human temper , nor more dangerous to that cardinal virtue , patience , than solicitation of extraordinary office of kindness on behalf of those very person with whom we be highly incense . for this reason Shakespear hath artfully introduce he Desdemona solicite favour for of she husband , as the means of inflaming , not only he jealousy , but he rage , to the highest pitch of madness ; and we find the unfortunate Moor less able to command he passion on this occasion , than even when he beheld he value present to he wife in the hand of he suppose rival . in fact , we regard these effort as insult on we understanding , and to such the pride of man be very difficultly bring to submit . my landlady , though a very good - tempered woman , have , I suppose , some of this pride in she composition , for have scarce end he request , when she fall upon he with a certain weapon , which , though it be neither long , nor sharp , nor hard , nor indeed threaten from its appearance with either death or wound , hath be however hold in great dread and abhorrence by many wise man -- nay , by many brave one ; insomuch , that some who have da to look into the mouth of a load cannon , have not da to look into a mouth where this weapon be brandish ; and rather than run the hazard of its execution , have contente themselves with make a most pitiful and sneak figure in the eyes of all they acquaintance . to confess the truth , I be afraid be one of these ; for though he be attack and violently belaboure with the aforesaid weapon , he could not be provoke to make any resistance ; but in a most cowardly manner apply , with many entreaty , to he antagonist to desist from pursue she blow ; in plain , he only beg she with the utmost earnestness to hear he ; but before he could obtain he request , my landlord himself enter into the fray , and embrace that side of the cause which seem to stand very little in need of assistance . there be a sort of heroe who be suppose to be determine in they chusing or avoid a conflict by the character and behaviour of the person whom they be to engage . these be say to know they man , and , I believe , know he woman ; for though he have be so submissive to she , he be no sooner attack by she husband , than he demonstrate a immediate spirit of resentment , and enjoin he silence under a very severe penalty ; no less than that , I think , of be convert into fuel for he own fire . the husband , with great indignation , but with a mixture of pity , answer , " you must pray first to be make able . I believe I be a better man than yourself ; ay , every way , that I
I be ; " and presently proceed to discharge half - a - dozen whore at the lady above stair , the last of which have scarce issue from he lip , when a swing blow from the cudgel that carry in he hand assault he over the shoulders . it be a question whether the landlord or the landlady be the most expeditious in return this blow . my landlord , whose hand be empty , fall to with he fist , and the good wife , uplift she broom and aim at the head of , have probably put a immediate end to the fray , and to likewise , have not the descent of this broom be prevent -- not by the miraculous intervention of any heathan deity , but by a very natural though fortunate accident , viz. , by the arrival of ; who enter the house at that instant ( for fear have cause he to run every step from the hill ) , and who , see the danger which threaten he master or companion ( which you chuse to call he ) , prevent so sad a catastrophe , by catche hold of the landlady 's arm , as it be brandish aloft in the air . the landlady soon perceive the impediment which prevent she blow ; and be unable to rescue she arm from the hand of , she let fall the broom ; and then leave to the discipline of she husband , she fall with the utmost fury on that poor fellow , who have already give some intimation of himself , by crying , " Zounds ! do you intend to kill my friend ? " Partridge , though not much addicte to battle , would not however stand still when he friend be attack ; nor be he much displease with that part of the combat which fall to he share ; he therefore return my landlady 's blow as soon as he receive they : and now the fight be obstinately maintain on all part , and it seem doubtful to which side Fortune would incline , when the naked lady , who have listen at the top of the stair to the dialogue which proceed the engagement , descende suddenly from above , and without weigh the unfair inequality of two to one , fall upon the poor woman who be box with ; nor do that great champion desist , but rather redouble he fury , when he find fresh succour be arrive to he assistance . victory must now have fall to the side of the traveller ( for the bravest troops must yield to number ) have not Susan the chambermaid come luckily to support she mistress . this be as two - hande a wench ( accord to the phrase ) as any in the country , and would , I believe , have beat the famed herself , or any of she subject Amazons ; for she form be robust and man - like , and every way make for such encounter . as she hand and arm be form to give blow with great mischief to a enemy , so be she face as well contrive to receive blow without any great injury to herself , she nose be already flat to she face ; she lip be so large , that no swelling could be perceive in they , and moreover they be so hard , that a fist could hardly make any impression on they . Lastly , she cheek - bone stand out , as if nature have intend they for two bastion to defend she eye in those encounter for which she see so well calculate , and to which she be most wonderfully well inclin . this fair creature enter the field of battle , immediately file to that we where she mistress maintain so unequal a fight with one of either sex . here she presently challenge Partridge to single combat . he accept the challenge , and a most desperate fight begin between they . now the dog of war be let loose , begin to lick they bloody lip ; now victory , with golden wing , hang hover in the air ; now , take she scale from she shelf , begin to weigh the fate of , he female companion , and , against the landlord , he wife , and maid ; all which hang in exact balance before she ; when a good - natured accident put suddenly a end to the bloody fray , with which half of the combatant have already sufficiently feast . this accident be the arrival of a coach and four ; upon which my landlord and landlady immediately desiste from fighting , and at they entreaty obtain the same favour of they antagonist : but be not so kind to ; for that Amazonian fair have overthrown and bestrid she enemy , be now cuff he lustily with both she hand , without any regard to he request of a cessation of arm , or to those loud exclamation of murder which he roar forth . no sooner , however , have quit the landlord , than he fly to the rescue of he defeat companion , from whom he with much difficulty draw off the enrage chambermaid : but be not immediately sensible of he deliverance , for he still lay flat on the floor , guard he face with he hand ; nor do he cease roar till have force he to look up , and to perceive that the battle be at a end . the landlord , who have no visible hurt , and the landlady , hide she well - scratch face with she handkerchief , run both hastily to the door to attend the coach , from which a young lady and she maid now
now alight . these the landlady presently usher into that room where have at first deposit he fair prize , as it be the best apartment in the house . Hither they be oblige to pass through the field of battle , which they do with the utmost haste , cover they face with they handkerchief , as desirous to avoid the notice of any one . indeed they caution be quite unnecessary ; for the poor unfortunate , the fatal cause of all the bloodshed , be entirely take up in endeavouring to conceal she own face , and be no less occupied in rescue from the fury of ; which be happily effect , the poor fellow immediately depart to the pump to wash he face , and to stop that bloody torrent which have plentifully set a - flow from he nostril . chapter iv . in which the arrival of a man of war put a final end to hostility , and cause the conclusion of a firm and last peace between all party . a serjeant and a file of musqueteer , with a deserter in they custody , arrive about this time . the serjeant presently enquire for the principal magistrate of the town , and be inform by my landlord , that he himself be vest in that office . he then demand he billet , together with a mug of beer , and complain it be cold , spread himself before the kitchen fire . be at this time comforte the poor distressed lady , who sit down at a table in the kitchen , and lean she head upon she arm , be bemoan she misfortune ; but lest my fair reader should be in pain concern a particular circumstance , I think proper here to acquaint they , that before she have quit the room above stair , she have so well cover herself with a pillowbeer which she there find , that she regard to decency be not in the least violate by the presence of so many man as be now in the room . one of the soldier now go up to the serjeant , and whisper something in he ear ; upon which he stedfastly fix he eye on the lady , and have look at she for near a minute , he come up to she , say , " I ask pardon , madam ; but I be certain I be not deceive ; you can be no other person than 's lady ? " the poor woman , who in she present distress have very little regard the face of any person present , no sooner look at the serjeant than she presently recollect he , and call he by he name , answer , " that she be indeed the unhappy person he imagine she to be ; " but add , " I wonder any one should know I in this disguise . " to which the serjeant reply , " he be very much surprized to see she ladyship in such a dress , and be afraid some accident have happene to she . " -- " a accident hath happene to I , indeed , " say she , " and I be highly oblige to this gentleman " ( point to ) " that it be not a fatal one , or that I be now live to mention it . " --" whatever the gentleman hath do , " cry the serjeant , " I be sure the captain will make he amend for it ; and if I can be of any service , you ladyship may command I , and I shall think myself very happy to have it in my power to serve you ladyship ; and so indeed may any one , for I know the captain will well reward they for it . " the landlady , who hear from the stair all that past between the serjeant and , come hastily down , and run directly up to she , begin to ask pardon for the offence she have commit , begge that all might be impute to ignorance of she quality : for , " ! madam , " say she , " how should I have imagine that a lady of you fashion would appear in such a dress ? I be sure , madam , if I have once suspect that you ladyship be you ladyship , I would sooner have burnt my tongue out , than have say what I have say ; and I hope you ladyship will accept of a gown , till you can get you own cloath . " " Prithee , woman , " say , " cease you impertinence : how can you imagine I should concern myself about anything which come from the lip of such low creature as yourself ? but I be surprize at you assurance in think , after what be past , that I will condescmend to put on any of you dirty thing . I would have you know , creature , I have a spirit above that . " here interfere , and beg Mrs Waters to forgive the landlady , and to accept she gown : " for I must confess , " cry he , " we appearance be a little suspicious when first we come in ; and I be well assure all this good woman do be , as she profess , out of regard to the reputation of she house . " " yes , upon my truly be it , " say she : " the gentleman speak very much like a gentleman , and I see very plainly be so ; and to be certain the house be well kny to be a house of as good reputation as any on the road , and though I say
say it , be frequent by gentry of the best quality , both irish and . I defy anybody to say black be my eye , for that matter . and , as I be say , if I have know you ladyship to be you ladyship , I would as soon have burn my finger as have affront you ladyship ; but truly where gentry come and spend they money , I be not willing that they should be scandalize by a set of poor shabby vermin , that , wherever they go , leave more lice than money behind they ; such folk never raise my compassion , for to be certain it be foolish to have any for they ; and if we justice do as they ought , they would be all whipt out of the kingdom , for to be certain it be what be most fitting for they . but as for you ladyship , I be heartily sorry you ladyship hath have a misfortune , and if you ladyship will do I the honour to wear my cloath till you can get some of you ladyship 's own , to be certain the best I have be at you ladyship 's service . " whether cold , shame , or the persuasion of prevail most on , I will not determine , but she suffer herself to be pacify by this speech of my landlady , and retire with that good woman , in order to apparel herself in a decent manner . my landlord be likewise begin he oration to , but be presently interrupt by that generous youth , who shook he heartily by the hand , and assure he of entire forgiveness , say , " if you be satisfied , my worthy friend , I promise you I be ; " and indeed , in one sense , the landlord have the better reason to be satisfied ; for he have receive a bellyfull of drubbing , whereas have scarce feel a single blow . , who have be all this time wash he bloody nose at the pump , return into the kitchen at the instant when he master and the landlord be shak hand with each other . as he be of a peaceable disposition , he be pleased with those symptom of reconciliation ; and though he face bear some mark of 's fist , and many more of she nails , he rather choose to be contente with he fortune in the last battle than to endeavou at bettere it in another . the heroic be likewise well contente with she victory , though it have cost she a black eye , which have give she at the first onset . between these two , therefore , a be struck , and those hand which have be the instrument of war become now the mediator of peace . matter be thus restore to a perfect calm ; at which the serjeant , though it may seem so contrary to the principle of he profession , testify he approbation . " why now , that be friendly , " say he ; " d -- and I , I hate to see two people bear ill - will to one another after they have have a tussel . the only way when friend quarrel be to see it out fairly in a friendly manner , as a man may call it , either with a fist , or sword , or pistol , accord as they like , and then let it be all over ; for my own part , -- and I if ever I love my friend better than when I be fight with he ! to bear malice be more like a than a . " he then propose a libation as a necessary part of the ceremony at all treaty of this kind . perhaps the reader may here conclude that he be well verse in antient history ; but this , though highly probable , as he cite no authority to support the custom , I will not affirm with any confidence . most likely indeed it be , that he foun he opinion on very good authority , since he confirm it with many violent oath . no sooner hear the proposal than , immediately agree with the learn serjeant , he order a bowl , or rather a large mug , fill with the liquor use on these occasion , to be bring in , and then begin the ceremony himself . he place he right hand in that of the landlord , and , seize the bowl with he left , uttere the usual word , and then make he libation . after which , the same be observ by all present . indeed , there be very little need of be particular in describe the whole form , as it differ so little from those libation of which so much be record in antient author and they modern transcriber . the principal difference lay in two instance ; for , first , the present company pour the liquor only down they throat ; and , secondly , the serjeant , who officiate as priest , drank the last ; but he preserve , I believe , the antient form , in swallow much the largest dratch of the whole company , and in be the only person present who contribute nothing towards the libation besides he good office in assisting at the performance . the good people now range themselves round the kitchen fire , where good humour seem to maintain a absolute dominion ; and not only forget he shameful defeat , but convert hunger into thirst , and soon become extremely facetious . we must however quit this agreeable assembly for a while , and attend to 's apartment , where the dinner which he
he have be now on the table . indeed , it take no long time in preparing , have be all drest three day before , and require nothing more from the cook than to warm it over again . v. a apology for all heroe who have good stomach , with a description of a battle of the amorous kind . Heroe , notwithstand the high idea which , by the means of flatterer , they may entertain of themselves , or the world may conceive of they , have certainly more of mortal than divine about they . however elevate they mind may be , they body at least ( which be much the major part of most ) be liable to the worst infirmity , and subject to the vilest office of human nature . among these latter , the act of eat , which hath by several wise man be consider as extremely mean and derogatory from the philosophic dignity , must be in some measure perform by the greatest prince , heroe , or philosopher upon earth ; nay , sometimes nature hath be so frolicsome as to exact of these dignify character a much more exorbitant share of this office than she hath oblige those of the lowest order to perform . to say the truth , as no know inhabitant of this globe be really more than man , so none need be asham of submit to what the necessity of man demand ; but when those great personage I have just mention condescend to aim at confining such low office to themselves -- as when , by hoarding or destroy , they seem desirous to prevent any other from eating -- then they surely become very low and despicable . now , after this short preface , we think it no disparagement to we heroe to mention the immoderate ardour with which he lay about he at this season . indeed , it may be doubt whether Ulyss , who by the way seem to have have the best stomach of all the heroe in that eat poem of the , ever make a better meal . three pound at least of that flesh which formerly have contribute to the composition of a ox be now honoure with become part of the individual . this particular we think ourselves oblige to mention , as it may account for we heroe 's temporary neglect of he fair companion , who eat but very little , and be indeed employ in consideration of a very different nature , which pass unobserved by , till he have entirely satisfied that appetite which a fast of twenty - four hour have procure he ; but he dinner be no sooner end than he attention to other matter revive ; with these matter therefore we shall now proceed to acquaint the reader . , of whose personal accomplishment we have hithertoo say very little , be , in reality , one of the handsomest young fellow in the world . he face , besides be the picture of health , have in it the most apparent mark of sweetness and good - nature . these quality be indeed so characteristical in he countenance , that , while the spirit and sensibility in he eyes , though they must have be perceive by a accurate observer , might have escape the notice of the less discerning , so strongly be this good - nature pain in he look , that it be remark by almost every one who see he . it be , perhaps , as much owe to this as to a very fine complexion that he face have a delicacy in it almost inexpressible , and which might have give he a air rather too effeminate , have it not be join to a most masculine person and mien : which latter have as much in they of the Hercule as the former had of the Adonis . he be besides active , genteel , gay , and good - humour ; and have a flow of animal spirit which enliven every conversation where he be present . when the reader hath duly reflect on these many charms which all centere in we heroe , and consider at the same time the fresh obligation which Mrs Waters have to he , it will be a more of prudery than candour to entertain a bad opinion of she because she conceive a very good opinion of he . but , whatever censure may be pass upon she , it be my business to relate matter of fact with veracity . Waters have , in truth , not only a good opinion of we heroe , but a very great affection for he . to speak out boldly at once , she be in love , accord to the present universally - receive sense of that phrase , by which love be apply indiscriminately to the desirable object of all we passion , appetite , and sense , and be understand to be that preference which we give to one kind of food rather than to another . but though the love to these several objects may possibly be one and the same in all case , its operation however must be allow to be different ; for , how much soever we may be in love with a excellent surloin of beef , or bottle of ; with a damask rose , or ; yet do we never smile , nor ogle , nor dress , nor flatter , nor endeavou by any other art or trick to gain the affection of the say beef , &c . sigh indeed we sometimes may ; but it be generally in the absence , not in the presence , of the beloved object . for otherwise we might possibly complain of they ingratitude and deafness , with the same
same reason as Pasiphae doth of she bull , whom she endeavoure to engage by all the coquetry practise with good success in the drawing - room on the much more sensible as well as tender heart of the fine gentleman there . the contrary happen in that love which operate between person of the same species , but of different sex . here we be no sooner in love than it become we principal care to engage the affection of the object belove . for what other purpose indeed be we youth instruct in all the art of render themselves agreeable ? if it be not with a view to this love , I question whether any of those trade which deal in set off and adorn the human person would procure a livelihood . Nay , those great polisher of we manners , who be by some think to teach what principally distinguish we from the brute creation , even dance - master themselves , might possibly find no place in society . in short , all the graces which young lady and young gentleman too learn from other , and the many improvement which , by the help of a look - glass , they add of they own , be in reality those very _spicula et face amoris_ so often mention by ; or , as they be sometimes call in we own language , the whole artillery of love . now and we heroe have no sooner sit down together than the former begin to play this artillery upon the latter . but here , as we be about to attempt a description hitherto unassayed either in prose or verse , we think proper to invoke the assistance of certain arial being , who will , we doubt not , come kindly to we aid on this occasion . " say then , ye Graces ! you that inhabit the heavenly mansion of 's countenance ; for you be truly divine , be always in she presence , and well know all the art of charming ; say , what be the weapon now use to captivate the heart of . " " first , from two lovely blue eye , whose bright orb flash lightning at they discharge , fly forth two point ogles ; but , happily for we heroe , hit only a vast piece of beef which he be then convey into he plate , and harmless spend they force . the fair warrior perceive they miscarriage , and immediately from she fair bosom draw forth a deadly sigh . a sigh which none could have hear unmoved , and which be sufficient at once to have sweep off a dozen beaus ; so soft , so sweet , so tender , that the insinuating air must have find it be subtle way to the heart of we heroe , have it not luckily be drive from he ear by the coarse bubbling of some bottle ale , which at that time he be pour forth . many other weapon do she assay ; but the god of eat ( if there be any such deity , for I do not confidently assert it ) preserve he votary ; or perhaps it may not be _dignus vindice nodus , and the present security of may be account for by natural means ; for as love frequently preserve from the attack of hunger , so may hunger possibly , in some case , defend we against love . " the fair one , enrage at she frequent disappointment , determine on a short cessation of arm . which interval she employ in make ready every engine of amorous warfare for the renewing of the attack when dinner should be over . " no sooner then be the cloth remove than she again begin she operation . first , have plan she right eye sidewise against , she shoot from its corner a most penetrating glance ; which , though great part of its force be spend before it reach we heroe , do not vent itself absolutely without effect . this the fair one perceive , hastily withdraw she eye , and level they downward , as if she be concerned for what she have do ; though by this mean she design only to draw he from he guard , and indeed to open he eye , through which she intend to surprize he heart . and now , gently lift up those two bright orb which have already begin to make a impression on poor , she discharge a volley of small charms at once from she whole countenance in a smile . not a smile of mirth , nor of joy ; but a smile of affection , which most lady have always ready at they command , and which serve they to show at once they good - humour , they pretty dimple , and they white tooth . " this smile we heroe receive full in he eye , and be immediately stagger with its force . he then begin to see the design of the enemy , and indeed to feel they success . a parley now be set on foot between the party ; during which the artful fair so slily and imperceptibly carry on she attack , that she have almost subdue the heart of we heroe before she again repair to act of hostility . to confess the truth , I be afraid maintain a kind of defence , and treacherously deliver up the garrison , without duly weigh he allegiance to the fair . in short , no sooner have the amorous parley ended and the lady have unmask the royal battery , by carelessly let she handkerchief drop from she neck , than the heart of be entirely take , and the fair conqueror enjoy the usual fruit of she victory .
. " here the think proper to end they description , and here we think proper to end the chapter . chapter vi . a friendly conversation in the kitchen , which have a very common , though not very friendly , conclusion . while we lover be entertain themselves in the manner which be partly describe in the forego chapter , they be likewise furnish out a entertainment for they good friend in the kitchen . and this in a double sense , by afford they matter for they conversation , and , at the same time , drink to enlive they spirits . there be now assemble round the kitchen fire , besides my landlord and landlady , who occasionally go backward and forward , , the serjeant , and the coachman who drive the young lady and she may . have acquaint the company with what he have lear nt from the man of the concern the situation in which Waters have be find by , the serjeant proceed to that part of she history which be know to he . he say she be the wife of , who be a captain in they regiment , and have often be with he at quarter . " some folk , " say he , " use indeed to doubt whether they be lawfully marry in a church or no . but , for my part , that be no business of mine : I must own , if I be put to my corporal oath , I believe she be little better than one of we ; and I fancy the captain may go to heaven when the sun shine upon a rainy day . but if he do , that be neither here nor there ; for he will not want company . and the lady , to give the he due , be a very good sort of lady , and love the cloth , and be always desirous to do strict justice to it ; for she hath begge off many a poor soldier , and , by she good - will , would never have any of they punish . but yet , to be sure , and she be very well acquaint together at we last quarter ; that be the very right and truth of the matter . but the captain he know nothing about it ; and as long as there be enough for he too , what do it signify ? he love she not a bit the worse , and I be certain would run any man through the body that be to abuse she ; therefore I will not abuse she , for my part . I only repeat what other folk say ; and , to be certain , what everybody say , there must be some truth in . " -- " ay , ay , a great deal of truth , I warrant you , " cry ; " _Verita odium parit_ " -- " all a parcel of scandalous stuff , " answer the mistress of the house . " I be sure , now she be drest , she look like a very good sort of lady , and she behave herself like one ; for she give I a guinea for the use of my cloath . " --" a very good lady indeed ! " cry the landlord ; " and if you have not be a little too hasty , you would not have quarrell with she as you do at first . " --" you need mention that with my truly ! " answer she : " if it have not be for you nonsense , nothing have happen . you must be meddl with what do not belong to you , and throw in you fool 's discourse . " -- " well , well , " answer he ; " what be past can not be mende , so there be a end of the matter . " --" yes , " cry she , " for this once ; but will it be mende ever the more hereafter ? this be not the first time I have suffer for you numscull 's pate . I wish you would always hold you tongue in the house , and meddle only in matter without door , which concern you . do not you remember what happen about seven year ago ? " --" Nay , my dear , " return he , " do not rip up old story . come , come , all ' well , and I be sorry for what I have do . " the landlady be go to reply , but be prevent by the peace - make serjeant , sorely to the displeasure of , who be a great lover of what be call fun , and a great promoter of those harmless quarrel which tend rather to the production of comical than tragical incidents . the serjeant ask whither he and he master be travell ? " none of you magister , " answer ; " I be no man 's servant , I assure you ; for , though I have have misfortunes in the world , I write gentleman after my name ; and , as poor and simple as I may appear now , I have teach grammar - school in my time ; _se hei mihi ! non sum quod fui _. " -- " no offence , I hope , sir , " say the serjeant ; " where , then , if I may venture to be so bold , may you and you friend be travel ? " --" you have now denominate we right , " say . " _Amici sumus ._ and I promise you my friend be one of the greatest gentleman in the kingdom " ( at which word
word both landlord and landlady prick up they ear ) . " he be the heir of . " -- " what , the squire who doth so much good all over the country ? " cry my landlady . " even he , " answer .--" then I warrant , " say she , " he will have a swing great estate hereafter . " -- " most certainly , " answer .--" well , " reply the landlady , " I think the first moment I see he he look like a good sort of gentleman ; but my husband here , to be sure , be wiser than anybody . " --" I own , my dear , " cry he , " it be a mistake . " --" a mistake , indeed ! " answer she ; " but when do you ever know I to make such mistake ? " --" but how come it , sir , " cry the landlord , " that such a great gentleman walk about the country afoot ? " --" I do not know , " return ; " great gentleman have humour sometimes . he hath now a dozen horse and servant at ; and nothing would serve he , but last night , it be very hot weather , he must cool himself with a walk to yon high hill , whither I likewise walk with he to bear he company ; but if ever you catch I there again : for I be never so frightened in all my life . we meet with the strangest man there . " --" I will be hang , " cry the landlord , " if it be not the man of the , as they call he ; if indeed he be a man ; but I know several people who believe it be the devil that live there . " -- " Nay , nay , like enough , " say ; " and now you put I in the head of it , I verily and sincerely believe it be the devil , though I could not perceive he cloven foot : but perhaps he might have the power give he to hide that , since evil spirit can appear in what shape they please . " -- " and pray , sir , " say the serjeant , " no offence , I hope ; but pray what sort of a gentleman be the devil ? for I have hear some of we officer say there be no such person ; and that it be only a trick of the parson , to prevent they be break ; for , if it be publickly know that there be no devil , the parson would be of no more use than we be in time of peace . " --" Those officer , " say , " be very great scholar , I suppose . " -- " not much of schollard neither , " answer the serjeant ; " they have not half you learning , sir , I believe ; and , to be sure , I think there must be a , notwithstand what they say , though one of they be a captain ; for methotch , think I to myself , if there be no devil , how can wick people be send to he ? and I have read all that upon a book . " -- " some of you officer , " quoth the landlord , " will find there be a devil , to they shame , I believe . I do not question but he will pay off some old score upon my account . here be one quarter upon I half a year , who have the conscience to take up one of my best bed , though he hardly spend a shilling a day in the house , and suffer he man to roast cabbage at the kitchen fire , because I would not give they a dinner on a . every good must desire there should be a devil for the punishment of such wretch . " -- " Harkee , landlord , " say the serjeant , " do not abuse the cloth , for I will not take it . " --" d -- and the cloth ! " answer the landlord , " I have suffer enough by they . " -- " bear witness , gentlemen , " say the serjeant , " he curse the king , and that be high treason . " --" I curse the king ! you villain , " say the landlord . " yes , you do , " cry the serjeant ; " you curse the cloth , and that be curse the king . it be all one and the same ; for every man who curse the cloth would curse the king if he durst ; so for matter of ' that , it be all one and the same thing . " --" excuse I there , , " quoth Partridge , " that be a _non sequitur _. " -- " none of you outlandish linguo , " answer the serjeant , leap from he seat ; " I will not sit still and hear the cloth abuse . " -- " you mistake I , friend , " cry . " I do not mean to abuse the cloth ; I only say you conclusion be a _non sequitur_. [ * ] " -- " you be another , " cry the serjeant , " a you come to that . no more a _sequitur_ than yourself . you be a pack of rascal , and I will prove it ; for I will fight the best man of you all for twenty pound . " this challenge effectually silence , whose stomach for drubb
drubb do not so soon return after the hearty meal which he have lately be treat with ; but the coachman , whose bone be less sore , and whose appetite for fighting be somewhat sharper , do not so easily brook the affront , of which he conceive some part at least fell to he share . he start therefore from he seat , and , advanc to the serjeant , swore he look on himself to be as good a man as any in the army , and offer to box for a guinea . the military man accept the combat , but refuse the wager ; upon which both immediately stript and engage , till the driver of horse be so well maul by the leader of man , that he be oblige to exhaust he small remainder of breath in begging for quarter . [ *] this word , which the serjeant unhappily mistook for a affront , be a term in logic , and mean that the conclusion do not follow from the premise . the young lady be now desirous to depart , and have give order for she coach to be prepare ; but all in vain , for the coachman be disable from perform he office for that evening . a antient heathen would perhaps have impute this disability to the god of drink , no less than to the god of war ; for , in reality , both the combatant have sacrifice as well to the former deity as to the latter . to speak plainly , they be both dead drunk , nor be Partridge in a much better situation . as for my landlord , drinking be he trade ; and the liquor have no more effect on he than it have on any other vessel in he house . the mistress of the inn , be summon to attend and he companion at they tea , give a full relation of the latter part of the forego scene ; and at the same time express great concern for the young lady , " who , " she say , " be under the utmost uneasiness at be prevent from pursue she journey . she be a sweet pretty creature , " add she , " and I be certain I have see she face before . I fancy she be in love , and run away from she friend . who know but some young gentleman or other may be expect she , with a heart as heavy as she own ? " fetch a heavy sigh at those word ; of which , though observe it , she take no notice while the landlady continue in the room ; but , after the departure of that good woman , she could not forbear give we heroe certain hint on she suspect some very dangerous rival in he affections . the aukward behaviour of on this occasion convince she of the truth , without he give she a direct answer to any of she question ; but she be not nice enough in she amour to be greatly concerned at the discovery . the beauty of highly charme she eye ; but as she could not see he heart , she give herself no concern about it . she could feast heartily at the table of love , without reflec that some other already have be , or hereafter might be , feast with the same repast . a sentiment which , if it deal but little in refinement , deal , however , much in substance ; and be less capricious , and perhaps less ill - natured and selfish , than the desire of those females who can be contente enough to abstain from the possession of they lover , provide they be sufficiently satisfied that no one else possess they . chapter vii . contain a fuller account of , and by what mean she come into that distressful situation from which she be rescue by . though hath by no means mix up a equal share either of curiosity or vanity in every human composition , there be perhaps no individual to whom she hath not allot such a proportion of both as require much art , and pain too , to subdue and keep under ;-- a conquest , however , absolutely necessary to every one who would in any degree deserve the character of wisdom or good breeding . as , therefore , might very justly be call a well - breed man , he have stifle all that curiosity which the extraordinary manner in which he have find Mrs Waters must be suppose to have occasion . he have , indeed , at first throw out some few hint to the lady ; but , when he perceive she industriously avoid any explanation , he be contente to remain in ignorance , the rather as he be not without suspicion that there be some circumstance which must have raise she blush , have she relate the whole truth . now since it be possible that some of we reader may not so easily acquiesce under the same ignorance , and as we be very desirous to satisfy they all , we have take uncommon pain to inform ourselves of the real fact , with the relation of which we shall conclude this book . this lady , then , have live some year with one , who be a captain in the same regiment to which belong . she past for that gentleman 's wife , and go by he name ; and yet , as the serjeant say , there be some doubt concern the reality of they marriage , which we shall not at present take upon we to resolve . , I be sorry to say it , have for some time contract a intimacy with the above
above -mentioned ensign , which do no great credit to she reputation . that she have a remarkable fondness for that young fellow be most certain ; but whether she indulge this to any very criminal length be not so extremely clear , unless we will suppose that woman never grant every favour to a man but one , without grant he that one also . the division of the regiment to which belonge have two day precede the march of that company to which be the ensign ; so that the former have reach the very day after the unfortunate re-encounter between and which we have before record . now , it have be agree between and the captain that she would accompany he in he march as far as , where they be to take they leave of each other , and she be thence to return to , where she be to stay till the end of the winter 's campaign against the rebel . with this agreement be make acquainted . to say the truth , the lady have make he a assignation at this very place , and promise to stay at till he division come thither ; with what view , and for what purpose , must be leave to the reader 's divination ; for , though we be oblige to relate fact , we be not oblige to do a violence to we nature by any comment to the disadvantage of the loveliest part of the creation . no sooner obtain a release from he captivity , as we have see , than he hast away to overtake ; which , as he be a very active nimble fellow , he do at the last - mentioned city , some few hour after have leave she . at he first arrival he make no scruple of acquaint she with the unfortunate accident ; which he make appear very unfortunate indeed , for he totally extract every particle of what could be call fault , at least in a court of honour , though he leave some circumstance which might be questionable in a court of law . women , to they glory be it speak , be more generally capable of that violent and apparently disinterested passion of love , which seek only the good of its object , than man . , therefore , be no sooner apprize of the danger to which she lover be expose , than she lose every consideration besides that of he safety ; and this be a matter equally agreeable to the gentleman , it become the immediate subject of debate between they . after much consultation on this matter , it be at length agree that the ensign should go across the country to , whence he might find some conveyance to one of the sea -port in Wales , and thence might make he escape abroad . in all which expedition declare she would bear he company ; and for which she be able to furnish he with money , a very material article to , she have then in she pocket three bank - note to the amount of  90 , besides some cash , and a diamond ring of pretty considerable value on she finger . all which she , with the utmost confidence , reveal to this wicked man , little suspect she should by these means inspire he with a design of rob she . now , as they must , by take horse from , have furnish any pursuer with the means of hereafter discover they route , the ensign propose , and the lady presently agree , to make they first stage on foot ; for which purpose the hardness of the frost be very seasonable . the main part of the lady 's baggage be already at , and she have nothing with she at present besides a very small quantity of linen , which the gallant undertook to carry in he own pocket . all thing , therefore , be settle in the evening , they arise early the next morning , and at five o'clock depart from , it be then above two hour before day , but the moon , which be then at the full , give they all the light she be capable of affording . be not of that delicate race of woman who be oblige to the invention of vehicle for the capacity of remove themselves from one place to another , and with whom consequently a coach be reckon among the necessary of life . she limb be indeed full of strength and agility , and , as she mind be no less animated with spirit , she be perfectly able to keep pace with she nimble lover . have travel on for some mile in a high road , which say he be inform lead to , they come at the break of day to the side of a large wood , where he suddenly stop , and , affect to meditate a moment with himself , express some apprehension from travel any longer in so public a way . upon which he easily persuade he fair companion to strike with he into a path which seem to lead directly through the wood , and which at length bring they both to the bottom of . whether the execrable scheme which he now attempt to execute be the effect of previous deliberation , or whether it now first come into he head , I can not determine . but be arrive in this lonely place , where it be very improbable he should meet with any interruption , he suddenly slipp he garter from he leg , and , lay violent hand on the poor woman , endeavoure to perpetrate that dreadful and detestable fact which we have before commemorate , and which the providential appearance of
of do so fortunately prevent . happy be it for Waters that she be not of the weakest order of female ; for no sooner do she perceive , by he tying a knot in he garter , and by he declaration , what he hellish intention were , than she stand stoutly to she defence , and so strongly struggle with she enemy , scream all the while for assistance , that she delay the execution of the villain 's purpose several minute , by which mean come to she relief at that very instant when she strength fail and she be totally overpowered , and deliver she from the ruffian 's hand , with no other loss than that of she cloath , which be tear from she back , and of the diamond ring , which during the contention either drop from she finger , or be wrench from it by . thus , reader , we have give thee the fruit of a very painful enquiry which for thy satisfaction we have make into this matter . and here we have open to thee a scene of folly as well as villany , which we could scarce have believe a human creature capable of be guilty of , have we not remember that this fellow be at that time firmly persuade that he have already commit a murder , and have forfeit he life to the law . as he conclude therefore that he only safety lay in flight , he think the possessing himself of this poor woman 's money and ring would make he amend for the additional burthan he be to lay on he conscience . and here , reader , we must strictly caution thee that thou dost not take any occasion , from the misbehaviour of such a wretch as this , to reflect on so worthy and honourable a body of man as be the officer of we army in general . thou will be pleased to consider that this fellow , as we have already inform thee , have neither the birth nor education of a gentleman , nor be a proper person to be enrol among the number of such . if , therefore , he baseness can justly reflect on any besides himself , it must be only on those who give he he commission . . in which the forward . I . contain instruction very necessary to be peruse by modern critic . , it be impossible we should know what sort of person thou will be ; for , perhaps , thou may 'st be as learn in human nature as himself be , and , perhaps , thou may 'st be no wiser than some of he editor . now , lest this latter should be the case , we think proper , before we go any farther together , to give thee a few wholesome admonition ; that thou may 'st not as grossly misunderstand and misrepresent we , as some of the say editor have misunderstood and misrepresent they author . first , then , we warn thee not too hastily to condemn any of the incident in this we history as impertinent and foreign to we main design , because thou dost not immediately conceive in what manner such incident may conduce to that design . this work may , indeed , be consider as a great creation of we own ; and for a little reptile of a critic to presume to find fault with any of its part , without know the manner in which the whole be connect , and before he come to the final catastrophe , be a most presumptuous absurdity . the allusion and metaphor we have here make use of , we must acknowledge to be infinitely too great for we occasion ; but there be , indeed , no other , which be at all adequate to express the difference between a author of the first rate and a critic of the lowest . another caution we would give thee , my good reptile , be , that thou dost not find out too near a resemblance between certain character here introduce ; as , for instance , between the landlady who appear in the seventh book and she in the ninth . thou be to know , friend , that there be certain characteristic in which most individual of every profession and occupation agree . to be able to preserve these characteristic , and at the same time to diversify they operation , be one talent of a good writer . again , to mark the nice distinction between two person actuate by the same vice or folly be another ; and , as this last talent be find in very few writer , so be the true discernment of it find in as few reader ; though , I believe , the observation of this form a very principal pleasure in those who be capable of the discovery ; every person , for instance , can distinguish between and ; but to note the difference between and require a more exquisite judgment : for want of which , vulgar spectator of play very often do great injustice in the theatre ; where I have sometimes know a poet in danger of be convict as a thief , upon much worse evidence than the resemblance of hand hath be hold to be in the law . in reality , I apprehend every amorous widow on the stage would run the hazard of be condemn as a servile imitation of , but that happily very few of we play - house critic understand enough of to read . in the next place , we must admonish thee , my worthy friend ( for , perhaps , thy heart may be better than thy head ) , not to condemn a character as a
a bad one , because it be not perfectly a good one . if thou dost delight in these model of perfection , there be book enow write to gratify thy taste ; but , as we have not , in the course of we conversation , ever happen to meet with any such person , we have not choose to introduce any such here . to say the truth , I a little question whether mere man ever arrive at this consummate degree of excellence , as well as whether there hath ever exist a monster bad enough to verify that _---- nulla virtute redemptum a vitiis _---- [ *] [ *] whose vice be not allay with a single virtue in ; nor do I , indeed , conceive the good purpose serve by inserting character of such angelic perfection , or such diabolical depravity , in any work of invention ; since , from contemplating either , the mind of man be more likely to be overwhelm with sorrow and shame than to draw any good use from such pattern ; for in the former instance he may be both concerned and asham to see a pattern of excellence in he nature , which he may reasonably despair of ever arrive at ; and in contemplate the latter he may be no less affect with those uneasy sensation , at see the nature of which he be a partaker degrad into so odious and detestable a creature . in fact , if there be enough of goodness in a character to engage the admiration and affection of a well - dispose mind , though there should appear some of those little blemish _qua humana parum cavit natura_ , they will raise we compassion rather than we abhorrence . indeed , nothing can be of more moral use than the imperfection which be see in example of this kind ; since such form a kind of surprize , more apt to affect and dwell upon we minds than the fault of very vicious and wicked person . the foible and vex of man , in whom there be great mixture of good , become more glaring object from the virtue which contrast they and show they deformity ; and when we find such vice attend with they evil consequence to we favourite character , we be not only teach to shin they for we own sake , but to hate they for the mischief they have already bring on those we love . and now , my friend , have give you these few admonition , we will , if you please , once more set forward with we history . . contain the arrival of a irish gentleman , with very extraordinary adventur which ensue at the inn . now the little trembling hare , which the dread of all she numerous enemie , and chiefly of that cunning , cruel , carnivorous animal , man , have confine all the day to she lurking - place , sport wantonly o 'er the lawn ; now on some hollow tree the owl , shrill chorister of the night , hoot forth note which might charm the ear of some modern connoisseur in music ; now , in the imagination of the half - drunk clown , as he stagger through the churchyard , or rather charnelyard , to he home , fear paint the bloody hobgoblin ; now thief and ruffian be awake , and honest watchman fast asleep ; in plain , it be now midnight ; and the company at the inn , as well those who have be already mention in this history , as some other who arrive in the evening , be all in bed . only be now stirr , she be oblige to wash the kitchen before she retire to the arm of the fond expect hostler . in this posture be affair at the inn when a gentleman arrive there post . he immediately alight from he horse , and , come up to , enquire of she , in a very abrupt and confused manner , be almost out of breath with eagerness , whether there be any lady in the house ? the hour of night , and the behaviour of the man , who star very wildly all the time , a little surprized , so that she hesitat before she make any answer ; upon which the gentleman , with redouble eagerness , beg she to give he a true information , say , he have lose he wife , and be come in pursuit of she . " upon my shoul , " cry he , " I have be near catch she already in two or three place , if I have not find she go just as I come up with she . if she be in the house , do carry I up in the dark and show she to I ; and if she be go away before I , do tell I which way I shall go after she to meet she , and , upon my shoul , I will make you the richest poor woman in the nation . " he then pull out a handful of guinea , a sight which would have bribe person of much greater consequence than this poor wench to much worse purpose . , from the account she have receive of Waters , make not the least doubt but that she be the very identical stray whom the right owner pursue . as she conclude , therefore , with great appearance of reason , that she never could get money in a honester way than by restore a wife to she husband , she make no scruple of assure the gentleman that the lady he want be then in the house ; and be presently afterwards prevail upon ( by very liberal
liberal promise , and some earnest pay into she hand ) to conduct he to the bedchamber of Waters . it hath be a custom long establish in the polite world , and that upon very solid and substantial reason , that a husband shall never enter he wife 's apartment without first knock at the door . the many excellent use of this custom need scarce be hint to a reader who hath any knowledge of the world ; for by this mean the lady hath time to adjust herself , or to remove any disagreeable object out of the way ; for there be some situation in which nice and delicate woman would not be discover by they husband . to say the truth , there be several ceremony institute among the polished part of mankind , which , though they may , to coarser judgment , appear as matter of mere form , be find to have much of substance in they , by the more discerning ; and lucky would it have be have the custom above mention be observe by we gentleman in the present instance . , indeed , he do at the door , but not with one of those gentle rap which be usual on such occasion . on the contrary , when he find the door lock , he fly at it with such violence , that the lock immediately give way , the door burst open , and he fall headlong into the room . he have no sooner recover he leg than forth from the bed , upon he leg likewise , appear -- with shame and sorrow be we oblige to proceed -- we heroe himself , who , with a menacing voice , demand of the gentleman who he be , and what he mean by daring to burst open he chamber in that outrageous manner . the gentleman at first thought he have commit a mistake , and be go to ask pardon and retreat , when , on a sudden , as the moon shone very bright , he cast he eye on stay , gowns , petticoat , cap , ribbon , stocking , garter , shoe , clog , & c. , all which lay in a disorder manner on the floor . all these , operate on the natural jealousy of he temper , so enrage he , that he lose all power of speech ; and , without return any answer to , he endeavoure to approach the bed . immediately interpose , a fierce contention arise , which soon proceed to blow on both side . and now ( for we must confess she be in the same bed ) , being , I suppose , awaken from she sleep , and see two man fight in she bedchamber , begin to scream in the most violent manner , cry out murder ! robbery ! and more frequently rape ! which last , some , perhaps , may wonder she should mention , who do not consider that these word of exclamation be use by lady in a fright , as fa , la , la , ra , da , & c. , be in music , only as the vehicle of sound , and without any fix idea . next to the lady 's chamber be deposite the body of a irish gentleman who arrive too late at the inn to have be mention before . this gentleman be one of those whom the irish call a calabalaro , or cavalier . he be a younger brother of a good family , and , have no fortune at home , be obliged to look abroad in order to get one ; for which purpose he be proceed to the Bath , to try he luck with card and the woman . this young fellow lay in bed read one of 's novel ; for he have be instruct by a friend that he would find no more effectual method of recommend himself to the ladie than the improve he understanding , and fill he mind with good literature . he no sooner , therefore , hear the violent uproar in the next room , than he leapt from he bolster , and , take he sword in one hand , and the candle which burnt by he in the other , he go directly to 's chamber . if the sight of another man in he shirt at first add some shock to the decency of the lady , it make she presently amend by considerably abat she fear ; for no sooner have the calabalaro enter the room than he cry out , " , what the devil be the maning of this ? " upon which the other immediately answer , " o , ! I be rejoice you be here .-- this villain hath debauch my wife , and be get into bed with she . " -- " what wife ? " cry ; " do not I know very well , and do not I see that the lady , whom the gentleman who stand here in he shirt be lie in bed with , be none of she ? " , now perceive , as well by the glimpse he have of the lady , as by she voice , which might have be distinguished at a greater distance than he now stand from she , that he have make a very unfortunate mistake , begin to ask many pardon of the lady ; and then , turn to , he say , " I would have you take notice I do not ask you pardon , for you have bate I ; for which I be resolve to have you blood in the morning . " treat this menace with much contempt ; and answer , " indeed , , you may
may be asham of you own self , to disturb people at this time of night ; if all the people in the inn be not asleep , you would have awaken they as you have I . the gentleman have serve you very rightly . upon my conscience , though I have no wife , if you have treat she so , I would have cut you throat . " be so confound with he fear for he lady 's reputation , that he know neither what to say or do ; but the invention of woman be , as hath be observe , much readier than that of man . she recollect that there be a communication between she chamber and that of ; rely , therefore , on he honour and she own assurance , she answer , " I know not what you mean , villain ! I be wife to none of you . help ! rape ! ! rape ! " --And now , the landlady come into the room , fell upon she with the utmost virulence , say , " she think herself in a sober inn , and not in a bawdy - house ; but that a set of villain have break into she room , with a intent upon she honour , if not upon she life ; and both , she say , be equally dear to she . " the landlady now begin to roar as loudly as the poor woman in bed have do before . she cry , " she be undone , and that the reputation of she house , which be never blow upon before , be utterly destroy . " then , turn to the man , she cry , " what , in the 's name , be the reason of all this disturbance in the lady 's room ? " , hang down he head , repeat , " that he have commit a mistake , for which he heartily ask pardon , " and then retire with he countryman . , who be too ingenious to have miss the hint give he by he fair one , boldly assert , " that he have run to she assistance upon hear the door break open , with what design he could not conceive , unless of rob the lady ; which , if they intend , he say , he have the good fortune to prevent . " " I never have a robbery commit in my house since I have keep it , " cry the landlady ; " I would have you to know , sir , I harbour no highwayman here ; I scorn the word , thor I say it . none but honest , good gentlefolk , be welcome to my house ; and , I thank good luck , I have always have enow of such customer ; indeed as many as I could entertain . here hath be my lord - - , " and then she repeat over a catalogue of name and title , many of which we might , perhaps , be guilty of a breach of privilege by insert . , after much patience , at length interrupt she , by make a apology to , for have appear before she in he shirt , assure she " that nothing but a concern for she safety could have prevail on he to do it . " the reader may inform himself of she answer , and , indeed , of she whole behaviour to the end of the scene , by consider the situation which she affect , it be that of a modest lady , who be awaken out of she sleep by three strange man in she chamber . this be the part which she undertake to perform ; and , indeed , she execute it so well , that none of we theatrical actress could exceed she , in any of they performance , either on or off the stage . and hence , I think , we may very fairly draw a argument , to prove how extremely natural virtue be to the fair sex ; for , though there be not , perhaps , one in ten thousand who be capable of make a good actress , and even among these we rarely see two who be equally able to personate the same character , yet this of virtue they can all admirably well put on ; and as well those individual who have it not , as those who possess it , can all act it to the utmost degree of perfection . when the man be all depart , Waters , recover from she fear , recovere likewise from she anger , and speak in much gentler accent to the landlady , who do not so readily quit she concern for the reputation of the house , in favour of which she begin again to number the many great person who have sleep under she roof ; but the lady stopt she short , and have absolutely acquit she of have have any share in the past disturbance , beg to be leave to she repose , which , she say , she hope to enjoy unmolested during the remainder of the night . upon which the landlady , after much civility and many courtsy , take she leave . chapter iii . a dialogue between the landlady and Susan the chamber-maid , proper to be read by all inn-keeper and they servants ; with the arrival , and affable behaviour of a beautiful young lady ; which may teach person of condition how they may acquire the love of the whole world . the landlady , remember that have be the only person out of bed when the door be burst open , resort presently to she , to enquire into the
the first occasion of the disturbance , as well as who the strange gentleman be , and when and how he arrive . relate the whole story which the reader know already , varie the truth only in some circumstance , as she see convenient , and totally conceal the money which she have receive . but whereas she mistress have , in the preface to she enquiry , speak much in compassion for the fright which the lady have be in concern any intend depredation on she virtue , could not help endeavour to quiet the concern which she mistress seem to be under on that account , by swear heartily she see leap out from she bed . the landlady fall into a violent rage at these word . " a likely story , truly , " cry she , " that a woman should cry out , and endeavou to expose herself , if that be the case ! I desire to know what better proon any lady can give of she virtue than she cry out , which , I believe , twenty people can witness for she she do ? I beg , madam , you would spread no such scandal of any of my guest ; for it will not only reflect on they , but upon the house ; and I be sure no vagabonds , nor wick beggarly people , come here . " " well , " say , " then I must not believe my own eye . " " no , indeed , must you not always , " answer she mistress ; " I would not have believe my own eye against such good gentlefolk . I have not have a better supper order this half - year than they order last night ; and so easy and good - humoured be they , that they find no fault with my , which I sell they for champagne ; and to be sure it be as well taste and as wholesome as the best champagne in the kingdom , otherwise I would scorn to give it th'ey ; and they drank I two bottle . no , no , I will never believe any harm of such sober good sort of people . " be thus silence , she mistress proceed to other matters . " and so you tell I , " continue she , " that the strange gentleman come post , and there be a footman without with the horse ; why , then , he be certainly some of you great gentlefolk too . why do not you ask he whether he would have any supper ? I think he be in the other gentleman 's room ; go up and ask whether he call . perhaps he will order something when he find anybody stirr in the house to dress it . now do not commit any of you usual blunder , by tell he the fire 's out , and the fowl alive . and if he should order , do not blab out that we have none . the butcher , I know , kill a sheep just before I go to bed , and he never refuse to cut it up warm when I desire it . go , remember there be all sort of mutton and fowl ; go , open the door with , , 'ye call ? and if they say nothing , ask what he honou will be pleased to have for supper ? do not forget he honour . go ; if you do not mind all these matter better , you will never come to anything . " depart , and soon return with a account that the two gentleman be get both into the same bed . " two gentleman , " say the landlady , " in the same bed ! that be impossible ; they be two arrant scrub , I warrant they ; and I believe young guess right , that the fellow intend to rob she ladyship ; for , if he have break open the lady 's door with any of the wicked design of a gentleman , he would never have sneak away to another room to save the expense of a supper and a bed to himself . they be certainly thieve , and they search after a wife be nothing but a pretence . " in these censure my landlady do great injustice ; for he be really bear a gentleman , though not worth a groat ; and though , perhaps , he have some few blemish in he heart as well as in he head , yet be a sneaking or a niggardly fellow be not one of they . in reality , he be so generous a man , that , whereas he have receive a very handsome fortune with he wife , he have now spend every penny of it , except some little pittance which be settle upon she ; and , in order to possess himself of this , he have use she with such cruelty , that , together with he jealousy , which be of the bitterest kind , it have force the poor woman to run away from he . this gentleman then be well tire with he long journey from in one day , with which , and some good dry blow he have receive in the scuffle , he bone be so sore , that , add to the soreness of he mind , it have quite deprive he of any appetite for eating . and be now so violently disappointed in the woman whom , at the maid 's instance , he have mistaken for he wife , it never once enter into he head that she might nevertheless be in the house , though he have er in the first person he have
have attack . he therefore yield to the dissuasion of he friend from search any farther after she that night , and accept the kind offer of part of he bed . the footman and post -boy be in a different disposition . they be more ready to order than the landlady be to provide ; however , after be pretty well satisfi by they of the real truth of the case , and that be no thief , she be at length prevail on to set some cold meat before they , which they be devour with great greediness , when come into the kitchen . he have be first awak by the hurry which we have before see ; and while he be endeavour to compose himself again on he pillow , a screech - owl have give he such a serenade at he window , that he leapt in a most horrible affright from he bed , and , huddl on he cloath with great expedition , run down to the protection of the company , whom he hear talk below in the kitchen . he arrival detain my landlady from return to she rest ; for she be just about to leave the other two guest to the care of ; but the friend of young be not to be so neglected , especially as he call for a pint of wine to be mull . she immediately obey , by put the same quantity of perry to the fire ; for this readily answer to the name of every kind of wine . the irish footman be retire to bed , and the post -boy be go to follow ; but invite he to stay and partake of he wine , which the lad very thankfully accept . the schoolmaster be indeed afraid to return to be by himself ; and as he do not know how soon he might lose the company of my landlady , he be resolve to secure that of the boy , in whose presence he apprehend no danger from the devil or any of he adherent . and now arrive another post -boy at the gate ; upon which , be order out , return , introduce two young woman in riding habit , one of which be so very richly laced , that and the post -boy instantly start from they chair , and my landlady fall to she courtsy , and she ladyship , with great eagerness . the lady in the rich habit say , with a smile of great condescension , " if you will give I leave , madam , I will warm myself a few minute at you kitchen fire , for it be really very cold ; but I must insist on disturb no one from he seat . " this be speak on account of , who have retreat to the other end of the room , struck with the utmost awe and astonishment at the splendor of the lady 's dress . indeed , she have a much better title to respect than this ; for she be one of the most beautiful creature in the world . the lady earnestly desire Partridge to return to he seat ; but could not prevail . she then pull off she glove , and display to the fire two hand , which have every property of snow in they , except that of melting . she companion , who be indeed she maid , likewise pull off she glove , and discover what bear a exact resemblance , in cold and colour , to a piece of frozen beef . " I wish , madam , " quoth the latter , " you ladyship would not think of go any farther to - night . I be terribly afraid you ladyship will not be able to bear the fatigue . " " why sure , " cry the landlady , " she ladyship 's honour can never intend it . o , bless I ! farther to - night , indeed ! let I beseech you ladyship not to think o not ---- but , to be sure , you ladyship can not . what will you honour be pleased to have for supper ? I have mutton of all kind , and some nice chicken . " " I think , madam , " say the lady , " it would be rather breakfast than supper ; but I can not eat anything ; and , if I stay , shall only lie down for a hour or two . however , if you please , madam , you may get I a little sack whey , make very small and thin . " " yes , madam , " cry the mistress of the house , " I have some excellent white wine . " --" you have no sack , then ? " say the lady . " yes , a not please you honour , I have ; I may challenge the country for that -- but let I beg you ladyship to eat something . " " upon my word , I can not eat a morsel , " answer the lady ; " and I shall be much obliged to you if you will please to get my apartment ready as soon as possible ; for I be resolve to be on horseback again in three hour . " " why , , " cry the landlady , " be there a fire light yet in the Wild - goose ? I be sorry , madam , all my best room be full . several people of the first quality be now in bed . here be a great young squire , and many other great gentlefolk of quality . " answer , " that the irish gentleman be get into the Wild - goose . "
" " be ever anythe like it ? " say the mistress ; " why the devil would you not keep some of the best room for the quality , when you know scarce a day pass without some call here ?---- if they be gentleman , I be certain , when they know it be for she ladyship , they will get up again . " " not upon my account , " say the lady ; " I will have no person disturb for I . if you have a room that be commonly decent , it will serve I very well , though it be never so plain . I beg , madam , you will not give yourself so much trouble on my account . " " o , madam ! " cry the other , " I have several very good room for that matter , but none good enough for you honour 's ladyship . however , as you be so condescending to take up with the best I have , do , , get a fire in the rose this minute . will you ladyship be pleased to go up now , or stay till the fire be light ? " " I think I have sufficiently warm myself , " answer the lady ; " so , if you please , I will go now ; I be afraid I have keep people , and particularly that gentleman ( mean ) , too long in the cold already . indeed , I can not bear to think of keep any person from the fire this dreadful weather . " -- she then depart with she maid , the landlady march with two lighted candle before she . when that good woman return , the conversation in the kitchen be all upon the charms of the young lady . there be indeed in perfect beauty a power which no almost can withstand ; for my landlady , though she be not pleased at the negative give to the supper , declare she have never see so lovely a creature . run out into the most extravagant encomium on she face , though he could not refrain from pay some compliment to the gold lace on she habit ; the post -boy sung forth the praise of she goodness , which be likewise echo by the other post -boy , who be now come in . " she be a true good lady , I warrant she , " say he ; " for she hath mercy upon dumb creature ; for she ask I every now and tan upon the journey , if I do not think she should hurt the horse by ride too fast ? and when she come in she charge I to give they as much corn as ever they would eat . " such charms be there in affability , and so sure be it to attract the praise of all kind of people . it may indeed be compare to the celebrate . [ *] it be equally sure to set off every female perfection to the highest advantage , and to palliate and conceal every defect . a short reflection , which we could not forbear make in this place , where my reader hath see the loveliness of a affable deportment ; and truth will now oblige we to contrast it , by show the reverse . [ *] a celebrate mantua - maker in the , famous for set off the shape of woman . iv. contain infallible nostrum for procure universal disesteem and hatre . the lady have no sooner laid herself on she pillow than the waiting - woman return to the kitchen to regale with some of those dainty which she mistress have refuse . the company , at she entrance , shew she the same respect which they have before pay to she mistress , by rise ; but she forget to imitate she , by desire they to sit down again . indeed , it be scarce possible they should have do so , for she place she chair in such a posture as to occupy almost the whole fire . she then order a chicken to be broil that instant , declare , if it be not ready in a quarter of a hour , she would not stay for it . now , though the say chicken be then at roost in the stable , and require the several ceremony of catching , kill , and pick , before it be bring to the gridiron , my landlady would nevertheless have undertaken to do all within the time ; but the guest , be unfortunately admit behind the scene , must have be witness to the _fourberie ; the poor woman be therefore oblige to confess that she have none in the house ; " but , madam , " say she , " I can get any kind of mutton in a instant from the butcher 's . " " do you think , then , " answer the waiting -gentlewoman , " that I have the stomach of a horse , to eat mutton at this time of night ? sure you people that keep innd imagine you betters be like yourselves . indeed , I expect to get nothing at this wretched place . I wonder my lady would stop at it . I suppose none but tradesman and grasier ever call here . " the landlady fire at this indignity offer to she house ; however , she suppress she temper , and contente herself with say , " very good quality frequent it , she thank heaven ! " " do not tell I , " cry the other , " of quality ! I believe I know more of people of quality than such as you .-- but , prithee , without
without trouble I with any of you impertinence , do tell I what I can have for supper ; for , though I can not eat horse - flesh , I be really hungry . " " why , truly , madam , " answer the landlady , " you could not take I again at such a disadvantage ; for I must confess I have nothing in the house , unless a cold piece of beef , which indeed a gentleman 's footman and the post -boy have almost cleared to the bone . " " , " say ( so for shortness we will call she ) , " I entreat you not to make I sick . if I have faste a month , I could not eat what have be touch by the finger of such fellows . be there nothing neat or decend to be have in this horrid place ? " " what think you of some egg and bacon , madam ? " say the landlady . " be you egg new laid ? be you certain they be laid to - day ? and let I have the bacon cut very nice and thin ; for I can not endure anything that be gross .-- Prithee try if you can do a little tolerably for once , and do not think you have a farmer 's wife , or some of those creature , in the house . " -- the landlady begin then to handle she knife ; but the other stopt she , say , " good woman , I must insist upon you first wash you hand ; for I be extremely nice , and have be always use from my cradle to have everything in the most elegant manner . " the landlady , who govern herself with much difficulty , begin now the necessary preparation ; for as to , she be utterly reject , and with such disdain , that the poor wench be as hard put to it to restrain she hand from violence as she mistress have be to hold she tongue . this indeed do not entirely ; for , though she literally keep it within she tooth , yet there it mutter many " marry - come - up , as good flesh and blood as yourself ; " with other such indignant phrase . while the supper be prepare , begin to lament she have not order a fire in the parlour ; but , she say , that be now too late . " however , " say she , " I have novetely to recommend a kitchen ; for I do not believe I ever eat in one before . " then , turn to the post -boy , she ask they , " why they be not in the stable with they horse ? if I must eat my hard fare here , madam , " cry she to the landlady , " I beg the kitchen may be keep clear , that I may not be surround with all the blackguard in town : as for you , sir , " say she to , " you look somewhat like a gentleman , and may sit still if you please ; I do not desire to disturb anybody but mob . " " yes , yes , madam , " cry , " I be a gentleman , I do assure you , and I be not so easily to be disturb . non semper vox casualis est verbo nominativus _. " this Latin she take to be some affront , and answer , " you may be a gentleman , sir ; but you do not show yourself as one to talk to a woman . " Partridge make a gentle reply , and conclude with more latin ; upon which she toss up she nose , and contente herself by abuse he with the name of a great scholar . the supper be now on the table , eat very heartily for so delicate a person ; and , while a second course of the same be by she order prepare , she say , " and so , madam , you tell I you house be frequente by people of great quality ? " the landlady answer in the affirmative , say , " there be a great many very good quality and gentlefolk in it now . there be young , as that gentleman there know . " " and pray who be this young gentleman of quality , this young ? " say . " who should he be , " answer , " but the son and heir of the great , of ! " " upon my word , " say she , " you tell I strange news ; for I know of very well , and I know he hath no son alive . " the landlady prick up she ear at this , and look a little confounded . however , after a short hesitation , he answer , " indeed , madam , it be true , everybody doth not know he to be 's son ; for he be never marry to he mother ; but he son he certainly be , and will be he heir too , as certainly as he name be . " at that word , let drop the bacon which she be convey to she mouth , and cry out , " you surprize I , sir ! be it possible should be now in the house ? " " _Quare non ?_ " answer , " it be possible , and it be certain . " Abigail now make haste to finish the remainder of she meal , and then repair back to she mistress , when the conversation pass which may be read in the next chapter .
. v. show who the amiable lady , and she unamiable maid , were . as in the month of , the damask rise , which chance hath plan among the lily , with they candid hue mix he vermilion ; or as some playsome heifer in the pleasant month of diffuse she odoriferous breath over the flowery meadow ; or as , in the blooming month of , the gentle , constant dove , perch on some fair bough , sit meditat on she mate ; so , look a hundred charms and breathing as many sweet , she thought be fix on she Tommy , with a heart as good and innocent as she face be beautiful , ( for it be she herself ) lay recline she lovely head on she hand , when she may enter the room , and , run directly to the bed , cry , " madam -- madam -- who doth you ladyship think be in the house ? " , start up , cry , " I hope my father hath not overtake we . " " no , madam , it be one worth a hundred father ; himself be here at this very instant . " " ! " say , " it be impossible ! I can not be so fortunate . " she maid averr the fact , and be presently detach by she mistress to order he to be call ; for she say she be resolve to see he immediately . have no sooner leave the kitchen in the manner we have before see than the landlady fall severely upon she . the poor woman have indeed be load she heart with foul language for some time , and now it scour out of she mouth , as filth doth from a mud -cart , when the board which confine it be remove . likewise shovell in he share of calumny , and ( what may surprize the reader ) not only bespatter the maid , but attempt to sully the lily - white character of herself . " never a barrel the better herr , " cry he , " yo_Noscitu a socio_ , be a true say . it must be confess , indeed , that the lady in the fine garment be the civiller of the two ; but I warrant neither of they be a bit better than they should be . a couple of Bath trull , I will answer for they ; you quality do not ride about at this time of ' night without servants . " " Sbodlikin , and that be true , " cry the landlady , " you have certainly hit upon the very matter ; for quality do not come into a house without bespeak a supper , whether they eat or no . " while they be thus discourse , return and discharge she commission , by bid the landlady immediately wake , and tell he a lady want to speak with he . the landlady refer she to , say , " he be the squire 's friend : but , for she part , she never call man -folk , especially gentleman , " and then walk sullenly out of the kitchen . Honou apply herself to ; but he refuse , " for my friend , " cry he , " go to be very late , and he would be very angry to be disturb so soon . " insist still to have he call , say , " she be sure , instead of be angry , that he would be to the highest degree delighte when he know the occasion . " " another time , perhaps , he might , " cry ; " but _non omnia possumus omne _. one woman be enough at once for a reasonable man . " " what do you mean by one woman , fellow ? " cry . " none of you fellow , " answer . he then proceed to inform she plainly that be in bed with a wench , and make use of a expression too indelicate to be here insert ; which so enrage , that she call he jackanape , and return in a violent hurry to she mistress , whom she acquaint with the success of she errand , and with the account she have receive ; which , if possible , she exaggerate , be as angry with as if he have pronounce all the word that come from the mouth of . she discharge a torrent of abuse on the master , and advise she mistress to quit all thought of a man who have never show himself deserive of she . she then rip up the story of , and give the most malicious turn to he formerly quit herself ; which , I must confess , the present incident not a little countenanced . the spirit of be too much dissipate by concern to enable she to stop the torrent of she maid . at last , however , she interrupt she , say , " I never can believe this ; some villain hath bely he . you say you have it from he friend ; but surely it be not the office of a friend to betray such secret . " " I suppose , " cry , " the fellow be he pimp ; for I never see so ill - look a villain . besides , such profligate rake as be never asham of these matters . " to say the truth , this behaviour of be a little inexcusable ; but he have not sleep off the effect of the dose which he swallow the evening before ; which have , in the morning , receive the addition of above a pint of wine , or indeed rather of malt spirit ;
; for the perry be by no means pure . now , that part of he head which desig for the reservoir of drink be very shallow , a small quantity of liquor overflow it , and open the sluice of he heart ; so that all the secret there deposite run out . these sluice be indeed , naturally , very ill - secured . to give the best - natured turn we can to he disposition , he be a very honest man ; for , as he be the most inquisitive of mortal , and eternally pry into the secret of other , so he very faithfully pay they by communicating , in return , everything within he knowledge . , torment with anxiety , kknow not what to believe , nor what resolution to take , arrive with the sack - whey . immediately advise she mistress , in a whisper , to pump this wench , who probably could inform she of the truth . approve it , and begin as follow : " come hither , child ; now answer I truly what I be go to ask you , and I promise you I will very well reward you . be there a young gentleman in this house , a handsome young gentleman , that -- --. " here blush and be confound . " a young gentleman , " cry , " that come hither in company with that saucy rascal who be now in the kitchen ? " answer , " there be . " -- " do you know anything of any lady ? " continue , " any lady ? I do not ask you whether she be handsome or no ; perhaps she be not ; that be nothing to the purpose ; but do you know of any lady ? " " la , madam , " cry , " you will make a very bad examiner . 'ee , child , " say she , " be not that very young gentleman now in bed with some nasty trull or other ? " here smile , and be silent . " answer the question , child , " say , " and here be a guinea for you . " --" a guinea ! madam , " cry ; " la , what be a guinea ? if my mistress should know it I shall certainly lose my place that very instant . " " here be another for you , " say , " and I promise you faithfully you mistress shall never know it . " , after a very short hesitation , take the money , and tell the whole story , conclude with say , " if you have any great curiosity , madam , I can steal softly into he room , and see whether he be in he own bed or no . " she accordingly do this by 's desire , and return with a answer in the negative . now tremble and turn pale . beg she to be comforte , and not to think any more of so worthless a fellow . " why there , " say , " I hope , madam , you ladyship will not be offend ; but pray , madam , be not you ladyship 's name western ? " " how be it possible you should know I ? " answer . " why that man , that the gentlewoman spoke of , who be in the kitchen , tell about you last night . but I hope you ladyship be not angry with I . " " indeed , child , " say she , " I be not ; pray tell I all , and I promise you I will reward you . " " why , madam , " continue , " that man tell we all in the kitchen that western -- indeed I do not know how to bring it out . " -- here she stopt , till , have receive encouragement from , and be vehemently press by , she proceed thus :--" he tell we , madam , though to be sure it be all a lie , that you ladyship be die for love of the young squire , and that he be go to the wars to get rid of you . I think to myself then he be a false - hear wretch ; but , now , to see such a fine , rich , beautiful lady as you be , forsaken for such a ordinary woman ; for to be sure so she be , and another man 's wife into the bargain . it be such a strange unnatural thing , in a manner . " give she a third guinea , and , tell she she would certainly be she friend if she mention nothing of what have pass , nor inform any one who she be , dismiss the girl , with order to the post -boy to get the horse ready immediately . be now leave alone with she maid , she tell she trusty waiting - woman , " that she never be more easy than at present . I be now convince , " say she , " he be not only a villain , but a low despicable wretch . I can forgive all rather than he expose my name in so barbarous a manner . that render he the object of my contempt . yes , , I be now easy ; I be indeed ; I be very easy ; " and then she burst into a violent flood of tear . after a short interval spend by , chiefly in crying , and assure she maid that she be perfectly easy , arrive with a account that the horse be ready , when a very extraordinary thought suggest
suggest itself to we young heroine , by which would be acquaint with she have be at the inn , in a way which , if any spark of affection for she remain in he , would be at least some punishment for he fault . the reader will be pleased to remember a little muff , which hath have the honour of be more than once remember already in this history . this muff , ever since the departure of , have be the constant companion of by day , and she bedfellow by night ; and this muff she have at this very instant upon she arm ; whence she take it off with great indignation , and , have writ she name with she pencil upon a piece of paper which she pin to it , she bribe the maid to convey it into the empty bed of , in which , if he do not find it , she charge she to take some method of convey it before he eye in the morning . then , have pay for what have eat , in which bill be include a account for what she herself might have eaten , she mount she horse , and , once more assure she companion that she be perfectly easy , continue she journey . chapter vi . contain , among other thing , the ingenuity of , the madness of , and the folly of . it be now past five in the morning , and other company begin to rise and come to the kitchen , among whom be the serjeant and the coachman , who , be thoroughly reconcile , make a libation , or , in the phrase , drank a hearty cup together . in this drink nothing more remarkable happen than the behaviour of , who , when the serjeant drank a health to , repeat only the word King ; nor could he be bring to utter more ; for though he be go to fight against he own cause , yet he could not be prevail upon to drink against it . , be now return to he own bed ( but from whence he return we must beg to be excuse from relating ) , summon from this agreeable company , who , after a ceremonious preface , have obtain leave to offer he advice , deliver himself as follow :-- " it be , sir , a old say , and a true one , that a wise man may sometimes learn counsel from a fool ; I wish , therefore , I might be so bold as to offer you my advice , which be to return home again , and leave these _horrida bella_ , these bloody wars , to fellow who be contente to swallow gunpowder , because they have nothing else to eat . now , everybody know you honour want for nothing at home ; when that be the case , why should any man travel abroad ? " " Partridge , " cry , " thou be certainly a coward ; I wish , therefore , thou wouldst return home thyself , and trouble I no more . " " I ask you honour 's pardon , " cry ; " I speak on you account more than my own ; for as to I , know my circumstance be bad enough , and I be so far from be afraid , that I value a pistol , or a blunderbuss , or any such thing , no more than a pop - gun . every man must die once , and what signify the manner how ? besides , perhaps I may come off with the loss only of a arm or a leg . I assure you , sir , I be never less afraid in my life ; and so , if you honour be resolve to go on , I be resolve to follow you . but , in that case , I wish I might give my opinion . to be sure , it be a scandalous way of travel , for a great gentleman like you to walk afoot . now here be two or three good horse in the stable , which the landlord will certainly make no scruple of trust you with ; but , if he should , I can easily contrive to take they ; and , let the worst come to the worst , the king would certainly pardon you , as you be go to fight in he cause . " now , as the honesty of be equal to he understanding , and both deal only in small matter , he would never have attempt a roguery of this kind , have he not imagine it altogether safe ; for he be one of those who have more consideration of the gallow than of the fitness of thing ; but , in reality , he think he might have commit this felony without any danger ; for , besides that he doubt not but the name of would sufficiently quiet the landlord , he conceive they should be altogether safe , whatever turn affair might take ; as , he imagine , would have friend enough on one side , and as he friend would as well secure he on the other . when find that be in earnest in this proposal , he very severely rebuk he , and that in such bitter term , that the other attempt to laugh it off , and presently turn the discourse to other matter ; say , he believe they be then in a bawdy house , and that he have with much ado prevent two wench from disturb he honour in the middle of the night . " ! " say he , " I believe they get into you chamber whether
whether I would or no ; for here lie the muff of one of they on the ground . " indeed , as return to he bed in the dark , he have never perceive the muff on the quilt , and , in leape into he bed , he have tumble it on the floor . this Partridge now take up , and be go to put into he pocket , when desire to see it . the muff be so very remarkable , that we heroe might possibly have recollect it without the information annex . but he memory be not put to that hard office ; for at the same instant he see and read the word western upon the paper which be pin to it . he look now grow frantic in a moment , and he eagerly cry out , " oh ! how come this muff here ? " " I know no more than you honour , " cry ; " but I see it upon the arm of one of the woman who would have disturb you , if I would have suffer they . " " where be they ? " cry , jump out of bed , and lay hold of he cloath . " Many mile off , I believe , by this time , " say . and now , upon further enquiry , be sufficientely assure that the bearer of this muff be no other than the lovely herself . the behaviour of on this occasion , he thought , he look , he word , he action , be such as beggar all description . after many bitter execration on , and not fewer on himself , he order the poor fellow , who be frightene out of he wit , to run down and hire he horse at any rate ; and a very few minute afterwards , have shuffle on he clothes , he hasten down - stair to execute the order himself , which he have just before give . but before we proceed to what pass on he arrival in the kitchen , it will be necessary to recur to what have there happen since have first leave it on he master 's summon . the serjeant be just march off with he party , when the two irish gentleman arise , and come downstairs ; both complain that they have be so often wake by the noise in the inn , that they have never once be able to close they eye all night . the coach which have bring the young lady and she maid , and which , perhaps , the reader may have hitherto conclude be she own , be , indeed , a return coach belong to , of , one of the worthiest and honestest man that ever deal in horse - flesh , and whose coach we heartily recommend to all we reader who travel that road . by which mean they may , perhaps , have the pleasure of riding in the very coach , and be drive by the very coachman , that be record in this history . the coachman , have but two passenger , and hear be go to , offer to carry he thither at a very moderate price . he be induce to this by the report of the hostler , who say that the horse which have hire from would be much more pleased with return to he friend there than to prosecute a long journey ; for that the say horse be rather a two - leg than a four - leg animal . immediately close with the proposal of the coachman , and , at the same time , persuade he friend to accept of the fourth place in the coach . this conveyance the soreness of he bone make more agreeable to he than a horse ; and , be well assure of meeting with he wife at , he think a little delay would be of no consequence . , who be much the sharper man of the two , no sooner hear that this lady come from , with the other circumstance which he learn from the hostler , than it come into he head that she might possibly be he friend 's wife ; and presently acquaint he with this suspicion , which have never once occur to Fitzpatrick himself . to say the truth , he be one of those composition which nature make up in too great a hurry , and forget to put any brain into they head . now it happen to this sort of man , as to bad hound , who never hit off a fault themselves ; but no sooner doth a dog of sagacity open he mouth than they immediately do the same , and , without the guidance of any scent , run directly forwards as fast as they be able . in the same manner , the very moment have mention he apprehension , instantly concur , and fly directly up - stair , to surprize he wife , before he know where she be ; and unluckily ( as Fortune love to play trick with those gentleman who put themselves entirely under she conduct ) run he head against several door and post to no purpose . much kinder be she to I , when she suggest that simile of the hound , just before insert ; since the poor wife may , on these occasion , be so justly compare to a hunted hare . like that little wretched animal , she prick up she ear to listen after the voice of she pursuer ; like she , fly away trembl when she hear it ; and , like she , be generally overtaken and destroy in the end . this be not however the case at present ; for
for after a long fruitless search , return to the kitchen , where , as if this have be a real chace , enter a gentleman hallow as hunter do when the hound be at a fault . he be just alight from he horse , and have many attendants at he heel . here , reader , it may be necessary to acquaint thee with some matters , which , if thou dost know already , thou be wiser than I take thee to be . and this information thou shal receive in the next chapter . chapter vii . in which be conclude the adventur that happen at the inn at . in the first place , then , this gentleman just arrive be no other person than western himself , who be come hither in pursuit of he daughter ; and , have he fortunately be two hour earlier , he have not only find she , but he niece into the bargain ; for such be the wife of , who have run away with she five year before , out of the custody of that sage lady , . now this lady have depart from the inn much about the same time with ; for , have be wake by the voice of she husband , she have send up for the landlady , and be by she apprize of the matter , have bribe the good woman , at a extravagant price , to furnish she with horse for she escape . such prevalence have money in this family ; and though the mistress would have turn away she maid for a corrupt hussy , if she have know as much as the reader , yet she be no more proof against corruption herself than poor have be . and he nephew be not know to one another ; nor indeed would the former have take any notice of the latter if he have know he ; for , this be a steal match , and consequently a unnatural one in the opinion of the good squire , he have , from the time of she commit it , abandon the poor young creature , who be then no more than eighteen , as a monster , and have never since suffer she to be name in he presence . the kitchen be now a scene of universal confusion , western enquiring after he daughter , and as eagerly after he wife , when enter the room , unfortunately have 's muff in he hand . as soon as western see Jone , he set up the same holla as be use by sportsman when they game be in view . he then immediately run up and laid hold of , cry , " we have get the dog fox , I warrant the bitch be not far off . " the jargon which follow for some minute , where many speak different thing at the same time , as it would be very difficult to describe , so would it be no less unpleasant to read . Jones have , at length , shake western off , and some of the company have interfere between they , we heroe protest he innocence as to know anything of the lady ; when step up , and say , " it be folly to deny it ; for why , the mark of guilt be in thy hand . I will myself asseverate and bind it by a oath , that the muff thou bearest in thy hand belongeth unto ; for I have frequently observe she , of later day , to bear it about she . " " my daughter 's muff ! " cry the squire in a rage . " Hath he get my daughter 's muff ? bear witness the goods be find upon he . I will have he before a justice of peace this instant . where be my daughter , villain ? " " , " say , " I beg you would be pacify . the muff , I acknowledge , be the young lady 's ; but , upon my honour , I have never see she . " at these word western lose all patience , and grow inarticulate with rage . some of the servant have acquaint who Mr western be . the good , therefore , think he have now a opportunity to do a act of service to he uncle , and by that means might possibly obtain he favour , steep up to , and cry out , " upon my conscience , sir , you may be asham of deny you have see the gentleman 's daughter before my face , when you know I find you there upon the bed together . " then , turn to , he offer to conduct he immediately to the room where he daughter be ; which offer be accept , he , the squire , the parson , and some other , ascend directly to 's chamber , which they enter with no less violence than have do before . the poor lady start from she sleep with as much amazement as terror , and beheld at she bedside a figure which might very well be suppose to have escape out of . such wildness and confusion be in the of ; who no sooner see the lady than he start back , shew sufficiently by he manner , before he speak , that this be not the person seek after . so much more tenderly do woman value they reputation than they person , that , though the latter see now in more danger than before , yet , as the former be secure , the lady scream not with such violence as she have do on the other occasion . however , she no sooner find herself alone than she
she abandon all thought of further repose ; and , as she have sufficient reason to be dissatisfied with she present lodging , she dress herself with all possible expedition . now proceed to search the whole house , but to as little purpose as he have disturb poor Waters . he then return disconsolate into the kitchen , where he find in the custody of he servants . this violent uproar have raise all the people in the house , though it be yet scarcely daylight . among these be a grave gentleman , who have the honour to be in the commission of the peace for the county of . of which be no sooner inform than he offer to lay he complaint before he . the justice decline execute he office , as he say he have no clerk present , nor no book about justice business ; and that he could not carry all the law in he head about stealing away daughter , and such sort of thing . here offer to lend he he assistance , inform the company that he have be himself breed to the law . ( and indeed he have serve three year as clerk to a attorney in the north of , when , chuse a genteeler walk in life , he quit he master , come over to , and set up that business which require no apprenticeship , namely , that of a gentleman , in which he have succeed , as hath be already partly mention . ) declare that the law concern daughter be out of the present case ; that steal a muff be undoubtedly felony , and the goods be find upon the person , be sufficient evidence of the fact . the magistrate , upon the encouragement of so learn a coadjutor , and upon the violent intercession of the squire , be at length prevail upon to seat himself in the chair of justice , where be place , upon view the muff which still hold in he hand , and upon the parson 's swear it to be the property of , he desire to draw up a commitment , which he say he would sign . now desire to be hear , which be at last , with difficulty , grant he . he then produce the evidence of , as to the finde it ; but , what be still more , depose that herself have deliver the muff to she , and have order she to convey it into the chamber where have find it . whether a natural love of justice , or the extraordinary comeliness of , have wrotch on to make the discovery , I will not determine ; but such be the effect of she evidence , that the magistrate , throw himself back in he chair , declare that the matter be now altogether as clear on the side of the prisoner as it have before be against he : with which the parson concur , say , the forbid he should be instrumental in commit a innocent person to durance . the justice then arise , acquit the prisoner , and break up the court . now give every one present a hearty curse , and , immediately order he horse , depart in pursuit of he daughter , without take the least notice of he nephew , or return any answer to he claim of kindred , notwithstand all the obligation he have just receive from that gentleman . in the violence , moreover , of he hurry , and of he passion , he luckily forget to demand the muff of : I say luckily ; for he would have die on the spot rather than have part with it . likewise , with he friend Partridge , set forward the moment he have pay he reckoning , in quest of he lovely , whom he now resolve never more to abandon the pursuit of . could he bring himself even to take leave of Waters ; of whom he detest the very thought , as she have be , though not designedly , the occasion of he miss the happiest interview with , to whom he now vow eternal constancy . as for , she take the opportunity of the coach which be go to ; for which place she set out in company with the two irish gentleman , the landlady kindly lend she she cloath ; in return for which she be content only to receive about double their value , as a recompence for the loan . upon the road she be perfectly reconcile to , who be a very handsome fellow , and indeed do all she could to conseal he in the absence of he wife . thus end the many odd adventur which encounter at he inn at , where they talk , to this day , of the beauty and lovely behaviour of the , by the name of the . chapter viii . in which the history go backward . before we proceed any farther in we history , it may be proper to look a little back , in order to account for the extraordinary appearance of and she father at the inn at . the reader may be pleased to remember that , in the ninth chapter of the seventh book of we history , we leave , after a long debate between love and duty , decide the cause , as it usually , I believe , happen , in favour of the former . this debate have arisen , as we have there show , from a visit which she father have just before make she , in order to force she consent to a marriage with ; and which he have understand to be fully implied in she acknowledgment " that she neither must nor could
could refuse any absolute command of he . " now from this visit the squire retire to he evening potation , overjoy at the success he have gain with he daughter ; and , as he be of a social disposition , and willing to have partaker in he happiness , the beer be order to flow very liberally into the kitchen ; so that before eleven in the evening there be not a single person sober in the house except only Mr western herself and the charme . Early in the morning a messenger be despatch to summon ; for , though the squire imagine that young gentleman have be much less acquainted than he really be with the former aversion of he daughter , as he have not , however , yet receive she consent , he long impatiently to communicate it to he , not doubt but that the intend bride herself would confirm it with she lip . as to the wedding , it have the evening before be fix , by the male party , to be celebrate on the next morning save one . Breakfast be now set forth in the parlour , where attend , and where the squire and he sister likewise be assemble ; and now be order to be call . o , ! have I thy pen ! o , ! have I thy pencil ! then would I draw the picture of the poor serving -man , who , with pale countenance , stare eye , chatter tooth , faulter tongue , and trembl limb , ( e 'en such a man , so faint , so spiritless , so dull , so dead in look , so woe - begone , 's curtain in the dead of night , and would have tell he , half he be burn have ) enter the room , and declare -- that be not to be find . " not to be find ! " cry the squire , start from he chair ; " Zound and d -- nation ! and fury ! where , when , how , what -- not to be find ! where ? " " ! brother , " say , with true political coldness , " you be always throw yourself into such violent passion for nothing . my niece , I suppose , be only walk out into the garden . I protest you be grow so unreasonable , that it be impossible to live in the house with you . " " Nay , nay , " answer the squire , return as suddenly to himself , as he have go from himself ; " if that be all the matter , it signify not much ; but , upon my soul , my mind misgave I when the fellow say she be not to be find . " he then give order for the bell to be ring in the garden , and sit himself contentedly down . no two thing could be more the reverse of each other than be the brother and sister in most instance ; particularly in this , that as the brother never foresee anything at a distance , but be most sagacious in immediately see everything the moment it have happen ; so the sister eternally foresee at a distance , but be not so quick - sight to object before she eye . of both these the reader may have observed example : and , indeed , both they several talents be excessive ; for , as the sister often foresee what never come to pass , so the brother often see much more than be actually the truth . this be not however the case at present . the same report be brotch from the garden as before have be bring from the chamber , that be not to be find . the squire himself now sally forth , and begin to roar forth the name of as loudly , and in as hoarse a voice , as whilome do Hercule that of Hylas ; and , as the poet tell we that the whole shore echo back the name of that beautiful youth , so do the house , the garden , and all the neighbour field resound nothing but the name of , in the hoarse voice of the man , and in the shrill pipe of the woman ; while echo see so pleased to repeat the beloved sound , that , if there be really such a person , I believe Ovid hath bely she sex . nothing reign for a long time but confusion ; till at last the squire , have sufficiently spend he breath , return to the parlour , where he find and , and throw himself , with the utmost dejection in he countenance , into a great chair . here begin to apply the follow consolation : " brother , I be sorry for what hath happen ; and that my niece should have behave herself in a manner so unbecom she family ; but it be all you own doings , and you have nobody to thank but yourself . you know she hath be educate always in a manner directly contrary to my advice , and now you see the consequence . have I not a thousand time argue with you about give my niece she own will ? but you know I never could prevail upon you ; and when I have take so much pain to eradicate she headstrong opinion , and to rectify you error in policy , you know she be take out of my hand ; so that I have nothing to answer for . have I be trust entirely with the care of she education , no such accident as this have ever befall you ; so that you must comfort yourself by think it
it be all you own do ; and , indeed , what else could be expect from such indulgence ? " " Zound ! sister , " answer he , " you be enough to make one mad . have I indulge she ? have I give she she will ?----It be no longer ago than last night that I threaten , if she disobey I , to confine she to she chamber upon bread and water as long as she liv .---- you would provoke the patience of . " " do ever mortal hear the like ? " reply she . " brother , if I have not the patience of fifty Jobs , you would make I forget all decency and decorum . why would you interfere ? do I not beg you , do I not intreat you , to leave the whole conduct to I ? you have defeat all the operation of the campaign by one false step . would any man in he sensis have provoke a daughter by such threat as these ? how often have I tell you that English woman be not to be treat like [ * ] slave . we have the protection of the world ; we be to be win by gentle means only , and not to be hector , and bully , and beat into compliance . I thank heaven no Salique law govern here . brother , you have a roughness in you manner which no woman but myself would bear . I do not wonder my niece be frightene and terrify into take this measure ; and , to speak honestly , I think my niece will be justifi to the world for what she hath do . I repeat it to you again , brother , you must comfort yourself by rememb'r that it be all you own fault . how often have I advise -- " here western rose hastily from he chair , and , vent two or three horrid imprecation , run out of the room . [ *] possibly Circassian . when he be depart , he sister express more bitterness ( if possible ) against he than she have do while he be present ; for the truth of which she appeal to , who , with great complacence , acquiesce entirely in all she say ; but excuse all the fault of , " as they must be consider , " he say , " to have proceed from the too inordinate fondness of a father , which must be allow the name of a amiable weakness . " " so much the more inexcuseable , " answer the lady ; " for whom doth he ruin by he fondness but he own child ? " to which immediately agree . Mrs western then begin to express great confusion on the account of , and of the usage which he have receive from a family to which he intend so much honour . on this subject she treat the folly of she niece with great severity ; but conclude with throw the whole on she brother , who , she say , be inexcuseable to have proceed so far without better assurance of he daughter 's consent : " but he be ( say she ) always of a violent , headstrong temper ; and I can scarce forgive myself for all the advice I have throw away upon he . " after much of this kind of conversation , which , perhaps , would not greatly entertain the reader , be it here particularly related , take he leave and return home , not highly pleased with he disappointment : which , however , the philosophy which he have acquire from , and the religion infus into he by , together with somewhat else , teach he to bear rather better than more passionate lover bear these kind of evils . chapter ix . the escape of . it be now time to look after ; whom the reader , if he love she half so well as I do , will rejoice to find escape from the clutch of she passionate father , and from those of she dispassionate lover . twelve time do the iron register of time beat on the sonorous bell - metal , summon the ghost to rise and walk they nightly round .---- in plainer language , it be twelve o'clock , and all the family , as we have say , lay bury in drink and sleep , except only , who be deeply engage in read a political pamphlet , and except we heroine , who now softly steal down - stair , and , have unbarred and unlock one of the house - door , sally forth , and hasten to the place of appointment . Notwithstand the many pretty art which lady sometimes practise , to display they fear on every little occasion ( almost as many as the other sex usis to conceal their ) , certainly there be a degree of courage which not only become a woman , but be often necessary to enable she to discharge she duty . it be , indeed , the idea of fierceness , and not of bravery , which destroy the female character ; for who can read the story of the justly celebrate without conceive as high a opinion of she gentleness and tenderness as of she fortitude ? at the same time , perhaps , many a woman who shriek at a mouse , or a rat , may be capable of poiso a husband ; or , what be worse , of drive he to poison himself . , with all the gentleness which a woman can have , have all the spirit which she ought to have . when , therefore , she come to the place of appointment , and
and , instead of meet she maid , as be agree , see a man ride directly up to she , she neither scream out nor faint away : not that she pulse then beat with its usual regularity ; for she be , at first , under some surprize and apprehension : but these be relieve almost as soon as raise , when the man , pull off he hat , ask she , in a very submissive manner , " if she ladyship do not expect to meet another lady ? " and then proceed to inform she that he be send to conduct she to that lady . could have no possible suspicion of any falsehood in this account : she therefore mount resolutely behind the fellow , who convey she safe to a town about five mile distant , where she have the satisfaction of find the good : for , as the soul of the waiting -woman be wrapt up in those very habiliment which use to enwrap she body , she could by no means bring herself to trust they out of she sight . upon these , therefore , she keep guard in person , while she detach the aforesaid fellow after she mistress , have give he all proper instruction . they now debate what course to take , in order to avoid the pursuit of , who they know would send after they in a few hour . the road have such charms for , that she be desirous of go on directly ; allege that , as could not be miss till eight or nine the next morning , she pursuer would not be able to overtake she , even though they know which way she have go . but have too much at stake to venture anything to chance ; nor do she dare trust too much to she tender limb , in a contest which be to be decide only by swiftness . she resolve , therefore , to travel across the country , for at least twenty or thirty mile , and then to take the direct road to . so , have hire horse to go twenty mile one way , when she intend to go twenty mile the other , she set forward with the same guide behind whom she have ride from she father 's house ; the guide have now take up behind he , in the room of , a much heavier , as well as much less lovely burden ; be , indeed , a huge portmanteau , well stuff with those outside ornament , by means of which the fair Honou hope to gain many conquest , and , finally , to make she fortune in city . when they have go about two hundred pace from the inn on the road , ride up to the guide , and , with a voice much fuller of honey than be ever that of , through he mouth be suppose to have be a bee - hive , beg he to take the first turning which lead towards . reader , I be not superstitious , nor any great believer of modern miracle . I do not , therefore , deliver the follow as a certain truth ; for , indeed , I can scarce credit it myself : but the fidelity of a historian oblige I to relate what hath be confidently assert . the horse , then , on which the guide rode , be report to have be so charme by 's voice , that he make a full stop , and express a unwillingness to proceed any farther . perhaps , however , the fact may be true , and less miraculous than it hath be represent ; since the natural cause seem adequate to the effect : for , as the guide at that moment desiste from a constant application of he armed right heel ( for , like , he wear but one spur ) , it be more than possible that this omission alone might occasion the beast to stop , especially as this be very frequent with he at other time . but if the voice of have really a effect on the horse , it have very little on the rider . he answer somewhat surlily , " that measter have order he to go a different way , and that he should lose he place if he go any other than that he be order . " , find all she persuasion have no effect , begin now to add irresistible charms to she voice ; charms which , accord to the proverb , make the old mare trot , instead of stand still ; charms ! to which modern ag have attribute all that irresistible force which the antient impute to perfect oratory . in a word , she promise she would reward he to he utmost expectation . the lad be not totally deaf to these promise ; but he dislike they be indefinite ; for , though perhaps he have never hear that word , yet that , in fact , be he objection . he say , " do not consider the case of poor volk ; that he have like to have be turn away the other day , for ride about the country with a gentleman from 's , who do not reward he as he should have do . " " with whom ? " say eagerly . " with a gentleman from 's , " repeat the lad ; " the squire 's son , I think they call ' un . " -- " ? which way do he go ? " say .--" why , a little o' one side o' , about twenty mile off , " answer the lad .--" guide I , " say , " to the same
same place , and I will give thee a guinea , or two , if one be not sufficient . " -- " to be certain , " say the boy , " it be honestly worth two , when you ladyship consider what a risk I run ; but , however , if you ladyship will promise I the two guinea , I will e'en venture : to be certain it be a sinful thing to ride about my measter 's horse ; but one comfort is , I can only be turn away , and two guinea will partly make I amend . " the bargain be thus struck , the lad turn aside into the road , and set forward in pursuit of , highly contrary to the remonstrance of , who have much more desire to see than to see : for indeed she be not he friend with she mistress , as he have be guilty of some neglect in certain pecuniary civility , which be by custom due to the waiting - gentlewoman in all love affair , and more especially in those of a clandestine kind . this we impute rather to the carelessness of he temper than to any want of generosity ; but perhaps she derive it from the latter motive . certain it be that she hate he very bitterly on that account , and resolve to take every opportunity of injure he with she mistress . it be therefore highly unlucky for she , that she have go to the very same town and inn whence have start , and still more unlucky be she in have stumble on the same guide , and on this accidental discovery which have make . we traveller arrive at [ * ] at the break of day , where be against she will charge to enquire the route which have take . of this , indeed , the guide himself could have inform they ; but , I know not for what reason , never ask he the question . [ *] this be the village where meet the Quaker . when have make she report from the landlord , , with much difficulty , procure some indifferent horse , which bring she to the inn where have be confine rather by the misfortune of meet with a surgeon than by have meet with a broken head . here , be again charge with a commission of enquiry , have no sooner apply herself to the landlady , and have describe the person of , than that sagacious woman begin , in the vulgar phrase , to smell a rat . when therefore enter the room , instead of answer the maid , the landlady , address herself to the mistress , begin the follow speech : " good lack - a - day ! why there now , who would have think it ? I protest the loveliest couple that ever eye beheld . I - fackin , madam , it be no wonder the squire run on so about you ladyship . he tell I indeed you be the finest lady in the world , and to be sure so you be . mercy on he , poor heart ! I bepitie he , so I do , when he use to hug he pillow , and call it he dear . I do all I could to dissuade he from go to the war : I tell he there be man enow that be good for nothing else but to be kill , that have not the love of such fine lady . " " sure , " say , " the good woman be distracted . " " no , no , " cry the landlady , " I be not distract . what , doth you ladyship think I do not know then ? I assure you he tell I all . " " what saucy fellow , " cry , " tell you anything of my lady ? " " no saucy fellow , " answer the landlady , " but the young gentleman you enquire after , and a very pretty young gentleman he be , and he love western to the bottom of he soul . " " he love my lady ! I would have you to know , woman , she be meat for he master . " -- " Nay , , " say , interrupt she , " do not be angry with the good woman ; she intend no harm . " " no , marry , do not I , " answer the landlady , embolden by the soft accent of ; and then launch into a long narrative too tedious to be here set down , in which some passage dropt that give a little offence to , and much more to she waiting - woman , who hence take occasion to abuse poor Jones to she mistress the moment they be alone together , say , " that he must be a very pitiful fellow , and could have no love for a lady , whose name he would thus prostitute in a ale - house . " do not see he behaviour in so very disadvantageous a light , and be perhaps more pleased with the violent rapture of he love ( which the landlady exaggerate as much as she have do every other circumstance ) than she be offend with the rest ; and indeed she impute the whole to the extravagance , or rather ebullience , of he passion , and to the openness of he heart . this incident , however , be afterwards revive in she mind , and place in the most odious colour by , serve to heighten and give credit to those unlucky occurrence at , and assist the waiting - woman in she endeavour to make she mistress
mistress depart from that inn without see . the landlady find intend to stay no longer than till she horse be ready , and that without either eat or drink , soon withdraw ; when Honou begin to take she mistress to task ( for indeed she use great freedom ) , and after a long harangue , in which she remind she of she intention to go to , and give frequent hint of the impropriety of pursue a young fellow , she at last concluded with this serious exhortation : " for heaven 's sake , madam , consider what you be about , and whither you be go . " this advice to a lady who have already ride near forty mile , and in no very agreeable season , may seem foolish enough . it may be suppose she have well consider and resolve this already ; nay , , by the hints she throw out , seem to think so ; and this I doubt not be the opinion of many reader , who have , I make no doubt , be long since well convince of the purpose of we heroine , and have heartily condemn she for it as a wanton baggage . but in reality this be not the case . have be lately so distrac between hope and fear , she duty and love to she father , she hatre to , she compassion , and ( why should we not confess the truth ? ) she love for ; which last the behaviour of she father , of she aunt , of every one else , and more particularly of himself , have blow into a flame , that she mind be in that confused state which may be truly say to make we ignorant of what we do , or whither we go , or rather , indeed , indifferent as to the consequence of either . the prudent and sage advice of she maid produce , however , some cool reflection ; and she at length determined to go to , and thence to proceed directly to . but , unluckily , a few miles before she enter that town , she meet the hack - attorney , who , as be before mention , have dine there with . this fellow , be well know to , stopt and speak to she ; of which at that time take little notice , more than to enquire who he be . but , have have a more particular account from of this man afterwards at , and hearing of the great expedition he usually make in travelling , for which ( as hath be before observe ) he be particularly famous ; recollect , likewise , that she have overheard inform he that they be go to , she begin to fear lest she father might , by this fellow 's means , be able to trace she to that city ; wherefore , if she should there strike into the road , she apprehend he would certainly be able to overtake she . she therefore alter she resolution ; and , have hire horse to go a week 's journey a way which she do not intend to travel , she again set forward after a light refreshment , contrary to the desire and earnest entreaty of she maid , and to the no less vehement remonstrance of , who , from good breeding , or perhaps from good nature ( for the poor young lady appear much fatigued ) , press she very heartily to stay that evening at . have refresh herself only with some tea , and with lie about two hour on the bed , while she horse be get ready , she resolutely leave 's about eleven at night , and , strike directly into the road , within less than four hour arrive at that very inn where we last see she . have thus trace we heroine very particularly back from she departure , till she arrival at , we shall in a very few word bring she father to the same place ; who , have receive the first scent from the post -boy , who conduct he daughter to , very easily trace she afterwards to ; whence he pursue she to , as he have learn have take that route ( for , to use the squire 's expression , leave everywhere a strong scent behind he ) , and he doubt not in the least but travel , or , as he phrase it , run , the same way . he use indeed a very coarse expression , which need not be here insert ; as fox - hunter , who alone will understand it , will easily suggest it to themselves . . contain about three day . I . a crust for the critic . in we last initial chapter we may be suppose to have treat that formidable set of man who be call critic with more freedom than become we ; since they exact , and indeed generally receive , great condescension from author . we shall in this , therefore , give the reason of we conduct to this august body ; and here we shall , perhaps , place they in a light in which they have not hithertoo be see . this word critic be of derivation , and signify judgment . hence I presume some person who have not understand the original , and have see the english translation of the primitive , have conclude that it mean judgment in the legal sense , in which it be frequently use as equivalent to condemnation . I be the rather inclin to be of that opinion , as the greatest number of critic hath of late year be find amongst the lawyer . many of these gentleman , from
from despair , perhaps , of ever rise to the bench in - hall , have place themselves on the benche at the playhouse , where they have exert they judicial capacity , and have give judgment , _i.e ._ , condemn without mercy . the gentleman would , perhaps , be well enough pleased , if we be to leave they thus compare to one of the most important and honourable office in the commonwealth , and , if we intend to apply to they favour , we would do so ; but , as we design to deal very sincerely and plainly too with they , we must remind they of another officer of justice of a much lower rank ; to whom , as they not only pronounce , but execute , they own judgment , they bear likewise some remote resemblance . but in reality there be another light , in which these modern critic may , with great justice and propriety , be see ; and this be that of a common slanderer . if a person who pry into the character of other , with no other design but to discover they fault , and to publish they to the world , deserve the title of a slanderer of the reputation of man , why should not a critic , who read with the same malevolent view , be as properly stil the slanderer of the reputation of book ? vice hath not , I believe , a more abject slave ; society produce not a more odious vermin ; nor can the receive a guest more worthy of he , nor possibly more welcome to he , than a slanderer . the world , I be afraid , regards not this monster with half the abhorrence which he deserve ; and I be more afraid to assign the reason of this criminal lenity show towards he ; yet it be certain that the thief look innocent in the comparison ; nay , the murderer himself can seldom stand in competition with he guilt : for slander be a more cruel weapon than a sword , as the wound which the former give be always incurable . one method , indeed , there be of killing , and that the basest and most execrable of all , which bear a exact analogy to the vice here disclaim against , and that be poison : a means of revenge so base , and yet so horrible , that it be once wisely distinguished by we law from all other murder , in the peculiar severity of the punishment . besides the dreadful mischief do by slander , and the baseness of the means by which they be effect , there be other circumstance that highly aggravate its atrocious quality ; for it often proceed from no provocation , and seldom promise itself any reward , unless some black and infernal mind may propose a reward in the thought of have procure the ruin and misery of another . Shakespear hath nobly touche this vice , when he say -- " who steal my purse steal trash ; 't be something , nothing ; ' Tbe mine , ' ti he , and hath be slave to thousand : but he that filch from I my good name Robs I of that which not Enrich he , but make I poor indeed . " with all this my good reader will doubtless agree ; but much of it will probably seem too severe , when apply to the slanderer of book . but let it here be consider that both proceed from the same wicked disposition of mind , and be alike void of the excuse of temptation . shall we conclude the injury do this way to be very slight , when we consider a book as the author 's offspring , and indeed as the child of he brain . the reader who hath suffer he muse to continue hitherto in a virgin state can have but a very inadequate idea of this kind of paternal fondness . to such we may parody the tender exclamation of , " ! thou hast write no book . " but the author whose muse hath bring forth will feel the pathetic strain , perhaps will accompany I with tear ( especially if he darling be already no more ) , while I mention the uneasiness with which the big muse bear about she burden , the painful labour with which she produce it , and , lastly , the care , the fondness , with which the tender father nourish he favourite , till it be bring to maturity , and produce into the world . be there any paternal fondness which seem less to savou of absolute instinct , and which may so well be reconcile to worldly wisdom , as this . these child may most truly be call the riche of they father ; and many of they have with true filial piety feed they parent in he old age : so that not only the affection , but the interest , of the author may be highly injure by these slanderer , whose poisonous breath bring he book to a untimely end . Lastly , the slander of a book be , in truth , the slander of the author : for , as no one can call another bastard , without call the mother a whore , so neither can any one give the name of sad stuff , horrid nonsense , & c. , to a book , without call the author a blockhead ; which , though in a moral sense it be a preferable appellation to that of villain , be perhaps rather more injuriious to he worldly interest . now , however ludicrous all this may appear to some , other , I doubt not , will feel
feel and acknowledge the truth of it ; nay , may , perhaps , think I have not treat the subject with decent solemnity ; but surely a man may speak truth with a smile countenance . in reality , to depreciate a book maliciously , or even wantonly , be at least a very ill - natured office ; and a morose snarling crintic may , I believe , be suspect to be a bad man . I will therefore endeaavor , in the remaining part of this chapter , to explain the mark of this character , and to show what criticism I here intend to obviate : for I can never be understand , unless by the very person here mean , to insinuate that there be no proper judge of writing , or to endeavou to exclude from the commonwealth of literature any of those noble critic to whose labour the learned world be so greatly indebt . such be , , and , among the antient , and among the french , and some perhaps among we ; who have certainly be duly authorise to execute at least a judicial authority _in foor literario . but without ascertaine all the proper qualification of a critic , which I have touch on elsewhere , I think I may very boldly object to the censure of any one past upon work which he hath not himself read . such censurer as these , whether they speak from they own guess or suspicion , or from the report and opinion of other , may properly be say to slander the reputation of the book they condemn . such may likewise be suspect of deserve this character , who , without assign any particular fault , condemn the whole in general defamatory term ; such as vile , dull , d --d stuff , & c. , and particularly by the use of the monosyllable low ; a word which become the mouth of no critic who be not right Honourable . again , though there may be some fault justly assign in the work , yet , if those be not in the most essential part , or if they be compensate by greater beautie , it will saavor rather of the malice of a slanderer than of the judgment of a true critic to pass a severe sentence upon the whole , merely on account of some vicious part . this be directly contrary to the sentiment of Horace : _Verum ubi plura nitent in carmine , non ego paucis Offendor maculis , quas aut incuria fudit , humana parum cavit natura ----_ but where the beauty , more in number , shine , I be not angry , when a casual line ( that with some trivial fault unequal flow ) a careless hand or human frailty show .-- . for , as say , _Aliter non fit , , liber . no book can be otherwise compose . all beauty of character , as well as of countenance , and indeed of everything human , be to be try in this manner . cruel indeed would it be if such a work as this history , which hath employ some thousand of hour in the composing , should be liable to be condemn , because some particular chapter , or perhaps chapter , may be obnoxious to very just and sensible objection . and yet nothing be more common than the most rigorous sentence upon boonks support by such objection , which , if they be rightly take ( and that they be not always ) , do by no means go to the merit of the whole . in the theatre especially , a single expression which doth not coincide with the taste of the audience , or with any individual critic of that audience , be sure to be hiss ; and one scene which should be disapprove would hazard the whole piece . to write within such severe rule as these be as impossible as to live up to some splenetic opinion : and if we judge accord to the sentiment of some critic , and of some , no author will be save in this world , and no man in the next . . the adventure which meet with after she leave . we history , just before it be oblige to turn about and travel backward , have mention the departure of and she may from the inn ; we shall now therefore pursue the step of that lovely creature , and leave she unworthy lover a little longer to bemoan he ill - luck , or rather he ill - conduct . have direct she guide to travel through bye - road , across the country , they now pass the , and have scarce get a mile from the inn , when the young lady , look behind she , see several horse come after on full speed . this greatly alarm she fear , and she call to the guide to put on as fast as possible . he immediately obey she , and away they ride a full gallop . but the faster they go , the faster be they follow ; and as the horse behind be somewhat swifter than those before , so the former be at length overtaken . a happy circumstance for poor ; whose fear , join to she fatigue , have almost overpowered she spirit ; but she be now instantly relieve by a female voice , that greet she in the softest manner , and with the utmost civility . this greet , as soon as she could recover she breath , with like civility , and with the highest satisfaction to herself , return . the traveller who join , and who have give she such terror , consist , like she own company , of two female
female and a guide . the two party proceed three full mile together before any one offer again to open they mouths ; when we heroine , have pretty well get the better of she fear ( but yet be somewhat surprize that the other still continue to attend she , as she pursue no great road , and have already pass through several turnings ) , accost the strange lady in a most obliging tone , and say , " she be very happy to find they be both travel the same way . " the other , who , like a ghost , only want to be speak to , readily answer , " that the happiness be entirely hers ; that she be a perfect stranger in that country , and be so overjoyed at meet a companion of she own sex , that she have perhaps be guilty of a impertinence , which require great apology , in keep pace with she . " more civility pass between these two lady ; for have now give place to the fine habit of the stranger , and have fall into the rear . but , though have great curiosity to know why the other lady continue to travel on through the same bye - road with herself , nay , though this give she some uneasiness , yet fear , or modesty , or some other consideration , restrain she from ask the question . the strange lady now laboure under a difficulty which appear almost below the dignity of history to mention . she bonnet have be blow from she head not less than five time within the last mile ; nor could she come at any ribbon or handkerchief to tie it under she ching . when be inform of this , she immediately supply she with a handkerchief for this purpose ; which while she be pull from she pocket , she perhaps too much neglect the management of she horse , for the beast , now unluckily make a false step , fall upon he fore - leg , and throw he fair rider from he back . though come head foremost to the ground , she happily receive not the least damage : and the same circumstance which have perhaps contribute to she fall now preserve she from confusion ; for the lane which they be then pass be narrow , and very much overgrown with tree , so that the moon could here afford very little light , and be moreover , at present , so obscured in a cloud , that it be almost perfectly dark . by these mean the young lady 's modesty , which be extremely delicate , escape as free from injury as she limb , and she be once more reinstate in she saddle , have receive no other harm than a little fright by she fall . Daylight at length appear in it be full lustre ; and now the two lady , who be ride over a common side by side , look stedfastly at each other , at the same moment both they eye become fix ; both they horse stopt , and , both speak together , with equal joy pronounce , the one the name of , the other that of . this unexpected encounter surprize the lady much more than I believe it will the sagacious reader , who must have imagine that the strange lady could be no other than , the cousin of , whom we before mention to have sally from the inn a few minute after she . so great be the surprize and joy which these two cousins conceive at this meeting ( for they have formerly be most intimate acquaintance and friend , and have long liv together with they aunt western ) , that it be impossible to recound half the congratulation which pass between they , before either ask a very natural question of the other , namely , whither she be go ? this at last , however , come first from ; but , easy and natural as the question may seem , find it difficult to give it a very ready and certain answer . she beg she cousin therefore to suspend all curiosity till they arrive at some inn , " which I suppose , " say she , " can hardly be far distant ; and , believe I , , I suspend as much curiosity on my side ; for , indeed , I believe we astonishment be pretty equal . " the conversation which pass between these ladie on the road be , I apprehend , little worth relating ; and less certainly be that between the two waiting - woman ; for they likewise begin to pay they compliment to each other . as for the guide , they be debar from the pleasure of discourse , the one be place in the van , and the other oblige to bring up the rear . in this posture they travel many hour , till they come into a wide and well - beaten road , which , as they turn to the right , soon bring they to a very fair promising inn , where they all alight : but so fatigue be , that as she have sit she horse during the last five or six mile with great difficulty , so be she now incapable of dismounting from he without assistance . this the landlord , who have hold of she horse , presently perceive , offer to lift she in he arm from she saddle ; and she too readily accept the tender of he service . indeed fortune seem to have resolve to put to the blush that day , and the second malicious attempt succeed better than the first ; for my landlord have no sooner receive the young
young lady in he arm , than he foot , which the gout have lately very severely handle , give way , and down he tumble ; but , at the same time , with no less dexterity than gallantry , contrive to throw himself under he charming burden , so that he alone receive any bruise from the fall ; for the great injury which happen to be a violent shock give to she modesty by a immoderate grin , which , at she rise from the ground , she observe in the countenance of most of the bye - stander . this make she suspect what have really happen , and what we shall not here relate for the indulgence of those reader who be capable of laugh at the offence give to a young lady 's delicacy . accident of this kind we have never regard in a comical light ; nor will we scruple to say that he must have a very inadequate idea of the modesty of a beautiful young woman , who would wish to sacrifice it to so paltry a satisfaction as can arise from laughter . this fright and shock , join to the violent fatigue which both she mind and body have undergone , almost overcame the excellent constitution of , and she have scarce strength sufficient to totter into the inn , lean on the arm of she maid . here she be no sooner seat than she call for a glass of water ; but , very judiciously , in my opinion , change it into a glass of wine . , hear from that have not be in bed during the two last night , and observe she to look very pale and want with she fatigue , earnestly entreate she to refresh herself with some sleep . she be yet a stranger to she history , or she apprehension ; but , have she know both , she would have give the same advice ; for rest be visibly necessary for she ; and they long journey through bye - road so entirely remove all danger of pursuit , that she be herself perfectly easy on that account . be easily prevail on to follow the counsel of she friend , which be heartily seconde by she maid . likewise offer to bear she cousin company , which , with much complacence , accept . the mistress be no sooner in bed than the maid prepare to follow she example . she begin to make many apology to she sister Abigail for leave she alone in so horrid a place as a inn ; but the other stopt she short , be as well inclin to a nap as herself , and desire the honour of be she bedfellow . 's maid agree to give she a share of she bed , but put in she claim to all the honour . so , after many courtsy and compliment , to be together go the waiting -woman , as they mistress have do before they . it be usual with my landlord ( as indeed it be with the whole fraternity ) to enquire particularly of all coachman , footman , postboy , and other , into the name of all he guest ; what they estate be , and where it lay . it can not therefore be wonder at that the many particular circumstance which attend we traveller , and especially they retire all to sleep at so extraordinary and unusual a hour as ten in the morning , should excite he curiosity . as soon , therefore , as the guide enter the kitchen , he begin to examine who the lady where , and whence they come ; but the guide , though they faithfully relate all they know , give he very little satisfaction . on the contrary , they rather enflam he curiosity than extinguish it . this landlord have the character , among all he neighbour , of be a very sagacious fellow . he be think to see farther and deeper into thing than any man in the parish , the parson himself not accept . perhaps he look have contribute not a little to procure he this reputation ; for there be in this something wonderfully wise and significant , especially when he have a pipe in he mouth ; which , indeed , he seldom be without . he behaviour , likewise , greatly assist in promote the opinion of he wisdom . in he deportment he be solemn , if not sull ; and when he speak , which be seldom , he always deliver himself in a slow voice ; and , though he sentence be short , they be still interrupt with many hum and ha 's , ay ays , and other expletive : so that , though he accompany he word with certain explanatory gesture , such as shaking or nodd the head , or point with he fore - finger , he generally leave he hearer to understand more than he express ; nay , he commonly give they a hint that he know much more than he think proper to disclose . this last circumstance alone may , indeed , very well account for he character of wisdom ; since man be strangely inclin to worship what they do not understand . a grand secret , upon which several imposer on mankind have totally rely for the success of they fraud . this polite person , now take he wife aside , ask she " what she think of the ladie lately arrive ? " " think of they ? " say the wife , " why , what should I think of they ? " " I know , " answer he , " what I think . the guide tell strange story . one pretend to be come from
from , and the other from ; and neither of they , for what I can find , can tell whither they be go . but what people ever travel across the country from hither , especially to ? and one of the maid - servant , before she alight from she horse , ask if this be not the road ? now I have put all these circumstance together , and whom do you think I have find they out to be ? " " Nay , " answer she , " you know I never pretend to guess at you discoveries . " ----" it be a good girl , " reply he , chuck she under the ching ; " I must own you have always submit to my knowledge of these matters . why , then , depend upon it ; mind what I say -- depend upon it , they be certainly some of the rebel lady , who , they say , travel with the young ; and have take a roundabout way to escape the duke 's army . " " , " quoth the wife , " you have certainly hit it ; for one of they be dress as fine as any princess ; and , to be sure , she look for all the world like one .---- but yet , when I consider one thing " ---- " when you consider , " cry the landlord contemptuously -- -- " come , pray let 's hear what you consider . " ----" why , it be , " answer the wife , " that she be too humble to be any very great lady : for , while we be warm the bed , she call she nothing but child , and my dear , and sweetheart ; and , when offer to pull off she shoe and stocking , she would not suffer she , say , she would not give she the trouble . " " ! " answer the husband , " that be nothing . Dost think , because you have see some great lady rude and uncivil to person below they , that none of they know how to behave themselves when they come before they inferior ? I think I know people of fashion when I see they -- I think I do . do not she call for a glass of water when she come in ? another sort of woman would have call for a dram ; you know they would . if she be not a woman of very great quality , sell I for a fool ; and , I believe , those who buy I will have a bad bargain . now , would a woman of she quality travel without a footman , unless upon some such extraordinary occasion ? " " Nay , to be sure , husband , " cry she , " you know these matters better than I , or most folk . " " I think I do know something , " say he . " to be sure , " answer the wife , " the poor little heart look so piteous , when she sit down in the chair , I protest I could not help have a compassion for she almost as much as if she have be a poor body . but what be to be do , husband ? if a she be a rebel , I suppose you intend to betray she up to the court . well , she be a sweet - tempered , good - humoured lady , be she what she will , and I shall hardly refrain from cry when I hear she be hang or behead . " " Pooh ! " answer the husband .----" but , as to what be to be do , it be not so easy a matter to determine . I hope , before she go away , we shall have the news of a battle ; for , if the should get the better , she may gain we interest at court , and make we fortune without betraie she . " " why , that be true , " reply the wife ; " and I heartily hope she will have it in she power . certainly she be a sweet good lady ; it would go horribly against I to have she come to any harm . " " Pooh ! " cry the landlord , " woman be always so tender - hear . why , you would not harbour rebel , would you ? " " no , certainly , " answer the wife ; " and as for betraie she , come what will o not , nobody can blame we . it be what anybody would do in we case . " while we polintic landlord , who have not , we see , undeservedly the reputation of great wisdom among he neighbour , be engage in debat this matter with himself ( for he pay little attention to the opinion of he wife ) , news arrive that the rebel have give the duke the slip , and have get a day 's march towards ; and soon after arrive a famous squire , who , with great joy in he countenance , shook the landlord by the hand , say , " all be we own , boy , ten thousand honest Frenchman be land in . for ever ! ten thousand French , my brave lad ! I be go to tap away directly . " this news determine the opinion of the wise man , and he resolve to make he court to the young lady when she arise ; for he have now ( he say ) discover that she be no other than herself . chapter iii . a very short chapter
chapter , in which however be a sun , a moon , a star , and a angel . the sun ( for he keep very good hour at this time of the year ) have be some time retire to rest when arise greatly refresh by she sleep ; which , short as it be , nothing but she extreme fatigue could have occasion ; for , though she have tell she maid , and perhaps herself too , that she be perfectly easy when she leave , yet it be certain she mind be a little affect with that malady which be attend with all the restless symptom of a fever , and be perhaps the very distemper which physician mean ( if they mean anything ) by the fever on the spirit . likewise leave she be at the same time ; and , have summon she maid , immediately dress herself . she be really a very pretty woman , and , have she be in any other company but that of , might have be think beautiful ; but when of she own accord attend ( for she mistress would not suffer she to be wake ) , and have equip we heroine , the charms of , who have perform the office of the morning - star , and have proceed greater glory , share the fate of that star , and be totally eclipse the moment those glory shone forth . perhaps never look more beautiful than she do at this instant . we ought not , therefore , to condemn the maid of the inn for she hyperbole , who , when she descende , after have light the fire , declare , and ratify it with a oath , that if ever there be a angel upon earth , she be now above - stair . have acquaint she cousin with she design to go to ; and have agree to accompany she ; for the arrival of she husband at have put a end to she design of go to , or to she aunt western . they have therefore no sooner finish they tea than propose to set out , the moon then shin extremely bright , and as for the frost she defy it ; nor have she any of those apprehension which many young lady would have feel at travelling by night ; for she have , as we have before observe , some little degree of natural courage ; and this , she present sensation , which border somewhat on despair , greatly encrease . besides , as she have already travel twice with safety by the light of the moon , she be the better embolden to trust to it a third time . the disposition of be more timorous ; for , though the greater terror have conquer the less , and the presence of she husband have drive she away at so unseasonable a hour from , yet , be now arrive at a place where she think herself safe from he pursuit , these lesser terror of I know not what operate so strongly , that she earnestly entreate she cousin to stay till the next morning , and not expose herself to the dangers of travelling by night . , who be yield to a excess , when she could neither laugh nor reason she cousin out of these apprehension , at last give way to they . perhaps , indeed , have she know of she father 's arrival at , it might have be more difficult to have persuade she ; for as to , she have , I be afraid , no great horror at the thought of be overtake by he ; nay , to confess the truth , I believe she rather wish than fear it ; though I might honestly enough have conceal this wish from the reader , as it be one of those secret spontaneous emotion of the soul to which the reason be often a stranger . when we young lady have determined to remain all that evening in they inn they be attend by the landlady , who desire to know what they ladyship would be pleased to eat . such charms be there in the voice , in the manner , and in the affable deportment of , that she ravish the landlady to the highest degree ; and that good woman , conclude that she have attend , become in a moment a stanch , and wish heartily well to the young Pretender 's cause , from the great sweetness and affability with which she have be treat by he suppose mistress . the two cousins begin now to impart to each other they reciprocal curiosity to know what extraordinary accident on both side occasion this so strange and unexpected meeting . at last , have obtain of a promise of communicate likewise in she turn , begin to relate what the reader , if he be desirous to know she history , may read in the ensue chapter . chapter iv . the history of . , after a silence of a few moment , fetch a deep sigh , thus begin : " it be natural to the unhappy to feel a secret concern in recollect those period of they life which have be most delightful to they . the remembrance of past pleasure affect we with a kind of tender grief , like what we suffer for depart friend ; and the idea of both may be say to haunt we imagination . " for this reason , I never reflect without sorrow on those day ( the happiest far of my life ) which we spend together when both be under the care of my aunt western . ! why be and no more ? you remember , I be sure , when we know each
each other by no other name . indeed , you give the latter appellation with too much cause . I have since experience how much I deserv it . you , my , be always my superior in everything , and I heartily hope you will be so in you fortune . I shall never forget the wise and matronly advice you once give I , when I lament be disappointed of a ball , though you could not be then fourteen year old .---- of my , how blest must have be my situation , when I could think such a disappointment a misfortune ; and when indeed it be the greatest I have ever know ! " " and yet , my dear , " answer , " it be then a serious matter with you . Comfort yourself therefore with thinking , that whatever you now lament may hereafter appear as trifling and contemptible as a ball would at this time . " " Ala , my , " reply the other lady , " you yourself will think otherwise of my present situation ; for greatly must that tender heart be alte if my misfortune do not draw many a sigh , nay , many a tear , from you . the knowledge of this should perhaps deter I from relate what I be convince will so much affect you . " here stopt , till , at the repeat entreaty of , she thus proceed : " though you must have hear much of my marriage ; yet , as matter may probably have be misrepresent , I will set out from the very commencement of my unfortunate acquaintance with my present husband ; which be at , soon after you leave my aunt , and return home to you father . " among the gay young fellow who be at this season at , be one . he be handsome , _dgag ,_ extremely gallant , and in he dress exceed most other . in short , my dear , if you be unluckily to see he now , I could describe he no better than by tell you he be the very reverse of everything which he be : for he hath rusticate himself so long , that he be become a absolute wild . but to proceed in my story : the qualifications which he then possess so well recommend he , that , though the people of quality at that time liv separate from the rest of the company , and exclude they from all they party , find mean to gain admittance . it be perhaps no easy matter to avoid he ; for he require very little or no invitation ; and as , be handsome and genteel , he find it no very difficult matter to ingratiate himself with the ladie , so , he have frequently draw he sword , the man do not care publickly to affront he . have it not be for some such reason , I believe he would have be soon expel by he own sex ; for surely he have no strict title to be prefer to the gentry ; nor do they seem inclin to show he any extraordinary favour . they all abuse he behind he back , which might probably proceed from envy ; for by the woman he be well receive , and very particularly distinguished by they . " my aunt , though no person of quality herself , as she have always live about the court , be enrol in that party ; for , by whatever mean you get into the polite circle , when you be once there , it be sufficient merit for you that you be there . this observation , young as you be , you could scarce avoid making from my aunt , who be free , or reserve , with all people , just as they have more or less of this merit . " and this merit , I believe , it be , which principally recommend to she favour . in which he so well succeed , that he be always one of she private party . be he backward in return such distinction ; for he soon grow so very particular in he behaviour to she , that the scandal club first begin to take notice of it , and the better - disposed person make a match between they . for my own part , I confess , I make no doubt but that he design be strictly honourable , as the phrase be ; that be , to rob a lady of she fortune by way of marriage . my aunt be , I conceive , neither young enough nor handsome enough to attract much wicked inclination ; but she have matrimonial charms in great abundance . " I be the more confirm in this opinion from the extraordinary respect which he show to myself from the first moment of we acquaintance . this I understand as a attempt to lessen , if possible , that disinclination which my interest might be suppose to give I towards the match ; and I know not but in some measure it have that effect ; for , as I be well contente with my own fortune , and of all people the least a slave to interested view , so I could not be violently the enemy of a man with whose behaviour to I I be greatly pleased ; and the more so , as I be the only object of such respect ; for he behave at the same time to many woman of quality without any respect at all . " agreeable as this be to I , he soon change it into another kind of behaviour , which be perhaps more so . he now put on much softness and tenderness ,
, and languish and sigh abundantly . at time , indeed , whether from art or nature I will not determine , he give he usual loose to gaiety and mirth ; but this be always in general company , and with other woman ; for even in a country - dance , when he be not my partner , he become grave , and put on the softest look imaginable the moment he approach I . indeed he be in all thing so very particular towards I , that I must have be blind not to have discover it . and , and , and -- -- " " and you be more pleased still , my dear Harriet , " cry ; " you need not be asham , " add she , sigh ; " for sure there be irresistible charms in tenderness , which too many man be able to affect . " " true , " answer she cousin ; " men , who in all other instance want common sense , be very Machiavels in the art of loving . I wish I do not know a instance .-- well , scandal now begin to be as busy with I as it have before be with my aunt ; and some good lady do not scruple to affirm that have a intrigue with we both . " but , what may seem astonish , my aunt never see , nor in the least seem to suspect , that which be visible enough , I believe , from both we behaviour . one would indeed think that love quite put out the eyes of a old woman . in fact , they so greedily swallow the address which be make to they , that , like a outrageous glutton , they be not at leisure to observe what pass amongst other at the same table . this I have observ in more case than my own ; and this be so strongly verifie by my aunt , that , though she often find we together at she return from the pump , the least canting word of he , pretend impatience at she absence , effectually smother all suspicion . one artifice succeed with she to admiration . this be he treat I like a little child , and never call I by any other name in she presence but that of pretty miss . this indeed do he some disservice with you humble servant ; but I soon see through it , especially as in she absence he behave to I , as I have say , in a different manner . however , if I be not greatly disoblige by a conduct of which I have discover the design , I smart very severely for it ; for my aunt really conceive I to be what she lover ( as she think he ) call I , and treat I in all respects as a perfect infant . to say the truth , I wonder she have not insist on my again wear leading - string . " at last , my lover ( for so he be ) think proper , in a most solemn manner , to disclose a secret which I have know long before . he now place all the love which he have pretend to my aunt to my account . he lament , in very pathetic term , the encouragement she have give he , and make a high merit of the tedious hour in which he have undergone she conversation .-- what shall I tell you , my dear ?-- then I will confess the truth . I be pleased with my man . I be pleased with my conquest . to rival my aunt delight I ; to rival so many other woman charme I . in short , I be afraid I do not behave as I should do , even upon the very first declaration -- I wish I do not almost give he positive encouragement before we part . " the now talk loudly -- I might almost say , roar against I . several young woman affec to shin my acquaintance , not so much , perhaps , from any real suspicion , as from a desire of banish I from a company in which I too much engross they favourite man . and here I can not omit express my gratitude to the kindness intend I by , who take I one day aside , and give I advice , which if I have follow , I have be a happy woman . ` child , ' say he , `I be sorry to see the familiarity which subsist between you and a fellow who be altogether unworthy of you , and I be afraid will prove you ruin . as for you old stink aunt , if it be to be no injury to you and my pretty Sophy western ( I assure you I repeat he word ) , I should be heartily glad that the fellow be in possession of all that belong to she . I never advise old woman : for , if they take it into they head to go to the , it be no more possible than worth while to keep they from he . Innocence and youth and beauty be worthy a better fate , and I would save they from he clutch . let I advise you therefore , dear child , never suffer this fellow to be particular with you again . ' many more thing he say to I , which I have now forget , and indeed I attend very little to they at the time ; for inclination contradict all he say ; and , beside , I could not be persuade that woman of quality would condescmend to familiarity with such a person as he describe
describe . " but I be afraid , my dear , I shall tire you with a detail of so many minute circumstance . to be concise , therefore , imagine I marry ; imagine I with my husband , at the foot of my aunt ; and then imagine the maddest woman in , in a raving fit , and you imagination will suggest to you no more than what really happen . " the very next day my aunt leave the place , partly to avoid see or myself , and as much perhaps to avoid see any one else ; for , though I be tell she hath since deny everything stoutly , I believe she be then a little confound at she disappointment . since that time , I have write to she many letter , but never could obtain a answer , which I must own sit somewhat the heavier , as she herself be , though undesignedly , the occasion of all my suffering : for , have it not be under the colour of pay he address to she , would never have find sufficient opportunity to have engage my heart , which , in other circumstance , I still flatter myself would not have be a easy conquest to such a person . indeed , I believe I should not have er so grossly in my choice if I have rely on my own judgment ; but I trust totally to the opinion of other , and very foolishly take the merit of a man for grant whom I see so universally well receive by the woman . what be the reason , my dear , that we , who have understanding equal to the wisest and greatest of the other sex , so often make choice of the silliest fellow for companion and favourite ? it raise my indignation to the highest pitch to reflect on the number of woman of sense who have be undone by fools . " here she pause a moment ; but , make no answer , she proceed as in the next chapter . v. in which the history of be continue . " we remain at no longer than a fortnight after we wedding ; for as to any reconciliation with my aunt , there be no hope ; and of my fortune not one farthing could be touch till I be of age , of which I now want more than two year . my husband therefore be resolve to set out for ; against which I remonstrate very earnestly , and insist on a promise which he have make I before we marriage that I should never take this journey against my consent ; and indeed I never intend to consent to it ; nor will anybody , I believe , blame I for that resolution ; but this , however , I never mention to my husband , and petition only for the reprieve of a month ; but he have fix the day , and to that day he obstinately adhere . " the evening before we departure , as we be dispute this point with great eagerness on both side , he start suddenly from he chair , and leave I abruptly , say he be go to the room . he be hardly out of the house when I see a paper lie on the floor , which , I suppose , he have carelessly pull from he pocket , together with he handkerchief . this paper I take up , and , finde it to be a letter , I make no scruple to open and read it ; and indeed I read it so often that I can repeat it to you almost word for word . this then be the letter : ._ 'sir , ' yours receive , and be surprize you should use I in this manner , as have never see any of you cash , unless for one linsey - woolsey coat , and you bill now be upward of  150 . consider , sir , how often you have fob I off with you be shortly to be marry to this lady and t'other lady ; but I can neither live on hope or promise , nor will my woollen - draper take any such in payment . you tell I you be secure of have either the aunt or the niece , and that you might have marry the aunt before this , whose jointure you say be immense , but that you prefer the niece on account of she ready money . pray , sir , take a fool 's advice for once , and marry the first you can get . you will pardon my offer my advice , as you know I sincerely wish you well . shall draw on you per next post , in favour of and company , at fourteen day , which doubt not you honouring , and am , , you humble servant , ' SAM . Cosgrave . ' " this be the letter , word for word . , my dear girl -- guess how this letter affect I . you prefer the niece on account of she ready money ! if every one of these word have be a dagger , I could with pleasure have stab they into he heart ; but I will not recound my frantic behaviour on the occasion . I have pretty well spend my tear before he return home ; but sufficient remains of they appear in my swollen eye . he throw himself sullenly into he chair , and for a long time we be both silent . at length , in a haughty tone , he say , ` I hope , madam , you servants have pack up all you thing ; for the coach will be ready by
by six in the morning . ' my patience be totally subdue by this provocation , and I answer , ` no , sir , there be a letter still remain unpacked ;' and then throw it on the table I fall to upbraid he with the most bitter language I could invent . " whether guild , or shame , or prudence , restrain he I can not say ; but , though he be the most passionate of man , he exert no rage on this occasion . he endeavoure , on the contrary , to pacify I by the most gentle means . he swore the phrase in the letter to which I principally objecte be not he , nor have he ever write any such . he own , indeed , the having mention he marriage , and that preference which he have give to myself , but deny with many oath the have mention any such matter at all on account of the strait he be in for money , arise , he say , from he have too long neglect he estate in . and this , he say , which he could not bear to discover to I , be the only reason of he have so strenuously insist on we journey . he then use several very endearing expression , and conclude by a very fond caress , and many violent protestation of love . " there be one circumstance which , though he do not appeal to it , have much weight with I in he favour , and that be the word jointure in the taylor 's letter , whereas my aunt never have be married , and this well know .---- as I imagine , therefore , that the fellow must have insert this of he own head , or from hearsay , I persuade myself he might have venture likewise on that odious line on no better authority . what reason be this , my dear ? be I not a advocate rather than a judge ? -- but why do I mention such a circumstance as this , or appeal to it for the justification of my forgiveness ?-- in short , have he be guilty of twenty time as much , half the tenderness and fondness which he use would have prevail on I to have forgiven he . I now make no farther objection to we setting out , which we do the next morning , and in a little more than a week arrive at the seat of . " you curiosity will excuse I from relate any occurrences which past during we journey ; for it would indeed be highly disagreeable to travel it over again , and no less so to you to travel it over with I . " this seat , then , be a ancient mansion - house : if I be in one of those merry humour in which you have so often see I , I could describe it to you ridiculously enough . it look as if it have be formerly inhabit by a gentleman . here be room enough , and not the less room on account of the furniture ; for indeed there be very little in it . a old woman , who seem coeval with the building , and greatly resemble she whom not mention in the , receive we at the gate , and in a howl scarce human , and to I unintelligible , welcome she master home . in short , the whole scene be so gloomy and melancholy , that it throw my spirits into the lowest dejection ; which my husband discern , instead of relieving , encrease by two or three malicious observation . ` there be good house , madam , ' say he , ` as you find , in other place besides ; but perhaps you have rather be in a dirty lodging at . ' " happy , my dear , be the woman who , in any state of life , hath a cheerful good - natured companion to support and comfort she ! but why do I reflect on happy situation only to aggravate my own misery ? my companion , far from clear up the gloom of solitude , soon convince I that I must have be wretch with he in any place , and in any condition . in a word , he be a surly fellow , a character perhaps you have never see ; for , indeed , no woman ever see it exemplify but in a father , a brother , or a husband ; and , though you have a father , he be not of that character . this surly fellow have formerly appear to I the very reverse , and so he do still to every other person . good heaven ! how be it possible for a man to maintain a constant lie in he appearance abroad and in company , and to content himself with shew disagreeable truth only at home ? here , my dear , they make themselves amend for the uneasy restraint which they put on they tempers in the world ; for I have observe , the more merry and gay and good - humoure my husband hath at any time be in company , the more sullen and morose he be sure to become at we next private meeting . how shall I describe he barbarity ? to my fondness he be cold and insensible . my little comical way , which you , my , and which other , have call so agreeable , he treat with contempt . in my most serious moments he sung and whistle ; and whenever I be thoroughly deject and miserable he be angry , and abuse I : for , though he be never pleased with my good
good - humour , nor ascribe it to my satisfaction in he , yet my low spirits always offend he , and those he impute to my repentance of have ( as he say ) marry a . " you will easily conceive , my dear Graveairs ( I ask you pardon , I really forget myself ) , that , when a woman make a imprudent match in the sense of the world , that be , when she be not a arrant prostitute to pecuniary interest , she must necessarily have some inclination and affection for she man . you will have easily believe that this affection may possibly be lessen ; nay , I do assure you , contempt will wholly eradicate it . this contempt I now begin to entertain for my husband , whom I now discover to be -- I must use the expression -- a arrant blockhead . perhaps you will wonder I do not make this discovery long before ; but woman will suggest a thousand excuse to themselves for the folly of those they like : beside , give I leave to tell you , it require a most penetrating eye to discern a fool through the disguise of gaiety and good breeding . " it will be easily imagine that , when I once despise my husband , as I confess to you I soon do , I must consequently dislike he company ; and indeed I have the happiness of be very little trouble with it ; for we house be now most elegantly furnish , we cellar well stock , and dog and horse provide in great abundance . as my gentleman therefore entertain he neighbour with great hospitality , so he neighbour resort to he with great alacrity ; and sport and drink consum so much of he time , that a small part of he conversation , that be to say , of he ill - humours , fall to my share . " happy would it have be for I if I could have easily have avoid all other disagreeable company ; but , alas ! I be confine to some which constantly torment I ; and the more , as I see no prospect of be relieve from they . these companion be my own racking thought , which plagu and in a manner haunt I night and day . in this situation I past through a scene , the horror of which can neither be paint nor imagine . think , my dear , figure , if you can , to yourself , what I must have undergone . I become a mother by the man I scorn , hate , and detest . I go through all the agony and misery of a lie - in ( ten time more painful in such a circumstance than the worst labour can be when one endure it for a man one love ) in a desert , or rather , indeed , a scene of riot and revel , without a friend , without a companion , or without any of those agreeable circumstance which often alleviate , and perhaps sometimes more than compensate , the suffering of we sex at that season . " chapter vi . in which the mistake of the landlord throw into a dreadful consternation . be proceed in she narrative when she be interrupt by the entrance of dinner , greatly to the concern of ; for the misfortunes of she friend have raise she anxiety , and leave she no appetite but what be to satisfy by she relation . the landlord now attend with a plate under he arm , and with the same respect in he countenance and address which he would have put on have the lady arrive in a coach and six . the married lady seem less affect with she own misfortunes than be she cousin ; for the former eat very heartily , whereas the latter could hardly swallow a morsel . likewise show more concern and sorrow in she countenance than appear in the other lady ; who , have observe these symptom in she friend , beg she to be comforte , say , " perhaps all may yet end better than either you or I expect . " we landlord think he have now a opportunity to open he mouth , and be resolve not to omit it . " I be sorry , madam , " cry he , " that you ladyship can not eat ; for to be sure you must be hungry after so long fast . I hope you ladyship be not uneasy at anything , for , as madam there say , all may end better than anybody expect . a gentleman who be here just now bring excellent news ; and perhaps some folk who have give other folk the slip may get to before they be overtaken ; and if they do , I make no doubt but they will find people who will be very ready to receive they . " all person under the apprehension of danger convert whatever they see and hear into the object of that apprehension . therefore immediately conclude , from the foregoing speech , that she be know , and pursue by she father . she be now strike with the utmost consternation , and for a few minute deprive of the power of speech ; which she no sooner recover than she desire the landlord to send he servants out of the room , and then , address herself to he , say , " I perceive , sir , you know who we be ; but I beseech you -- nay , I be convince , if you have any compassion or goodness , you will not betray we . " " I betray you ladyship ! " quoth the landlord ;
; " no ( and then he swore several very hearty oath ) ; I would sooner be cut into ten thousand piece . I hate all treachery . I ! I never betraye any one in my life yet , and I be sure I shall not begin with so sweet a lady as you ladyship . all the world would very much blame I if I should , since it will be in you ladyship 's power so shortly to reward I . my wife can witness for I , I know you ladyship the moment you come into the house : I say it be you honour , before I lift you from you horse , and I shall carry the bruise I get in you ladyship 's service to the grave ; but what signify that , as long as I save you ladyship ? to be sure some people this morning would have think of get a reward ; but no such thought ever enter into my head . I would sooner starve than take any reward for betraie you ladyship . " " I promise you , sir , " say , " if it be ever in my power to reward you , you shall not lose by you generosity . " " - a - day , madam ! " answer the landlord ; " in you ladyship 's power ! put it as much into you will ! I be only afraid you honour will forget such a poor man as a innkeeper ; but , if you ladyship should not , I hope you will remember what reward I refuse -- refuse ! that be , I would have refuse , and to be sure it may be call refuse , for I might have have it certainly ; and to be sure you might have be in some house ; -- but , for my part , would not methink for the world have you ladyship wrong I so much as to imagine I ever think of betraie you , even before I hear the good news . " " what news , pray ? " say , something eagerly . " not you ladyship hear it , then ? " cry the landlord ; " nay , like enough , for I hear it only a few minute ago ; and if I have never hear it , may the fly away with I this instant if I would have betraye you honour ! no , if I would , may I -- " here he subjoin several dreadful imprecation , which at last interrupt , and beg to know what he mean by the news .-- he be go to answer , when come run into the room , all pale and breathless , and cry out , " madam , we be all undone , all ruin , they be come , they be come ! " these word almost froze up the blood of ; but ask who be come ?--" who ? " answer she , " why , the french ; several hundred thousand of they be land , and we shall be all murder and ravish . " as a miser , who hath , in some well - build city , a cottage , value twenty shilling , when at a distance he be alarme with the news of a fire , turn pale and tremble at he loss ; but when he find the beautiful palace only be burnt , and he own cottage remain safe , he come instantly to himself , and smile at he good fortune : or as ( for we dislike something in the former simile ) the tender mother , when terrify with the apprehension that she darl boy be drown , be struck senseless and almost dead with consternation ; but when she be tell that little master be safe , and the victory only , with twelve hundr brave man , go to the bottom , life and sense again return , maternal fondness enjoy the sudden relief from all its fear , and the general benevolence which at another time would have deeply feel the dreadful catastrophe , lie fast asleep in she mind ;--so , than whom none be more capable of tenderly feel the general calamity of she country , find such immediate satisfaction from the relief of those terror she have of be overtake by she father , that the arrival of the french scarce make any impression on she . she gently chide she maid for the fright into which she have throw she , and say " she be glad it be no worse ; for that she have fear somebody else be come . " " ay , ay , " quoth the landlord , smile , " she ladyship know better thing ; she know the french be we very best friend , and come over hither only for we good . they be the people who be to make flourish again . I warrant she honou think the duke be come ; and that be enough to put she into a fright . I be go to tell you ladyship the news .-- he honour 's majesty , bless he , hath give the duke the slip , and be marching as fast as he can to , and ten thousand french be landed to join he on the road . " be not greatly pleased with this news , nor with the gentleman who relate it ; but , as she still imagine he know she ( for she could not possibly have any suspicion of the real truth ) , she durst not show any dislike . and now the landlord , have remove the cloth from the table , withdrew ; but at he departure frequently repeat he hope of be
be remember hereafter . the mind of be not at all easy under the supposition of be know at this house ; for she still apply to herself many thing which the landlord have address to ; she therefore order she maid to pump out of he by what mean he have become acquainted with she person , and who have offer he the reward for betraie she ; she likewise order the horse to be in readiness by four in the morning , at which hour promise to bear she company ; and then , compose herself as well as she could , she desire that lady to continue she story . chapter vii . in which conclude she history . while , in pursuance of the command of she mistress , order a bowl of punch , and invite my landlord and landlady to partake of it , thus go on with she relation . " most of the officer who be quarter at a town in we neighbourhood be of my husband 's acquaintance . among these there be a lieutenant , a very pretty sort of man , and who be marry to a woman , so agreeable both in she temper and conversation , that from we first know each other , which be soon after my lying - in , we be almost inseparable companion ; for I have the good fortune to make myself equally agreeable to she . " the lieutenant , who be neither a sot nor a sportsman , be frequently of we party ; indeed he be very little with my husband , and no more than good breeding constrain he to be , as he liv almost constantly at we house . my husband often express much dissatisfaction at the lieutenant 's prefer my company to he ; he be very angry with I on that account , and give I many a hearty curse for draw away he companion ; say , ` I ought to be d -- and ' for have spoil one of the prettiest fellow in the world , by make a milksop of he . ' " you will be mistaken , my dear , if you imagine that the anger of my husband arise from my deprive he of a companion ; for the lieutenant be not a person with whose society a fool could be pleased ; and , if I should admit the possibility of this , so little right have my husband to place the loss of he companion to I , that I be convince it be my conversation alone which induce he ever to come to the house . no , child , it be envy , the worst and most rancorous kind of envy , the envy of superiority of understanding . the wretch could not bear to see my conversation prefer to he , by a man of whom he could not entertain the least jealousy . of my dear Sophy , you be a woman of sense ; if you marry a man , as be most probable you will , of less capacity than yourself , make frequent trial of he temper before marriage , and see whether he can bear to submit to such a superiority .-- promise I , Sophy , you will take this advice ; for you will hereafter find its importance . " " it be very likely I shall never marry at all , " answer ; " I think , at least , I shall never marry a man in whose understanding I see any defect before marriage ; and I promise you I would rather give up my own than see any such afterwards . " " give up you understanding ! " reply ; " oh , fie , child ! I will not believe so meanly of you . everything else I might myself be bring to give up ; but never this . natur would not have allot this superiority to the wife in so many instance , if she have intend we should all of we have surrender it to the husband . this , indeed , man of sense never expect of we ; of which the lieutenant I have just mention be one notable example ; for though he have a very good understanding , he always acknowledge ( as be really true ) that he wife have a better . and this , perhaps , be one reason of the hatre my tyrant bear she . " before he would be so governed by a wife , he say , especially such a ugly b -- ( for , indeed , she be not a regular beauty , but very agreeable and extremely genteel ) , he would see all the woman upon earth at the , which be a very usual phrase with he . he say , he wonder what I could see in she to be so char with she company : since this woman , say he , hath come among we , there be a end of you beloved read , which you pretend to like so much , that you could not afford time to return the visit of the ladie in this country ; and I must confess I have be guilty of a little rudeness this way ; for the ladie there be at least no better than the mere country lady here ; and I think I need make no other excuse to you for decline any intimacy with they . " this correspondence , however , continue a whole year , even all the while the lieutenant be quarter in that town ; for which I be contente to pay the tax of be constantly abuse in the manner above mention by my husband ; I mean when he be at home ; for he be frequently absent
absent a month at a time at , and once make a journey of two month to : in all which journey I think it a very singular happiness that he never once desire my company ; nay , by he frequent censure on man who could not travel , as he phrase it , without a wife tie up to they tail , he sufficiently intimate that , have I be never so desirous of accompany he , my wish would have be in vain ; but , heaven know , such wish be very far from my thought . " at length my friend be remove from I , and I be again leave to my solitude , to the tormenting conversation with my own reflection , and to apply to book for my only comfort . I now read almost all day long . how many boonks do you think I read in three month ? " " I can not guess , indeed , cousin , " answer . " perhaps half a score . " " half a score ! half a thousand , child ! " answer the other . " I read a good deal in 's of ; a great deal in 's , the , 's , 's , , the , and 's human understanding . " during this interval I write three very supplicating , and , I think , move letter to my aunt ; but , as I receive no answer to any of they , my disdain would not suffer I to continue my application . " here she stopt , and , look earnestly at , say , " , my dear , I read something in you eye which reproach I of a neglect in another place , where I should have meet with a kinder return . " " indeed , dear , " answer , " you story be a apology for any neglect ; but , indeed , I feel that I have be guilty of a remissness , without so good a excuse .-- yet pray proceed ; for I long , though I tremble , to hear the end . " thus , then , resume she narrative :--" my husband now take a second journey to , where he continue upward of three month ; during the greater part of this time I lead a life which nothing but have lead a worse could make I think tolerable ; for perfect solitude can never be reconcile to a social mind , like mine , but when it relieve you from the company of those you hate . what add to my wretchedness be the loss of my little infant : not that I pretend to have have for it that extravagant tenderness of which I believe I might have be capable under other circumstance ; but I resolve , in every instance , to discharge the duty of the tenderest mother ; and this care prevent I from feel the weight of that heaviest of all thing , when it can be at all say to lie heavy on we hand . " I have spend full ten week almost entirely by myself , have see nobody all that time , except my servants and a very few visitor , when a young lady , a relation to my husband , come from a distant part of to visit I . she have staid once before a week at my house , and then I give she a pressing invitation to return ; for she be a very agreeable woman , and have improve good natural part by a proper education . indeed , she be to I a welcome guest . " a few day after she arrival , perceive I in very low spirit , without enquir the cause , which , indeed , she very well know , the young lady fall to compassionat my case . she say , ` though politeness have prevent I from complain to my husband 's relation of he behaviour , yet they all be very sensible of it , and feel great concern upon that account ; but none more than herself . ' and after some more general discourse on this head , which I own I could not forbear countenancing , at last , after much previous precaution and enjoin concealment , she communicate to I , as a profound secret -- that my husband keep a mistress . " you will certainly imagine I hear this news with the utmost insensibility -- Upon my word , if you do , you imagination will mislead you . Contempt have not so keep down my anger to my husband , but that hatre rise again on this occasion . what can be the reason of this ? be we so abominably selfish , that we can be concerned at other have possession even of what we despise ? or be we not rather abominably vain , and be not this the greatest injury do to we vanity ? what think you , ? " " I do not know , indeed , " answer ; " I have never trouble myself with any of these deep contemplation ; but I think the lady do very ill in communicate to you such a secret . " " and yet , my dear , this conduct be natural , " reply ; " and , when you have see and read as much as myself , you will acknowledge it to be so . " " I be sorry to hear it be natural , " return ; " for I want neither read nor experience to convince I that it be very dishonourable and very ill - nature : nay , it be surely as ill - breed to tell a husband or wife of the fault of each
each other as to tell they of they own . " " well , " continue , " my husband at last return ; and , if I be thoroughly acquainted with my own thought , I hate he now more than ever ; but I despise he rather less : for certainly nothing so much weaken we contempt , as a injury do to we pride or we vanity . " he now assume a carriage to I so very different from what he have lately worn , and so nearly resembl he behaviour the first week of we marriage , that , have I now have any spark of love remaining , he might , possibly , have rekindle my fondness for he . but , though hatre may succeed to contempt , and may perhaps get the better of it , love , I believe , cannot . the truth be , the passion of love be too restless to remain contente without the gratification which it receive from its object ; and one can no more be inclin to love without love than we can have eye without see . when a husband , therefore , cease to be the object of this passion , it be most probable some other man -- I say , my dear , if you husband grow indifferent to you -- if you once come to despise he -- I say -- that be -- if you have the passion of love in you -- ! I have bewilder myself so -- but one be apt , in these abstract consideration , to lose the concatenation of idea , as say :-- in short , the truth be -- in short , I scarce know what it be ; but , as I be say , my husband return , and he behaviour , at first , greatly surprize I ; but he soon acquaint I with the motive , and teach I to account for it . in a word , then , he have spend and lose all the ready money of my fortune ; and , as he could mortgage he own estate no deeper , he be now desirous to supply himself with cash for he extravagance , by sell a little estate of mine , which he could not do without my assistance ; and to obtain this favour be the whole and sole motive of all the fondness which he now put on . " with this I peremptorily refuse to comply . I tell he , and I tell he truly , that , have I be possess of the at we first marriage , he might have command it all ; for it have be a constant maxim with I , that where a woman dispose of she heart , she should always deposit she fortune ; but , as he have be so kind , long ago , to restore the former into my possession , I be resolve likewise to retain what little remain of the latter . " I will not describe to you the passion into which these word , and the resolute air in which they be speak , throw he : nor will I trouble you with the whole scene which succeed between we . out come , you may be well assure , the story of the mistress ; and out it do come , with all the embellishment which anger and disdain could bestow upon it . " seem a little thunderstruck with this , and more confused than I have see he , though he idea be always confused enough , heaven know . he do not , however , endeaavor to exculpate himself ; but take a method which almost equally confound I . what be this but recrimination ? he affec to be jealous :-- he may , for atch I know , be inclin enough to jealousy in he natural temper ; nay , he must have have it from nature , or the must have put it into he head ; for I defy all the world to cast a just aspersion on my character : nay , the most scandalous tongue have never da censure my reputation . my fame , I thank heaven , hath be always as spotless as my life ; and let falsehood itself accuse that if it dare . no , my dear Graveair , however provoke , however ill - treat , however injured in my love , I have firmly resolve never to give the least room for censure on this account .-- and yet , my dear , there be some people so malicious , some tongue so venomous , that no innocence can escape they . the most undesigned word , the most accidental look , the least familiarity , the most innocent freedom , will be misconstrue , and magnify into I know not what , by some people . but I despise , my dear Graveairs , I despise all such slander . no such malice , I assure you , ever give I a uneasy moment . no , no , I promise you I be above all that . -- but where be I ? o let I see , I tell you my husband be jealous -- and of whom , I pray ?-- why , of whom but the lieutenant I mention to you before ! he be oblige to resort above a year and more back to find any object for this unaccountable passion , if , indeed , he really feel any such , and be not a arrant counterfeit in order to abuse I . " but I have ti you already with too many particular . I will now bring my story to a very speedy conclusion . in short , then , after many scene very unworthy to be
be repeat , in which my cousin engage so heartily on my side , that at last turn she out of door ; when he find I be neither to be soothe nor bully into compliance , he take a very violent method indeed . perhaps you will conclude he beat I ; but this , though he hath approach very near to it , he never actually do . he confin I to my room , without suffer I to have either pen , ink , paper , or book : and a servant every day make my bed , and bring I my food . " when I have remain a week under this imprisonment , he make I a visit , and , with the voice of a schoolmaster , or , what be often much the same , of a tyrant , ask I , ` if I would yet comply ? ' I answer , very stoutly , ` that I would die first . ' ` then so you shall , and be d -- nd ! ' cry he ; ` for you shall never go alive out of this room . ' " here I remain a fortnight longer ; and , to say the truth , my constancy be almost subdue , and I begin to think of submission ; when , one day , in the absence of my husband , who be go abroad for some short time , by the greatest good fortune in the world , a accident happen .-- I -- at a time when I begin to give way to the utmost despair ---- everything would be excusable at such a time -- at that very time I receive ---- but it would take up a hour to tell you all particular .-- in one word , then ( for I will not tire you with circumstance ) , gold , the common key to all padlock , open my door , and set I at liberty . " I now make haste to , where I immediately procure a passage to ; and be proceed to , in order to throw myself into the protection of my aunt , or of you father , or of any relation who would afford it I . my husband overtake I last night at the inn where I lay , and which you leave a few minute before I ; but I have the good luck to escape he , and to follow you . " and thus , my dear , end my history : a tragical one , I be sure , it be to myself ; but , perhaps , I ought rather to apologize to you for its dullness . " heav a deep sigh , and answer , " indeed , , I pity you from my soul !----But what could you expect ? why , why , would you marry a ? " " upon my word , " reply she cousin , " you censure be unjust . there be , among the irish , man of as much worth and honour as any among the : nay , to speak the truth , generosity of spirit be rather more common among they . I have know some example there , too , of good husband ; and I believe these be not very plenty in . ask I , rather , what I could expect when I marry a fool ; and I will tell you a solemn truth ; I do not know he to be so . " --" can no man , " say , in a very low and alte voice , " do you think , make a bad husband , who be not a fool ? " " that , " answer the other , " be too general a negative ; but none , I believe , be so likely as a fool to prove so . among my acquaintance , the silliest fellow be the worst husband ; and I will venture to assert , as a fact , that a man of sense rarely behave very ill to a wife who deserve very well . " chapter viii . a dreadful alarm in the inn , with the arrival of a unexpected friend of . Sophia now , at the desire of she cousin , related -- not what follow , but what hath go before in this history : for which reason the reader will , I suppose , excuse I for not repeat it over again . one remark , however , I can not forbear make on she narrative , namely , that she make no more mention of , from the beginning to the end , than if there have be no such person alive . this I will neither endeaavor to account for nor to excuse . indeed , if this may be call a kind of dishonesty , it seem the more inexcusable , from the apparent openness and explicit sincerity of the other lady . -- but so it be . just as arrive at the conclusion of she story , there arrive in the room where the two lady be sit a noise , not unlike , in loudness , to that of a pack of hound just let out from they kennel ; nor , in shrillness , to cat , when caterwaul ; or to screech owl ; or , indeed , more like ( for what animal can resemble a human voice ? ) to those sound which , in the pleasant mansion of that gate which seem to derive its name from a duplicity of tongue , issue from the mouth , and sometimes from the nostril , of those fair river nymph , ycle of old the ; in the vulgar tongue translate oyster - wench ; for
for when , instead of the antient libation of milk and honey and oil , the rich distillation from the juniper - berry , or , perhaps , from malt , hath , by the early devotion of they votary , be pour forth in great abundance , should any daring tongue with unhallowed license prophane , _i.e ._ , depreciate , the delicate fat oyster , the plaice sound and firm , the flounder as much alive as when in the water , the shrimp as big as a prawn , the fine cod alive but a few hour ago , or any other of the various treasure which those water - deity who fish the sea and rivers have commit to the care of the nymph , the angry lift up they immortal voice , and the prophane wretch be struck deaf for he impiety . such be the noise which now burst from one of the room below ; and soon the thunder , which long have rattle at a distance , begin to approach nearer and nearer , till , have ascend by degree upstairs , it at last enter the apartment where the lady be . in short , to drop all metaphor and figure , , have scold violently below - stair , and continue the same all the way up , come in to she mistress in a most outrageous passion , cry out , " what doth you ladyship think ? would you imagine that this impudent villain , the master of this house , hath have the impudence to tell I , nay , to stand it out to my face , that you ladyship be that nasty , stink wh --re ( they call she ) , that run about the country with the Pretender ? Nay , the lying , saucy villain have the assurance to tell I that you ladyship have own yourself to be so ; but I have claw the rascal ; I have leave the mark of my nails in he impudent face . my lady ! say I , you saucy scoundrel ; my lady be meat for no pretender . she be a young lady of as good fashion , and family , and fortune , as any in . do you never hear of the great Squire western , sirrah ? she be he only daughter ; she be -- --, and heiress to all he great estate . my lady to be call a nasty Scotch wh -- re by such a varlet !-- to be sure I wish I have knock he brain out with the punch - bowl . " the principal uneasiness with which be affect on this occasion Honou have herself cause , by have in she passion discover who she be . however , as this mistake of the landlord sufficientely account for those passage which have before mistaken , she acquire some ease on that account ; nor could she , upon the whole , forbear smiling . this enrage , and she cry , " indeed , madam , I do not think you ladyship would have make a laugh matter of it . to be call whore by such a impudent low rascal . you ladyship may be angry with I , for atch I know , for take you part , since proffer service , they say , stink ; but to be sure I could never bear to hear a lady of mine call whore .-- will I bear it . I be sure you ladyship be as virtuous a lady as ever sit foot on English ground , and I will claw any villain 's eye out who dare for to offer to presume for to say the least word to the contrary . nobody ever could say the least ill of the character of any lady that ever I wait upon . " _Hinc illae lachryma ;_ in plain truth , Honou have as much love for she mistress as most servants have , that be to say -- but besides this , she pride oblige she to support the character of the lady she wait on ; for she think she own be in a very close manner connect with it . in proportion as the character of she mistress be raise , hers likewise , as she conceive , be raise with it ; and , on the contrary , she think the one could not be lower without the other . on this subject , reader , I must stop a moment , to tell thee a story . " the famous , step one day , from a house where she have make a short visit , into she coach , see a great mob assemble , and she footman all bloody and dirty ; the fellow , be ask by he mistress the reason of he be in that condition , answer , ` I have be fight , madam , with a impudent rascal who call you ladyship a wh -- re . ' ` you blockhead , ' reply , ` at this rate you must fight every day of you life ; why , you fool , all the world know it . ' ` do they ? ' cry the fellow , in a muttering voice , after he have shut the coach - door , ` they not call I a whore 's footman for all that . ' " thus the passion of appear natural enough , even if it be to be no otherwise account for ; but , in reality , there be another cause of she anger ; for which we must beg leave to remind we reader of a circumstance mention in the above simile . there be indeed certain liquor , which , be apply to we passion , or to fire , produce
produce effect the very reverse of those produce by water , as they serve to kindle and inflame , rather than to extinguish . among these , the generous liquor call punch be one . it be not , therefore , without reason , that the learn use to call drink punch pour liquid fire down you throat . now , have unluckily poured so much of this liquid fire down she throat , that the smoke of it begin to ascend into she pericranium and blind the eye of , which be there suppose to keep she residence , while the fire itself from the stomach easily reach the heart , and there inflam the noble passion of pride . so that , upon the whole , we shall cease to wonder at the violent rage of the waiting - woman ; though at first sight we must confess the cause seem inadequate to the effect . and she cousin both do all in they power to extinguish these flame which have roar so loudly all over the house . they at length prevail ; or , to carry the metaphor one step farther , the fire , have consum all the fuel which the language affords , to wit , every reproachful term in it , at last go out of its own accord . but , though tranquillity be restore above - stair , it be not so below ; where my landlady , highly resent the injury do to the beauty of she husband by the flesh - spade of , call aloud for revenge and justice . as to the poor man , who have principally suffer in the engagement , he be perfectly quiet . perhaps the blood which he lose might have cool he anger : for the enemy have not only apply she nail to he cheek , but likewise she fist to he nostril , which lament the blow with tear of blood in great abundance . to this we may add reflection on he mistake ; but indeed nothing so effectually silence he resentment as the manner in which he now discover he error ; for as to the behaviour of , it have the more confirm he in he opinion ; but he be now assure by a person of great figure , and who be attend by a great equipage , that one of the ladie be a woman of fashion , and he intimate acquaintance . by the order of this person , the landlord now ascend , and acquaint we fair traveller that a great gentleman below desire to do they the honour of waiting on they . turn pale and tremble at this message , though the reader will conclude it be too civil , notwithstand the landlord 's blunder , to have come from she father ; but fear hath the common fault of a justice of peace , and be apt to conclude hastily from every slight circumstance , without examine the evidence on both side . to ease the reader 's curiosity , therefore , rather than he apprehension , we proceed to inform he that a irish peer have arrive very late that even at the inn , in he way to . this nobleman , have sally from he supper at the hurricane before commemorate , have see the attendant of , and upon a short enquiry , be inform that she lady , with whom he be very particularly acquaint , be above . this information he have no sooner receive than he address himself to the landlord , pacify he , and send he upstairs with compliment rather civiller than those which be deliver . it may perhaps be wonder at that the waiting - woman herself be not the messenger employ on this occasion ; but we be sorry to say she be not at present qualified for that , or indeed for any other office . the rum ( for so the landlord choose to call the distillation from malt ) have basely take the advantage of the fatigue which the poor woman have undergone , and have make terrible depredation on she noble faculty , at a time when they be very unable to resist the attack . we shall not describe this tragical scene too fully ; but we think ourselves oblige , by that historic integrity which we profess , shortly to hind a matter which we would otherwise have be glad to have spare . many historian , indeed , for want of this integrity , or of diligence , to say no worse , often leave the reader to find out these little circumstance in the dark , and sometimes to he great confusion and perplexity . be very soon ease of she causeless fright by the entry of the noble peer , who be not only a intimate acquaintance of , but in reality a very particular friend of that lady . to say truth , it be by he assistance that she have be enable to escape from she husband ; for this nobleman have the same gallant disposition with those renowned knights of whom we read in heroic story , and have deliver many a imprison nymph from durance . he be indeed as bitter a enemy to the savage authority too often exercise by husband and fathers , over the young and lovely of the other sex , as ever knight - errant be to the barbarous power of enchanter ; nay , to say truth , I have often suspect that those very enchanter with which romance everywhere abounds be in reality no other than the husband of those day ; and matrimony itself be , perhaps , the enchant castle in which the nymph be say to be confine . this nobleman have a estate in the neighbourhood of , and have be for some time
time acquaint with the lady . no sooner , therefore , do he hear of she confinement , than he earnestly apply himself to procure she liberty ; which he presently effect , not by storm the castle , accord to the example of antient heroe , but by corrupt the , in conformity with the modern art of war , in which craft be hold to be preferable to valou , and gold be find to be more irresistible than either lead or steel . this circumstance , however , as the lady do not think it material enough to relate to she friend , we would not at that time impart it to the reader . we rather choose to leave he a while under a supposition that she have find , or coin , or by some very extraordinary , perhaps supernatural means , have possess herself of the money with which she have bribe she keeper , than to interrupt she narrative by give a hint of what see to she of too little importance to be mention . the peer , after a short conversation , could not forbear express some surprize at meet the lady in that place ; nor could he refrain from tell she he imagine she have be go to . very freely answer , " that she have be prevent in she purpose by the arrival of a person she need not mention . in short , " say she , " I be overtake by my husband ( for I need not affect to conceal what the world know too well already ) . I have the good fortune to escape in a most surprizing manner , and be now go to with this young lady , who be a near relation of mine , and who hath escape from as great a tyrant as my own . " he lordship , conclude that this tyrant be likewise a husband , make a speech full of compliment to both the lady , and as full of invective against he own sex ; nor indeed do he avoid some oblique glance at the matrimonial institution itself , and at the unjust power give by it to man over the more sensible and more meritorious part of the species . he end he oration with a offer of he protection , and of he coach and six , which be instantly accept by , and at last , upon she persuasion , by . matter be thus adjust , he lordship take he leave , and the lady retire to rest , where entertaine she cousin with many high encomium on the character of the noble peer , and enlarge very particularly on he great fondness for he wife ; say , she believe he be almost the only person of high rank who be entirely constant to the marriage bed . " indeed , " add she , " my dear Sophy , that be a very rare virtue amongst man of condition . never expect it when you marry ; for , believe I , if you do , you will certainly be deceive . " a gentle sigh stole from at these word , which perhaps contribute to form a dream of no very pleasant kind ; but , as she never reveal this dream to any one , so the reader can not expect to see it relate here . chapter ix . the morning introduce in some pretty writing . a stagecoach . the civility of chambermaid . the heroic temper of . she generosity . the return to it . the departure of the company , and they arrival at ; with some remark for the use of traveller . those member of society who be bear to furnish the blessing of life now begin to light they candle , in order to pursue they daily labour for the use of those who be bear to enjoy these blessing . the sturdy hind now attend the levee of he fellow - labourer the ox ; the cunning artificer , the diligent mechanic , spring from they hard mattress ; and now the bonny housemaid begin to repair the disorder drum - room , while the riotous author of that disorder , in broken interrupted slumber , tumble and toss , as if the hardness of down disquiet they repose . in simple phrase , the clock have no sooner struck seven than the ladie be ready for they journey ; and , at they desire , he lordship and he equipage be prepared to attend they . and now a matter of some difficulty arise ; and this be how he lordship himself should be convey ; for though in stage - coach , where passenger be properly consider as so much luggage , the ingenious coachman stows half a dozen with perfect ease into the place of four ; for well he contrive that the fat hostess , or well - feed alderman , may take up no more room than the slim miss , or taper master ; it be the nature of gut , when well squeeze , to give way , and to lie in a narrow compass ; yet in these vehicle , which be call , for distinction 's sake , gentleman 's coach , though they be often larger than the other , this method of packing be never attempt . he lordship would have put a short end to the difficulty , by very gallantly desire to mount he horse ; but would by no means consent to it . it be therefore conclude that the should , by turn , relieve each other on one of he lordship 's horse , which be presently equip with a side - saddle for that purpose . everything be settle at the inn , the lady discharge they former guide
guide , and make a present to the landlord , partly to repair the bruise which he have receive under herself , and partly on account of what he have suffer under the hand of she enrage wait -woman . and now first discover a loss which give she some uneasiness ; and this be of the hundred - pound bank - bill which she father have give she at they last meeting ; and which , within a very inconsiderable trifle , be all the treasure she be at present worth . she search everywhere , and shook and tumble all she thing to no purpose , the bill be not to be find : and she be at last fully persuade that she have lose it from she pocket when she have the misfortune of tumbling from she horse in the dark lane , as before record : a fact that see the more probable , as she now recollect some discomposure in she pocket which have happene at that time , and the great difficulty with which she have draw forth she handkerchief the very instant before she fall , in order to relieve the distress of . Misfortune of this kind , whatever inconveniency they may be attend with , be incapable of subdue a mind in which there be any strength , without the assistance of avarice . , therefore , though nothing could be worse time than this accident at such a season , immediately get the better of she concern , and , with she wonted serenity and cheerfulness of countenance , return to she company . he lordship conduct the lady into the vehicle , as he do likewise , who , after many civility , and more dear madam , at last yield to the well - breed importunity of she sister , and submit to be compliment with the first ride in the coach ; in which indeed she would afterwards have be contente to have pursue she whole journey , have not she mistress , after several fruitless intimation , at length force she to take she turn on horseback . the coach , now have receive its company , begin to move forwards , attend by many servants , and lead by two captain , who have before rode with he lordship , and who would have be dismiss from the vehicle upon a much less worthy occasion than be this of accommodate two lady . in this they act only as gentleman ; but they be ready at any time to have perform the office of a footman , or indeed would have condescende lower , for the honour of he lordship 's company , and for the convenience of he table . my landlord be so pleased with the present he have receive from , that he rather rejoice in than regret he bruise or he scratch . the reader will perhaps be curious to know the _quantum_ of this present ; but we can not satisfy he curiosity . whatever it be , it satisfy the landlord for he bodily hurt ; but he lament he have not know before how little the lady value she money ; " for to be sure , " say he , " one might have charge every article double , and she would have make no cavil at the reckoning . " he wife , however , be far from draw this conclusion ; whether she really feel any injury do to she husband more than he do himself , I will not say : certain it be , she be much less satisfied with the generosity of . " indeed , " cry she , " my dear , the lady know better how to dispose of she money than you imagine . she might very well think we should not put up such a business without some satisfaction , and the law would have cost she a infinite deal more than this poor little matter , which I wonder you would take . " " you be always so bloodily wise , " quoth the husband : " it would have cost she more , would it ? dost fancy I do not know that as well as thee ? but would any of that more , or so much , have come into we pocket ? indeed , if son the lawyer have be alive , I could have be glad to have put such a pretty business into he hand . he would have get a good pick out of it ; but I have no relation now who be a lawyer , and why should I go to law for the benefit of strangers ? " " Nay , to be sure , " answer she , " you must know best . " " I believe I do , " reply he . " I fancy , when money be to be get , I can smell it out as well as another . everybody , let I tell you , would not have talk people out of this . mind that , I say ; everybody would not have cajol this out of she , mind that . " the wife then join in the applause of she husband 's sagacity ; and thus end the short dialogue between they on this occasion . we will therefore take we leave of these good people , and attend he lordship and he fair companion , who make such good expedition that they perform a journey of ninety mile in two day , and on the second evening arrive in , without have encounter any one adventure on the road worthy the dignity of this history to relate . we pen , therefore , shall imitate the expedition which it describe , and we history shall keep pace with the traveller who be its
its subject . good writer will , indeed , do well to imitate the ingenious traveller in this instance , who always proportion he stay at any place to the beauty , elegancy , and curiosity which it afford . at , at , at , at , and at 's , day be too short for the ravished imagination ; while we admire the wondrous power of art in improve nature . in some of these , be chiefly engage we admiration ; in other , nature and art contmend for we applause ; but , in the last , the former seem to triumph . here appear in she richest attire , and , dress with the modestest simplicity , attend she benignant mistress . here indeed pour forth the choicest treasure which she hath lavish on this world ; and here human nature present you with a object which can be exceed only in the other . the same taste , the same imagination , which luxuriously riot in these elegant scene , can be amuse with object of far inferior note . the woods , the rivers , the lawn of and of Dorset , attract the eye of the ingenious traveller , and retard he pace , which delay he afterwards compensate by swiftly scour over the gloomy heath of , or that pleasant plain which extend itself westward from , where no other object than one single tree only in sixteen mile present itself to the view , unless the cloud , in compassion to we tired spirit , kindly open they variegate mansion to we prospect . not so travel the money - meditating tradesman , the sagacious justice , the dignified doctor , the warm -clad grazier , with all the numerous offspring of wealth and dulness . on they jog , with equal pace , through the verdant meadow or over the barren heath , they horse measure four mile and a half per hour with the utmost exactness ; the eye of the and of he master be alike direct forward , and employ in contemplate the same object in the same manner . with equal rapture the good rider survey the proudest boast of the architect , and those fair building with which some unknown name hath adorn the rich cloathing town ; where heap of brick be pile up as a kind of monument to show that heap of money have be pile there before . and now , reader , as we be in haste to attend we heroine , we will leave to thy sagacity to apply all this to the Boeotian writer , and to those author who be they opposite . this thou will be abundantly able to perform without we aid . Bestir thyself therefore on this occasion ; for , though we will always lend thee proper assistance in difficult place , as we do not , like some other , expect thee to use the art of divination to discover we meaning , yet we shall not indulge thy laziness where nothing but thy own attention be require ; for thou be highly mistaken if thou dost imagine that we intend , when we begin this great work , to leave thy sagacity nothing to do ; or that , without sometimes exercise this talent , thou will be able to travel through we page with any pleasure or profit to thyself . chapter x . contain a hint or two concern virtue , and a few more concerning suspicion . we company , be arrive at , be set down at he lordship 's house , where , while they refresh themselves after the fatigue of they journey , servants be despatch to provide a lodging for the two lady ; for , as she ladyship be not then in town , would by no means consent to accept a bed in the mansion of the peer . some reader will , perhaps , condemn this extraordinary delicacy , as I may call it , of virtue , as too nice and scrupulous ; but we must make allowances for she situation , which must be own to have be very ticklish ; and , when we consider the malice of censorious tongue , we must allow , if it be a fault , the fault be a excess on the right side , and which every woman who be in the self - same situation will do well to imitate . the most formal appearance of virtue , when it be only a appearance , may , perhaps , in very abstracted consideration , seem to be rather less commendable than virtue itself without this formality ; but it will , however , be always more commended ; and this , I believe , will be grant by all , that it be necessary , unless in some very particular case , for every woman to support either the one or the other . a lodging be prepare , accompany she cousin for that evening ; but resolve early in the morning to enquire after the lady into whose protection , as we have formerly mention , she have determine to throw herself when she quit she father 's house . and this she be the more eager in do from some observation she have make during she journey in the coach . now , as we would by no means fix the odious character of suspicion on , we be almost afraid to open to we reader the conceit which fill she mind concern ; of whom she certainly entertaine at present some doubt ; which , as they be very apt to enter into the bosom of the worst of people , we think proper not to mention more plainly till we have first suggest a word or two to we reader touch suspicion in general . of
of this there have always appear to I to be two degree . the first of these I chuse to derive from the heart , as the extreme velocity of its discernment seem to denote some previous inward impulse , and the rather as this superlative degree often form its own object ; see what be not , and always more than really exist . this be that quick - sight penetration whose hawk 's eye no symptom of evil can escape ; which observe not only upon the action , but upon the word and look , of man ; and , as it proceed from the heart of the observer , so it dive into the heart of the observe , and there espy evil , as it be , in the first embryo ; nay , sometimes before it can be say to be conceive . a admirable faculty , if it be infallible ; but , as this degree of perfection be not even claim by more than one mortal be ; so from the fallibility of such acute discernment have arisen many sad mischief and most grievous heart -ach to innocence and virtue . I can not help , therefore , regard this vast quick -sightedness into evil as a vicious excess , and as a very pernicious evil in itself . and I be the more inclined to this opinion , as I be afraid it always proceed from a bad heart , for the reason I have above mention , and for one more , namely , because I never know it the property of a good one . now , from this degree of suspicion I entirely and absolutely acquin . a second degree of this quality seem to arise from the head . this be , indeed , no other than the faculty of see what be before you eye , and of draw conclusion from what you see . the former of these be unavoidable by those who have any eye , and the latter be perhaps no less certain and necessary a consequence of we have any brain . this be altogether as bitter a enemy to guil as the former be to innocence : nor can I see it in a unamiable light , even though , through human fallibility , it should be sometimes mistaken . for instance , if a husband should accidentally surprize he wife in the lap or in the embrace of some of those pretty young gentleman who profess the art of cuckold - make , I should not highly , I think , blame he for conclude something more than what he see , from the familiarity which he really have see , and which we be at least favourable enough to when we call they innocent freedom . the reader will easily suggest great plenty of instance to himself ; I shall add but one more , which , however unchristian it may be think by some , I can not help esteem to be strictly justifiable ; and this be a suspicion that a man be capable of do what he hath do already , and that it be possible for one who hath be a villain once to act the same part again . and , to confess the truth , of this degree of suspicion I believe be guilty . from this degree of suspicion she have , in fact , conceive a opinion that she cousin be really not better than she should be . the case , it seem , be this : wisely consider that the virtue of a young lady be , in the world , in the same situation with a poor hare , which be certain , whenever it venture abroad , to meet its enemy ; for it can hardly meet any other . no sooner therefore be she determined to take the first opportunity of quit the protection of she husband , than she resolve to cast herself under the protection of some other man ; and whom could she so properly choose to be she guardian as a person of quality , of fortune , of honou ; and who , besides a gallant disposition which incline man to knight - errantry , that be , to be the champion of lady in distress , have often declare a violent attachment to herself , and have already give she all the instance of it in he power ? but , as the law hath foolishly omit this office of vice -husband , or guardian to a eloped lady , and as malice be apt to denominate he by a more disagreeable appellation , it be conclude that he lordship should perform all such kind office to the lady in secret , and without publickly assume the character of she protector . , to prevent any other person from see he in this light , it be agree that the lady should proceed directly to , and that he lordship should first go to , and thence should go down to that place by the advice of he physician . now all this very plainly understood , not from the lip or behaviour of , but from the peer , who be infinitely less expert at retain a secret than be the good lady ; and perhaps the exact secrecy which have observe on this head in she narrative serve not a little to heighten those suspicions which be now risen in the mind of she cousin . very easily find out the lady she seek ; for indeed there be not a chairman in town to whom she house be not perfectly well know ; and , as she receive , in return of she first message , a most pressing invitation , she immediately accept it . , indeed , do not desire she cousin to stay with she
she with more earnestness than civility require . whether she have discern and resent the suspicion above -mentioned , or from what other motive it arise , I can not say ; but certain it be , she be full as desirous of part with as herself could be of go . the young lady , when she come to take leave of she cousin , could not avoid give she a short hint of advice . she beg she , for heaven 's sake , to take care of herself , and to consider in how dangerous a situation she stand ; add , she hope some method would be find of reconcile she to she husband . " you must remember , my dear , " say she , " the maxim which my aunt western hath so often repeat to we both ; that whenever the matrimonial alliance be break , and war declare between husband and wife , she can hardly make a disadvantageous peace for herself on any condition . these be my aunt 's very word , and she hath have a great deal of experience in the world . " answer , with a contemptuous smile , " never fear I , child , take care of yourself ; for you be younger than I . I will come and visit you in a few day ; but , dear Sophy , let I give you one piece of advice : leave the character of Graveairs in the country , for , believe I , it will sit very awkwardly upon you in this town . " thus the two cousins parte , and repair directly to , where she find a most hearty , as well as a most polite , welcome . the lady have take a great fancy to she when she have see she formerly with she aunt western . she be indeed extremely glad to see she , and be no sooner acquaint with the reason which induce she to leave the squire and to fly to than she highly applaude she sense and resolution ; and after express the highest satisfaction in the opinion which have declare she entertaine of she ladyship , by chuse she house for a asylum , she promise she all the protection which it be in she power to give . as we have now bring into safe hand , the reader will , I apprehend , be contente to deposit she there a while , and to look a little after other personage , and particularly poor , whom we have leave long enough to do penance for he past offence , which , as be the nature of vice , bring sufficient punishment upon he themselves . . contain the time with the Former . I . show what be to be deem plagiarism in a modern author , and what be to be consider as lawful prize . the learned reader must have observ that in the course of this mighty work , I have often translate passage out of the best antient author , without quote the original , or without take the least notice of the book from whence they be borrowed . this conduct in writing be place in a very proper light by the ingenious Abb , in he preface to he Mythology , a work of great erudition and of equal judgment . " it will be easy , " say he , " for the reader to observe that I have frequently have greater regard to he than to my own reputation : for a author certainly pay he a considerable compliment , when , for he sake , he suppress learn quotation that come in he way , and which would have cost he but the bare trouble of transcribing . " to fill up a work with these scrap may , indeed , be consider as a downright cheat on the learned world , who be by such means impos upon to buy a second time , in fragment and by retail , what they have already in gross , if not in they memory , upon they shelf ; and it be still more cruel upon the illiterate , who be draw in to pay for what be of no manner of use to they . a writer who intermix great quantity of and with he work , deal by the ladie and fine gentleman in the same paultry manner with which they be treat by the auctioneer , who often endeaavor so to confound and mix up they lots , that , in order to purchase the commodity you want , you be oblige at the same time to purchase that which will do you no service . and yet , as there be no conduct so fair and disinterest but that it may be misunderstand by ignorance , and misrepresent by malice , I have be sometimes temp to preserve my own reputation at the expense of my reader , and to transcribe the original , or at least to quote chapter and verse , whenever I have make use either of the thought or expression of another . I be , indeed , in some doubt that I have often suffer by the contrary method ; and that , by suppresse the original author 's name , I have be rather suspect of plagiarism than repute to act from the amiable motive assign by that justly celebrate . now , to obviate all such imputation for the future , I do here confess and justify the fact . the antient may be consider as a rich common , where every person who hath the smallest tenement in hath a free right to fate he muse . or , to place it in a clearer light , we modern be to the antient what the poor be to the
the rich . by the poor here I mean that large and venerable body which , in , we call the mob . now , whoever hath have the honour to be admit to any degree of intimacy with this mob , must well know that it be one of they establish maxim to plunder and pillage they rich neighbour without any reluctance ; and that this be hold to be neither sin nor shame among they . and so constantly do they abide and act by this maxim , that , in every parish almost in the kingdom , there be a kind of confederacy ever carry on against a certain person of opulence call the squire , whose property be consider as free - booty by all he poor neighbour ; who , as they conclude that there be no manner of guilt in such depredation , look upon it as a point of honour and moral obligation to conceal , and to preserve each other from punishment on all such occasion . in like manner be the antient , such as , , , , and the rest , to be esteem among we writers , as so many wealthy squire , from whom we , the poor of , claim a immemorial custom of take whatever we can come at . this liberty I demand , and this I be as ready to allow again to my poor neighbour in they turn . all I profess , and all I require of my breth , be to maintain the same strict honesty among ourselves which the mob show to one another . to steal from one another be indeed highly criminal and indecent ; for this may be strictly stil defraud the poor ( sometimes perhaps those who be poorer than ourselves ) , or , to set it under the most opprobrious colour , rob the spittal . , therefore , upon the strictest examination , my own conscience can not lay any such pitiful theft to my charge , I be contente to plead guilty to the former accusation ; nor shall I ever scruple to take to myself any passage which I shall find in a antient author to my purpose , without set down the name of the author from whence it be take . Nay , I absolutely claim a property in all such sentiment the moment they be transcribe into my writings , and I expect all reader henceforwards to regard they as purely and entirely my own . this claim , however , I desire to be allow I only on condition that I preserve strict honesty towards my poor breth , from whom , if ever I borrow any of that little of which they be possess , I shall never fail to put they mark upon it , that it may be at all time ready to be restore to the right owner . the omission of this be highly blameable in one , who , have formerly borrowed some line of Pope and company , take the liberty to transcribe six of they into he play of the . , however , very luckily find they in the say play , and , lay violent hand on he own property , transfer it back again into he own work ; and , for a further punishment , imprison the say in the loathsome dungeon of the , where he unhappy memory now remain , and eternally will remain , as a proper punishment for such he unjust dealings in the poetical trade . . in which , though the squire doth not find he daughter , something be find which put a end to he pursuit . the history now return to the inn at , whence we shall first trace the footstep of Squire western ; for , as he will soon arrive at a end of he journey , we shall have then full leisure to attend we heroe . the reader may be pleased to remember that the say squire depart from the inn in great fury , and in that fury he pursue he daughter . the hostler have inform he that she have cross the , he likewise past that river with he equipage , and ride full speed , vow the utmost vengeance against poor , if he should but overtake she . he have not go far before he arrive at a crossway . here he call a short council of war , in which , after hear different opinion , he at last give the direction of he pursuit to fortune , and strike directly into the Worcester road . in this road he proceed about two mile , when he begin to bemoan himself most bitterly , frequently cry out , " what pity be it ! sure never be so unlucky a dog as myself ! " and then burst forth a volley of oath and execration . the parson attempt to administer comfort to he on this occasion . " Sorrow not , sir , " say he , " like those without hope . Howbeit we have not yet be able to overtake young madam , we may account it some good fortune that we have hithertoo trace she course aright . Peradventure she will soon be fatigate with she journey , and will tarry in some inn , in order to renovate she corporeal function ; and in that case , in all moral certainty , you will very briefly be _compo voti_. " " Pogh ! -- and the slut ! " answer the squire , " I be lament the loss of so fine a morning for hunting . it be confound hard to lose one of the best scenting day , in all appearance , which hath be this season , and especially after so long a frost . " ,
, who now and then show some compassion in she wantonest trick , might not take pity of the squire ; and , as she have determine not to let he overtake he daughter , might not resolve to make he amend some other way , I will not assert ; but he have hardly utter the word just before commemorate , and two or three oath at they heel , when a pack of hound begin to open they melodious throat at a small distance from they , which the squire 's horse and he rider both perceive , both immediately prick up they ear , and the squire , cry , " she be gone , she be gone ! damn I if she be not go ! " instantly clap spur to the beast , who little need it , have indeed the same inclination with he master ; and now the whole company , cross into a corn-field , ride directly towards the hound , with much hallowing and whoope , while the poor parson , bless himself , bring up the rear . thus fable report that the fair , whom , at the desire of a passionate lover , convert from a cat into a fine woman , no sooner perceive a mouse than , mindful of she former sport , and still retain she pristine nature , she leape from the bed of she husband to pursue the little animal . what be we to understand by this ? not that the bride be displease with the embrace of she amorous bridegroom ; for , though some have remark that cat be subject to ingratitude , yet woman and cat too will be pleased and purr on certain occasion . the truth be , as the sagacious L' observe , in he deep reflection , that , " if we shut out at the door , she will come in at the window ; and that puss , though a madam , will be a mouser still . " in the same manner we be not to arraign the squire of any want of love for he daughter ; for in reality he have a great deal ; we be only to consider that he be a squire and a sportsman , and then we may apply the fable to he , and the judicious reflection likewise . the hound run very hard , as it be call , and the squire pursue over hedge and ditch , with all he usual vociferation and alacrity , and with all he usual pleasure ; nor do the thought of ever once intrude themselves to allay the satisfaction he enjoy in the chace , which , he say , be one of the finest he ever see , and which he swore be very well worth go fifty mile for . as the squire forget he daughter , the servants , we may easily believe , forgot they mistress ; and the parson , after have express much astonishment , in , to himself , at length likewise abandon all farther thought of the young lady , and , jogge on at a distance behind , begin to meditate a portion of doctrine for the ensuing . the squire who own the hound be highly pleased with the arrival of he brother squire and sportsman ; for all man approve merit in they own way , and no man be more expert in the field than , nor do any other better know how to encourage the dog with he voice , and to animate the hunt with he holla . Sportsmen , in the warmth of a chace , be too much engage to attend to any manner of ceremony , nay , even to the office of humanity : for , if any of they meet with a accident by tumbl into a ditch , or into a river , the rest pass on regardless , and generally leave he to he fate : during this time , therefore , the two squire , though often close to each other , interchange not a single word . the master of the hunt , however , often see and approve the great judgment of the stranger in draw the dog when they be at a fault , and hence conceive a very high opinion of he understanding , as the number of he attendant inspire no small reverence to he quality . as soon , therefore , as the sport be end by the death of the little animal which have occasion it , the two squire meet , and in all squire - like greeting salute each other . the conversation be entertain enough , and what we may perhaps relate in a appendix , or on some other occasion ; but as it nowise concern this history , we can not prevail on ourselves to give it a place here . it conclude with a second chace , and that with a invitation to dinner . this be accept , be follow by a hearty bout of drinking , which end in as hearty a nap on the part of . we squire be by no means a match either for he host , or for parson , at he cup that eve ; for which the violent fatigue of mind as well as body that he have undergone , may very well account , without the least derogation from he honour . he be indeed , accord to the vulgar phrase , whisle drunk ; for before he have swallow the third bottle , he become so entirely overpower that though he be not carry off to bed till long after , the parson consider he as absent , and have acquaint the other squire with all relate to , he obtain he promise of seconde those argument which he intend to
to urge the next morning for 's return . no sooner , therefore , have the good squire shake off he evening , and begin to call for he morning dratch , and to summon he horse in order to renew he pursuit , than begin he dissuasive , which the host so strongly seconded , that they at length prevailed , and agree to return home ; be principally move by one argument , viz. , that he know not which way to go , and might probably be ride farther from he daughter instead of towards she . he then take leave of he brother sportsman , and express great joy that the frost be break ( which might perhaps be no small motive to he hastening home ) , set forward , or rather backward , for ; but not before he have first despatch part of he retinue in quest of he daughter , after whom he likewise send a volley of the most bitter execration which he could invent . chapter iii . the departure of from , with what pass between he and on the road . at length we be once more come to we heroe ; and , to say truth , we have be oblige to part with he so long , that , consider the condition in which we leave he , I apprehend many of we reader have conclude we intend to abandon he for ever ; he be at present in that situation in which prudent people usually desist from enquir any farther after they friend , lest they should be shocked by hear such friend have hang themselves . but , in reality , if we have not all the virtue , I will boldly say , neither have we all the vice of a prudent character ; and though it be not easy to conceive circumstance much more miserable than those of poor Jones at present , we shall return to he , and attend upon he with the same diligence as if he be wanton in the brightest beam of fortune . , then , and he companion , leave the inn a few minute after the departure of , and pursue the same road on foot , for the hostler tell they that no horse be by any means to be at that time procure at . on they march with heavy heart ; for though they disquiet proceed from very different reason , yet displease they be both ; and if sigh bitterly , grunt altogether as sadly at every step . when they come to the cross - road where the squire have stopt to take counsel , stopt likewise , and turn to , ask he opinion which track they should pursue . " ah , sir , " answer , " I wish you honou would follow my advice . " " why should I not ? " reply ; " for it be now indifferent to I whither I go , or what become of I . " " my advice , then , " say , " be , that you immediately face about and return home ; for who that hath such a home to return to as you honour , would travel thus about the country like a vagabond ? I ask pardon , _se vox ea sola reperta est_. " " Alas ! " cry , " I have no home to return to ; -- but if my friend , my father , would receive I , could I bear the country from which be fly ? ! ! no ; let I blame myself !-- no ; let I blame thee . d -- nation seize thee -- fool -- blockhead ! thou hast undone I , and I will tear thy soul from thy body . " -- at which word he laid violent hand on the collar of poor Partridge , and shake he more heartily than a ague - fit , or he own fear have ever do before . fall trembling on he knee , and begge for mercy , vow he have mean no harm -- when , after star wildly on he for a moment , quit he hold , and discharge a rage on himself , that , have it fall on the other , would certainly have put a end to he being , which indeed the very apprehension of it have almost effected . we would bestow some pain here in minutely describe all the mad prank which play on this occasion , could we be well assure that the reader would take the same pain in peruse they ; but as we be apprehensive that , after all the labour which we should employ in paint this scene , the say reader would be very apt to skip it entirely over , we have save ourselves that trouble . to say the truth , we have , from this reason alone , often do great violence to the luxuriance of we genius , and have leave many excellent description out of we work , which would otherwise have be in it . and this suspicion , to be honest , arise , as be generally the case , from we own wicked heart ; for we have , ourselves , be very often most horridly give to jump , as we have run through the page of voluminous historian . Suffice it then simply to say , that , after have play the part of a madman for many minute , come , by degree , to himself ; which no sooner happen , than , turn to , he very earnestly beg he pardon for the attack he have make on he in the violence of he passion ; but conclude , by desire he never to mention he return again ; for
for he be resolve never to see that country any more . Partridge easily forgave , and faithfully promise to obey the injunction now lay upon he . and then very briskly cry out , " Since it be absolutely impossible for I to pursue any farther the step of my angel -- I will pursue those of glory . come on , my brave lad , now for the army :-- it be a glorious cause , and I would willingly sacrifice my life in it , even though it be worth my preserving . " and so say , he immediately strike into the different road from that which the squire have take , and , by mere chance , pursue the very same through which have before pass . we traveller now march a full mile , without speak a syllable to each other , though , indeed , mutter many thing to himself . as to , he be profoundly silent ; for he be not , perhaps , perfectly recover from he former fright ; beside , he have apprehension of provoke he friend to a second fit of wrath , especially as he now begin to entertain a conceit , which may not , perhaps , create any great wonder in the reader . in short , he begin now to suspect that be absolutely out of he sense . at length , , be weary of soliloquy , address himself to he companion , and blame he for he taciturnity ; for which the poor man very honestly account , from he fear of give offence . and now this fear be pretty well remove , by the most absolute promise of indemnity , again take the bridle from he tongue ; which , perhaps , rejoice no less at regain its liberty , than a young colt , when the bridle be slipt from he neck , and he be turn loose into the pasture . as be inhibit from that topic which would have first suggest itself , he fall upon that which be next uppermost in he mind , namely , the man of the . " certainly , sir , " say he , " that could never be a man , who dress himself and live after such a strange manner , and so unlike other folk . besides , he diet , as the old woman tell I , be chiefly upon herb , which be a fitter food for a horse than a : nay , landlord at say that the neighbour thereabout have very fearful notion about he . it run strangely in my head that it must have be some spirit , who , perhaps , might be send to forewarn we : and who know but all that matter which he tell we , of he go to fight , and of he be take prisoner , and of the great danger he be in of be hang , might be intend as a warning to we , consider what we be go about ? besides , I dreamt of nothing all last night but of fight ; and methotch the blood run out of my nose , as liquor out of a tap . indeed , sir , _infandum , regina , jube renovare dolorem _. " " thy story , , " answer , " be almost as ill apply as thy . nothing can be more likely to happen than death to man who go into battle . perhaps we shall both fall in it -- and what then ? " " what then ? " reply ; " why then there be a end of we , be there not ? when I be go , all be over with I . what matter the cause to I , or who get the victory , if I be kill ? I shall never enjoy any advantage from it . what be all the ringing of bell , and bonfire , to one that be six foot under ground ? there will be a end of poor Partridge . " " and a end of poor Partridge , " cry , " there must be , one time or other . if you love , I will repeat you some fine line out of , which would inspire courage into a coward . `_ et decorum est pro patria mori Mors et fugacem persequitur virum Nec parcit timbellis juventa Poplitibus , timidoque tergo._g " " I wish you would construe they , " cry ; " for be a hard author , and I can not understand as you repeat they . " " I will repeat you a bad imitation , or rather paraphrase , of my own , " say ; " for I be but a indifferent poet : ` who would not die in he dear country 's cause ? , if base fear he dastard step withdraw , from death he can not fly :-- one common grave receive , at last , the coward and the brave . ' " " that be very certain , " cry . " ay , sure , _Mor omnibus communi :_ but there be a great difference between die in one 's be a great many year hence , like a good , with all we friend cry about we , and be shot to - day or to - morrow , like a mad dog ; or , perhaps , hack in twenty piece with the sword , and that too before we have repent of all we sins . of , have mercy upon we ! to be sure the soldier be a wicked kind of people . I never love to have anything to do with they . I could hardly bring myself ever to look upon they as . there be nothing but curse
curse and swear among they . I wish you honou would repent : I heartily wish you would repent before it be too late ; and not think of go among they .-- communication corrupt good manners . that be my principal reason . for as for that matter , I be no more afraid than another man , not I ; as to matter off that . I know all human flesh must die ; but yet a man may live many year , for all that . why , I be a middle - aged man now , and yet I may live a great number of year . I have read of several who have liv to be above a hundr , and some a great deal above a hundred . not that I hope , I mean that I promise myself , to live to any such age as that , neither . -- but if it be only to eighty or ninety . heaven be praise , that be a great way off yet ; and I be not afraid of die then , no more than another man ; but , surly , to tempt death before a man 's time be come seem to I downright wickedness and presumption . besides , if it be to do any good indeed ; but , let the cause be what it will , what mighty matter of good can two people do ? and , for my part , I understand nothing of it . I never fire off a gun above ten time in my life ; and then it be not charge with bullet . and for the sword , I never learn to fence , and know nothing of the matter . and then there be those cannon , which certainly it must be think the highest presumption to go in the way of ; and nobody but a madman -- I ask pardon ; upon my soul I mean no harm ; I beg I may not throw you honour into another passion . " " be under no apprehension , , " cry ; " I be now so well convince of thy cowardice , that thou couldst not provoke I on any account . " " you honour , " answer he , " may call I coward , or anything else you please . if love to sleep in a whole skin make a man a coward , _non immune ab illis mali sumus _. I never read in my grammar that a man can not be a good man without fight . _Vir bonus est quis ? Qui consulta patrum , qui leg juraque servat . not a word of fighting ; and I be sure the scripture be so much against it , that a man shall never persuade I he be a good while he shed christian blood . " chapter iv . the adventure of a beggar- man . just as have utter that good and pious doctrine , with which the last chapter conclude , they arrive at another cross -way , when a lame fellow in rag ask they for alm ; upon which give he a severe rebuke , say , " every parish ought to keep they own poor . " then fall a - laughing , and ask , " if he be not asham , with so much charity in he mouth , to have no charity in he heart . you religion , " say he , " serve you only for a excuse for you fault , but be no incentive to you virtue . can any man who be really a abstain from relieive one of he breth in such a miserable condition ? " and at the same time , put he hand in he pocket , he give the poor object a shilling . " master , " cry the fellow , after thanke he , " I have a curiious thing here in my pocket , which I find about two mile off , if you worship will please to buy it . I should not venture to pull it out to every one ; but , as you be so good a gentleman , and so kind to the poor , you will not suspect a man of be a thief only because he be poor . " he then pull out a little gilt pocket - book , and deliver it into the hand of . presently open it , and ( guess , reader , what he feel ) see in the first page the word , write by she own fair hand . he no sooner read the name than he prest it close to he lip ; nor could he avoid fall into some very frantic rapture , notwithstand he company ; but , perhaps , these very rapture make he forget he be not alone . while be kiss and mumbl the book , as if he have a excellent brown butter crust in he mouth or as if he have really be a book - worm , or a author who have nothing to eat but he own work , a piece of paper fell from its leave to the ground , which Partridge take up , and deliver to , who presently perceive it to be a bank - bill . it be , indeed , the very bill which western have give he daughter the night before she departure ; and a would have jump to purchase it at five shilling less than  100 . the eyes of sparkle at this news , which now proclaim aloud ; and so do ( though with somewhat a different aspect ) those of the poor fellow who have find the book ; and who ( I hope from a principle of honesty ) have never
never open it : but we should not deal honestly by the reader if we omit to inform he of a circumstance which may be here a little material , viz . that the fellow could not read . , who have feel nothing but pure joy and transport from the find the book , be affect with a mixture of concern at this new discovery ; for he imagination instantly suggest to he that the owner of the bill might possibly want it before he should be able to convey it to she . he then acquaint the finder that he know the lady to whom the book belong , and would endeaavor to find she out as soon as possible , and return it she . the pocket - book be a late present from western to she niece ; it have cost five - and - twenty shilling , have be buy of a celebrate toyman ; but the real value of the silver which it contain in its clasp be about eighteen - pence ; and that price the say toyman , as it be altogether as good as when it first issue from he shop , would now have give for it . a prudent person would , however , have take proper advantage of the ignorance of this fellow , and would not have offer more than a shilling , or perhaps sixpence , for it ; nay , some perhaps would have give nothing , and leave the fellow to he action of trover , which some learn serjeant may doubt whether he could , under these circumstance , have maintain . , on the contrary , whose character be on the outside of generosity , and may perhaps not very unjustly have be suspect of extravagance , without any hesitation give a guinea in exchange for the book . the poor man , who have not for a long time before be possess of so much treasure , give a thousand thanks , and discover little less of transport in he muscle than have before show when he have first read the name of . the fellow very readily agree to attend we traveller to the place where he have find the pocket - book . together , therefore , they proceed directly thither ; but not so fast as desire ; for he guide unfortunately happen to be lame , and could not possibly travel faster than a mile a hour . as this place , therefore , be at above three mile ' distance , though the fellow have say otherwise , the reader need not be acquaint how long they be in walk it . open the book a hundred time during they walk , kiss it as often , talk much to himself , and very little to he companion . at all which the guide exprest some sign of astonishment to ; who more than once shook he head , and cry , poor gentleman ! _orandum est ut sit mens sana in corpore sano ._ at length they arrive at the very spot where unhappily dropt the pocket - book , and where the fellow have as happily find it . here offer to take leave of he guide , and to improve he pace ; but the fellow , in whom that violent surprize and joy which the first receipt of the guinea have occasion be now considerably abate , and who have now have sufficient time to recollect himself , put on a discontented look , and , scratch he head , say , " he hope he worship would give he something more . you worship , " say he , " will , I hope , take it into you consideration that if I have not be honest I might have keep the whole . " and , indeed , this the reader must confess to have be true . " if the paper there , " say he , " be worth  100 , I be sure the finding it deserve more than a guinea . besides , suppose you worship should never see the lady , nor give it she -- and , though you worship look and talk very much like a gentleman , yet I have only you worship 's bare word ; and , certainly , if the right owner be not to be find , it all belong to the first finder . I hope you worship will consider of all these matters : I be but a poor man , and therefore do not desire to have all ; but it be but reasonable I should have my share . you worship look like a good man , and , I hope , will consider my honesty ; for I might have keep every farthing , and nobody ever the wiser . " " I promise thee , upon my honour , " cry , " that I know the right owner , and will restore it she . " " Nay , you worship , " answer the fellow , " may do as you please as to that ; if you will but give I my share , that be , one - half of the money , you honour may keep the rest yourself if you please ; " and conclude with swear , by a very vehement oath , " that he would never mention a syllable of it to any man liive . " " Lookee , friend , " cry , " the right owner shall certainly have again all that she lose ; and as for any farther gratuity , I really can not give it you at present ; but let I know you name , and where you live , and it be more than possible you may hereafter have further reason to rejoice at this
this morning 's adventure . " " I do not know what you mean by venture , " cry the fellow ; " it seem I must venture whether you will return the lady she money or no ; but I hope you worship will consider -- " " come , come , " say , " tell he honou you name , and where you may be find ; I warrant you will never repent have put the money into he hand . " the fellow , see no hope of recovere the possession of the pocket - book , at last complied in give in he name and place of abode , which writ upon a piece of paper with the pencil of ; and then , place the paper in the same page where she have writ she name , he cry out , " there , friend , you be the happiest man alive ; I have join you name to that of a angel . " " I do not know anything about angels , " answer the fellow ; " but I wish you would give I a little more money , or else return I the pocket - book . " Partridge now wax wrath : he call the poor cripple by several vile and opprobrious name , and be absolutely proceed to beat he , but would not suffer any such thing : and now , tel the fellow he would certainly find some opportunity of serve he , depart as fast as he heel would carry he ; and , into whom the thought of the hundred pound have infus new spirits , follow he leader ; while the man , who be oblige to stay behind , fall to curse they both , as well as he parent ; " for have they , " say he , " send I to charity - school to learn to write and read and cast account , I should have know the value of these matter as well as other people . " v. contain more adventur which and he companion meet on the road . we traveller now walk so fast , that they have very little time or breath for conversation ; meditat all the way on , and on the bank - bill , which , though it give he some pleasure , cause he at the same time to repine at fortune , which , in all he walk , have never give he such a opportunity of show he honesty . they have proceed above three mile , when , be unable any longer to keep up with , call to he , and beg he a little to slacke he pace : with this he be the more ready to comply , as he have for some time lose the footstep of the horse , which the thaw have enable he to trace for several mile , and he be now upon a wide common , where be several roads . he here therefore stopt to consider which of these roads he should pursue ; when on a sudden they hear the noise of a drum , that see at no great distance . this sound presently alarme the fear of , and he cry out , " have mercy upon we all ; they be certainly a coming ! " " who be come ? " cry ; for fear have long since give place to softer idea in he mind ; and since he adventure with the lame man , he have be totally intent on pursue , without entertaine one thought of a enemy . " who ? " cry , " why , the rebel : but why should I call they rebel ? they may be very honest gentleman , for anything I know to the contrary . the take he that affront they , I say ; I be sure , if they have nothing to say to I , I will have nothing to say to they , but in a civil way . for 's sake , sir , do not affro not they if they should come , and perhaps they may do we no harm ; but would it not be the wiser way to creep into some of yonder bushes , till they be go by ? what can two unarmed man do perhaps against fifty thousand ? certainly nobody but a madman ; I hope you honour be not offend ; but certainly no man who hath _men sana in corpore sano ---- " here interrupt this torrent of eloquence , which fear have inspire , say , " that by the drum he perceive they be near some town . " he then make directly towards the place whence the noise proceed , bid Partridge " take courage , for that he would lead he into no danger ; " and add , " it be impossible the rebel should be so near . " be a little comfort with this last assurance ; and though he would more gladly have go the contrary way , he follow he leader , he heart beat time , but not after the manner of heroe , to the music of the drum , which cease not till they have traverse the common , and be come into a narrow lane . and now , who keep even pace with , discover something pain fly in the air , a very few yard before he , which fancie to be the colour of the enemy , he fall a bellowing , " oh , sir , here they be ; there be the crown and coffin . oh ! I never see anything so terrible ; and we be within gun - shot of they already . " no sooner look up , than he plainly perceive
perceive what it be which Partridge have thus mistaken . " Partridge , " say he , " I fancy you will be able to engage this whole army yourself ; for by the colour I guess what the drum be which we hear before , and which beat up for recruit to a puppet - show . " " a puppet - show ! " answer , with most eager transport . " and be it really no more than that ? I love a puppet - show of all the pastime upon earth . do , good sir , let we tarry and see it . besides , I be quite famish to death ; for it be now almost dark , and I have not eat a morsel since three o'clock in the morning . " they now arrive at a inn , or indeed a ale - house , where be prevail upon to stop , the rather as he have no longer any assurance of be in the road he desire . they walk both directly into the kitchen , where begin to enquire if no lady have pass that way in the morning , and as eagerly examine into the state of they provision ; and indeed he enquiry meet with the better success ; for could not hear news of ; but , to he great satisfaction , find good reason to expect very shortly the agreeable sight of a excellent smoaking dish of egg and bacon . in strong and healthy constitution love hath a very different effect from what it cause in the puny part of the species . in the latter it generally destroy all that appetite which tend towards the conservation of the individual ; but in the former , though it often induce forgetfulness , and a neglect of food , as well as of everything else ; yet place a good piece of well - powder buttock before a hungry lover , and he seldom fail very handsomely to play he part . thus it happen in the present case ; for though perhaps want a prompter , and might have travel much farther , have he be alone , with a empty stomach ; yet no sooner do he sit down to the bacon and egg , than he fall to as heartily and voraciously as himself . before we traveller have finish they dinner , night come on , and as the moon be now past the full , it be extremely dark . therefore prevail on to stay and see the puppet - show , which be just go to begin , and to which they be very eagerly invite by the master of the say show , who declare that he figure be the finest which the world have ever produce , and that they have give great satisfaction to all the quality in every town in . the puppet - show be perform with great regularity and decency . it be call the fine and serious part of the ; and it be indeed a very grave and solemn entertainment , without any low wit or humour , or jest ; or , to do it no more than justice , without anything which could provoke a laugh . the audience be all highly pleased . a grave matron tell the master she would bring she two daughter the next night , as he do not show any stuff ; and a attorney 's clerk and a exciseman both declare , that the character of and Townley be well preserve , and highly in nature . likewise concur with this opinion . the master be so highly elate with these encomium , that he could not refrain from add some more of he own . he say , " the present age be not improve in anything so much as in they puppet - show ; which , by throw out and he wife , and such idle trumpery , be at last bring to be a rational entertainment . I remember , " say he , " when I first take to the business , there be a great deal of low stuff that do very well to make folk laugh ; but be never calculate to improve the moral of young people , which certainly ought to be principally aim at in every puppet - show : for why may not good and instructive lesson be convey this way , as well as any other ? my figure be as big as the life , and they represent the life in every particular ; and I question not but people rise from my little drama as much improve as they do from the great . " " I would by no means degrade the ingenuity of you profession , " answer , " but I should have be glad to have see my old acquaintance master punch , for all that ; and so far from improve , I think , by leave out he and he merry wife , you have spoil you puppet - show . " the dancer of wire conceive a immediate and high contempt for , from these word . and with much disdain in he countenance , he reply , " very probably , sir , that may be you opinion ; but I have the satisfaction to know the best judge differ from you , and it be impossible to please every taste . I confess , indeed , some of the quality at , two or three year ago , want mightily to bring again upon the stage . I believe I lose some money for not agree to it ; but let other do as they will ; a little matter shall never bribe I to degrade my own profession , nor will I ever willingly consent to the spoiling the decency
decency and regularity of my stage , by introduce any such low stuff upon it . " " right , friend , " cry the clerk , " you be very right . always avoid what be low . there be several of my acquaintance in , who be resolve to drive everything which be low from the stage . " " nothing can be more proper , " cry the exciseman , pull he pipe from he mouth . " I remember , " add he , " ( for I then live with my lord ) I be in the footman 's gallery , the night when this play of the be act first . there be a great deal of low stuff in it about a country gentleman come up to town to stand for parliament-man ; and there they bring a parcel of he servants upon the stage , he coachman I remember particularly ; but the gentleman in we gallery could not bear anything so low , and they damne it . I observe , friend , you have leave all that matter out , and you be to be commend for it . " " Nay , gentlemen , " cry , " I can never maintain my opinion against so many ; indeed , if the generality of he audience dislike he , the learn gentleman who conduct the show might have do very right in dismissing from he service . " the master of the show then begin a second harangue , and say much of the great force of example , and how much the inferior part of mankind would be deter from vice , by observe how odious it be in they superior ; when he be unluckily interrupt by a incident , which , though perhaps we might have omit it at another time , we can not help relate at present , but not in this chapter . chapter vi . from which it may be infer that the best thing be liable to be misunderstood and misinterpret . a violent uproar now arise in the entry , where my landlady be well cuff she maid both with she fist and tongue . she have indeed miss the wench from she employment , and , after a little search , have find she on the puppet - show stage in company with the , and in a situation not very proper to be describe . though ( for that be she name ) have forfeit all title to modesty ; yet have she not impudence enough to deny a fact in which she be actually surprize ; she , therefore , take another turn , and attempt to mitigate the offence . " why do you beat I in this manner , mistress ? " cry the wench . " if you do not like my doings , you may turn I away . if I be a w -- e " ( for the other have liberally bestow that appellation on she ) , " my better be so as well as I . what be the fine lady in the puppet - show just now ? I suppose she do not lie all night out from she husband for nothing . " the landlady now burst into the kitchen , and fall foul on both she husband and the poor puppet - mover . " here , husband , " say she , " you see the consequence of harbour these people in you house . if one doth draw a little drink the more for they , one be hardly make amend for the litter they make ; and then to have one 's house make a bawdy - house of by such lousy vermin . in short , I desire you would be go to - morrow morning ; for I will tolerate no more such doings . it be only the way to teach we servants idleness and nonsense ; for to be sure nothing better can be learn by such idle show as these . I remember when puppet- show be make of good scripture story , as 's , and such good thing , and when wicked people be carry away by the devil . there be some sense in those matters ; but as the parson tell we last , nobody believe in the now - a - day ; and here you bring about a parcel of puppets drest up like lord and lady , only to turn the head of poor country wench ; and when they head be once turn topsy - turvy , no wonder everything else be so . " , I think , tell we , that when the mob be assemble in a riotous and tumultuous manner , and all sort of missile weapon fly about , if a man of gravity and authority appear amongst they , the tumult be presently appease , and the mob , which when collect into one body , may be well compare to a ass , erect they long ear at the grave man 's discourse . on the contrary , when a set of grave man and philosopher be dispute ; when wisdom herself may in a manner be consider as present , and administer argument to the disputant ; should a tumult arise among the mob , or should one scold , who be herself equal in noise to a mighty mob , appear among the say philosopher ; there dispute cease in a moment , wisdom no longer perform she ministerial office , and the attention of every one be immediately attract by the scold alone . thus the uproar aforesaid , and the arrival of the landlady , silence the master of the puppet - show , and put a speedy and final end to that grave and solemn harangue , of which
which we have give the reader a sufficient taste already . nothing indeed could have happen so very inopportune as this accident ; the most wanton malice of fortune could not have contrive such another stratagem to confound the poor fellow , while he be so triumphantly descant on the good moral inculcate by he exhibition . he mouth be now as effectually stopt , as that of quack must be , if , in the midst of a declamation on the great virtue of he pill and powder , the corpse of one of he martyr should be bring forth , and deposit before the stage , as a testimony of he skill . instead , therefore , of answer my landlady , the puppet - show man run out to punish he ; and now the moon begin to put forth she silver light , as the poet call it ( though she look at that time more like a piece of copper ) , call for he reckoning , and order , whom my landlady have just awak from a profound nap , to prepare for he journey ; but Partridge , have lately carry two point , as my reader hath see before , be embolden to attempt a third , which be to prevail with to take up a lodging that even in the house where he then be . he introduce this with a affect surprize at the intention which declare of remove ; and , after urge many excellent argument against it , he at last insiste strongly that it could be to no manner of purpose whatever ; for that , unless know which way the lady be gone , every step he take might very possibly lead he the farther from she ; " for you find , sir , " say he , " by all the people in the house , that she be not go this way . how much better , therefore , would it be to stay till the morning , when we may expect to meet with somebody to enquire off ? " this last argument have indeed some effect on , and while he be weigh it the landlord throw all the rhetoric of which he be master into the same scale . " sure , sir , " say he , " you servant give you most excellent advice ; for who would travel by night at this time of the year ? " he then begin in the usual stile to trumpet forth the excellent accommodation which he house afforde ; and my landlady likewise open on the occasion ---- but , not to detain the reader with what be common to every host and hostess , it be sufficient to tell he be at last prevaile on to stay and refresh himself with a few hour ' rest , which indeed he very much want ; for he have hardly shut he eye since he have leave the inn where the accident of the broken head have happen . as soon as have take a resolution to proceed no farther that night , he presently retire to rest , with he two bedfellow , the pocket - book and the muff ; but , who at several time have refresh himself with several nap , be more inclined to eat than to sleep , and more to drink than to either . and now the storm which have raise be at a end , and my landlady be again reconcile to the puppet-man , who on he side forgave the indecent reflection which the good woman in she passion have cast on he performance , a face of perfect peace and tranquillity reign in the kitchen ; where sit assemble round the fire the landlord and landlady of the house , the master of the puppet - show , the attorney 's clerk , the exciseman , and the ingenious ; in which company past the agreeable conversation which will be find in the next chapter . chapter vii . contain a remark or two of we own and many more of the good company assemble in the kitchen . though the pride of do not submit to acknowledge himself a servant , yet he condescende in most particulars to imitate the manners of that rank . one instance of this be , he greatly magnify the fortune of he companion , as he call : such be a general custom with all servants among strangers , as none of they would willingly be think the attendant on a beggar : for , the higher the situation of the master be , the higher consequently be that of the man in he own opinion ; the truth of which observation appear from the behaviour of all the footman of the nobility . but , though title and fortune communicate a splendor all around they , and the footman of man of quality and of estate think themselves entitle to a part of that respect which be pay to the quality and estate of they master , it be clearly otherwise with regard to virtue and understanding . these advantage be strictly personal , and swallow themselves all the respect which be pay to they . to say the truth , this be so very little , that they can not well afford to let any other partake with they . as these therefore reflect no honour on the domestic , so neither be he at all dishonoure by the most deplorable want of both in he master . indeed it be otherwise in the want of what be call virtue in a mistress , the consequence of which we have before see : for in this dishonour there be a kind of contagion , which , like that of poverty , communicate itself to all who approach it . now for these
these reason we be not to wonder that servants ( I mean among the man only ) should have so great regard for the reputation of the wealth of they master , and little or none at all for they character in other point , and that , though they would be asham to be the footman of a beggar , they be not so to attend upon a rogue or a blockhead ; and do consequently make no scruple to spread the fame of the iniquity and folly of they say master as far as possible , and this often with great humour and merriment . in reality , a footman be often a wit as well as a beau , at the expence of the gentleman whose livery he wear . after , therefore , have enlarge greatly on the vast fortune to which be here , he very freely communicate a apprehension , which he have begin to conceive the day before , and for which , as we hint at that very time , the behaviour of seem to have furnish a sufficient foundation . in short , he be now pretty well confirm in a opinion that he master be out of he wit , with which opinion he very bluntly acquaint the good company round the fire . with this sentiment the puppet - show man immediately coinci . " I own , " say he , " the gentleman surprize I very much , when he talk so absurdly about puppet- show . it be indeed hardly to be conceive that any man in he sense should be so much mistaken ; what you say now account very well for all he monstrous notion . poor gentleman ! I be heartily concerned for he ; indeed he hath a strange wildness about he eyes , which I take notice of before , though I do not mention it . " the landlord agree with this last assertion , and likewise claim the sagacity of have observe it . " and certainly , " add he , " it must be so ; for no one but a madman would have think of leave so good a house to ramble about the country at that time of night . " the exciseman , pull he pipe from he mouth , say , " he think the gentleman look and talk a little wildly ; " and then turn to , " if he be a madman , " say he , " he should not be suffer to travel thus about the country ; for possibly he may do some mischief . it be a pity he be not secure and send home to he relation . " now some conceit of this kind be likewise lurk in the mind of ; for , as he be now persuade that have run away from , he promise himself the highest reward if he could by any means convey he back . but fear of , of whose fierceness and strength he have see , and indeed feel , some instance , have however represent any such scheme as impossible to be execute , and have discourage he from apply himself to form any regular plan for the purpose . but no sooner do he hear the sentiment of the exciseman than he embrace that opportunity of declare he own , and express a hearty wish that such a matter could be bring about . " could be bring about ! " say the exciseman : " why , there be nothing easier . " " ah ! sir , " answer , " you do not know what a devil of a fellow he be . he can take I up with one hand , and throw I out at window ; and he would , too , if he do but imagine -- " " Pogh ! " say the exciseman , " I believe I be as good a man as he . besides , here be five of we . " " I do not know what five , " cry the landlady , " my husband shall have nothing to do in it . nor shall any violent hand be laid upon anybody in my house . the young gentleman be as pretty a young gentleman as ever I see in my life , and I believe he be no more mad than any of we . what do you tell of he have a wild look with he eye ? they be the prettiest eye I ever see , and he hath the prettiest look with they ; and a very modest civil young man he be . I be sure I have bepitie he heartily ever since the gentleman there in the corner tell we he be crost in love . certainly that be enough to make any man , especially such a sweet young gentleman as he be , to look a little otherwise than he do before . lady , indeed ! what the devil would the lady have better than such a handsome man with a great estate ? I suppose she be one of you quality folk , one of you Townly lady that we see last night in the puppet - show , who do not know what they would be at . " the attorney 's clerk likewise declare he would have no concern in the business without the advice of counsel . " suppose , " say he , " a action of false imprisonment should be bring against we , what defence could we make ? who know what may be sufficient evidence of madness to a jury ? but I only speak upon my own account ; for it do not look well for a lawyer to be concerned in these matters , unless it be as a lawyer .
. Jury be always less favourable to we than to other people . I do not therefore dissuade you , ( to the exciseman ) , nor the gentleman , nor anybody else . " the exciseman shook he head at this speech , and the puppet - show man say , " Madness be sometimes a difficult matter for a jury to decide : for I remember , " say he , " I be once present at a tryal of madness , where twenty witness swore that the person be as mad as a hare ; and twenty other , that he be as much in he sense as any man in . -- and indeed it be the opinion of most people , that it be only a trick of he relation to rob the poor man of he right . " " very likely ! " cry the landlady . " I myself know a poor gentleman who be keep in a mad - house all he life by he family , and they enjoy he estate , but it do they no good ; for though the law give it they , it be the right of another . " " Pogh ! " cry the clerk , with great contempt , " who hath any right but what the law give they ? if the law give I the best estate in the country , I should never trouble myself much who have the right . " " if it be so , " say , " _Felix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum . " my landlord , who have be call out by the arrival of a horseman at the gate , now return into the kitchen , and with a affrighted countenance cry out , " what do you think , gentlemen ? the rebel have give the duke the slip , and be get almost to . it be certainly true , for a man on horseback just now tell I so . " " I be glad of it with all my heart , " cry ; " then there will be no fighting in these part . " " I be glad , " cry the clerk , " for a better reason ; for I would always have right take place . " " ay , but , " answer the landlord , " I have hear some people say this man hath no right . " " I will prove the contrary in a moment , " cry the clerk : " if my father die seize of a right ; do you mind I , seize of a right , I say ; doth not that right descend to he son ; and doth not one right descend as well as another ? " " but how can he have any right to make we papish ? " say the landlord . " never fear that , " cry . " as to the matter of right , the gentleman there hath prove it as clear as the sun ; and as to the matter of religion , it be quite out of the case . the papist themselves do not expect any such thing . a popish priest , whom I know very well , and who be a very honest man , tell I upon he word and honour they have no such design . " " and another priest , of my acquaintance , " say the landlady , " hath tell I the same thing ; but my husband be always so afraid of papish . I know a great many papish that be very honest sort of people , and spend they money very freely ; and it be always a maxim with I , that one man 's money be as good as another ' . " " very true , mistress , " say the puppet - show man , " I do not care what religion come ; provide the be not uppermost ; for they be enemy to puppet - show . " " and so you would sacrifice you religion to you interest , " cry the exciseman ; " and be desirous to see popery bring in , be you ? " " not I , truly , " answer the other ; " I hate popery as much as any man ; but yet it be a comfort to one , that one should be able to live under it , which I could not do among . to be sure , every man value he livelihood first ; that must be grant ; and I warrant , if you would confess the truth , you be more afraid of lose you place than anything else ; but never fear , friend , there will be a excise under another government as well as under this . " " why , certainly , " reply the exciseman , " I should be a very ill man if I do not honour the king , whose bread I eat . that be no more than natural , as a man may say : for what signify it to I that there would be a excise - office under another government , since my friend would be out , and I could expect no better than to follow they ? no , no , friend , I shall never be bubble out of my religion in hope only of keep my place under another government ; for I should certainly be no better , and very probably might be worse . " " why , that be what I say , " cry the landlord , " whenever folk say who know what may happen ! Odsooks ! should not I be a blockhead to lend my money to I know not who , because mayhap he
he may return it again ? I be sure it be safe in my own bureau , and there I will keep it . " the attorney 's clerk have take a great fancy to the sagacity of . whether this proceed from the great discernment which the former have into man , as well as thing , or whether it arise from the sympathy between they minds ; for they be both truly in principle ; they now shook hand heartily , and drank bumper of strong beer to healt which we think proper to bury in . these health be afterwards pledge by all present , and even by my landlord himself , though reluctantly ; but he could not withstand the menace of the clerk , who swore he would never set he foot within he house again , if he refuse . the bumper which be swallow on this occasion soon put a end to the conversation . here , therefore , we will put a end to the chapter . chapter viii . in which fortune seem to have be in a better humour with than we have hithertoo see she . as there be no wholesomer , so perhaps there be few stronger , sleep potion than fatigue . of this might be say to have take a very large dose , and it operate very forcibly upon he . he have already sleep nine hour , and might perhaps have sleep longer , have he not be awaken by a most violent noise at he chamber - door , where the sound of many heavy blow be accompany with many exclamation of murder . presently leapt from he bed , where he find the master of the puppet - show belabour the back and rib of he poor - , without either mercy or moderation . instantly interpose on behalf of the suffer party , and pinne the insulting conqueror up to the wall : for the puppet - show man be no more able to contend with than the poor party - coloured jester have be to contend with this puppet-man . but though the - be a little fellow , and not very strong , he have nevertheless some choler about he . he therefore no sooner find himself deliver from the enemy , than he begin to attack he with the only weapon at which he be he equal . from this he first discharge a volley of general abusive word , and thence proceed to some particular accusation --" d -- and you bl -- , you rascal , " say he , " I have not only support you ( for to I you owe all the money you get ) , but I have save you from the gallow . do you not want to rob the lady of she fine riding - habit , no longer ago than yesterday , in the back - lane here ? can you deny that you wish to have she alone in a wood to strip she -- to strip one of the prettiest lady that ever be see in the world ? and here you have fall upon I , and have almost murder I , for do no harm to a girl as willing as myself , only because she like I better than you . " no sooner hear this than he quit the master , lay on he at the same time the most violent injunction of forbearance from any further insult on the - ; and then take the poor wretch with he into he own apartment , he soon learn tiding of he , whom the fellow , as he be attend he master with he drum the day before , have see pass by . he easily prevail with the lad to show he the exact place , and then have summon Partridge , he depart with the utmost expedition . it be almost eight of the clock before all matters could be get ready for he departure : for be not in any haste , nor could the reckoning be presently adjust ; and when both these be settled and over , Jones would not quit the place before he have perfectly reconcile all difference between the master and the man . when this be happily accomplish , he set forwards , and be by the trusty - conduct to the spot by which have past ; and then have handsomely reward he conductor , he again push on with the utmost eagerness , be highly deligh with the extraordinary manner in which he receive he intelligence . of this Partridge be no sooner acquainted , than he , with great earnestness , begin to prophesy , and assure Jones that he would certainly have good success in the end : for , he say , " two such accident could never have happene to direct he after he mistress , if Providence have not design to bring they together at last . " and this be the first time that lent any attention to the superstitious doctrine of he companion . they have not go above two mile when a violent storm of rain overtake they ; and , as they happen to be at the same time in sight of a ale - house , , with much earnest entreaty , prevail with to enter , and weather the storm . be a enemy ( if indeed it may be call one ) which partake more of the than of the french disposition ; for , though you subdue this never so often , it will always rally again in time ; and so it do with , who be no sooner arrive within the kitchen , than he begin to ask the same question which he have ask the night before . the consequence of this be a excellent cold
cold chine be produce upon the table , upon which not only Partridge , but himself , make a very hearty breakfast , though the latter begin to grow again uneasy , as the people of the house could give he no fresh information concern . they meal be over , be again prepare to sally , notwithstand the violence of the storm still continue ; but beg heartily for another mug ; and at last casting he eye on a lad at the fire , who have enter into the kitchen , and who at that instant be look as earnestly at he , he turn suddenly to , and cry , " master , give I you hand , a single mug sha not serve the turn this bout . why , here be more news of come to town . the boy there stand by the fire be the very lad that ride before she . I can swear to my own plaister on he face . " --" Heavens bless you , sir , " cry the boy , " it be you own plaister sure enough ; I shall have always reason to remember you goodness ; for it hath almost cure I . " at these word start from he chair , and , bid the boy follow he immediately , depart from the kitchen into a private apartment ; for , so delicate be he with regard to , that he never willingly mention she name in the presence of many people ; and , though he have , as it be , from the overflowing of he heart , give as a toast among the officer , where he think it be impossible she should be know ; yet , even there , the reader may remember how difficultly he be prevail upon to mention she surname . hard therefore be it , and perhaps , in the opinion of many sagacious reader , very absurd and monstrous , that he should principally owe he present misfortune to the suppose want of that delicacy with which he so abound ; for , in reality , be much more offended at the freedom which she think ( and not without good reason ) he have take with she name and character , than at any freedom , in which , under he present circumstance , he have indulge himself with the person of another woman ; and to say truth , I believe Honou could never have prevail on she to leave without she see , have it not be for those two strong instance of a levity in he behaviour , so void of respect , and indeed so highly inconsistent with any degree of love and tenderness in great and delicate mind . but so matter fall out , and so I must relate they ; and if any reader be shocked at they appear unnatural , I can not help it . I must remind such person that I be not write a system , but a history , and I be not oblige to reconcile every matter to the receive notion concern truth and nature . but if this be never so easy to do , perhaps it might be more prudent in I to avoid it . for instance , as the fact at present before we now stand , without any comment of mine upon it , though it may at first sight offend some reader , yet , upon more mature consideration , it must please all ; for wise and good man may consider what happen to at as a just punishment for he wickedness with regard to woman , of which it be indeed the immediate consequence ; and silly and bad person may comfort themselves in they vice by flatter they own heart that the character of man be rather owe to accident than to virtue . now , perhaps the reflection which we should be here inclin to draw would alike contradict both these conclusion , and would show that these incidents contribute only to confirm the great , useful , and uncommon doctrine , which it be the purpose of this whole work to inculcate , and which we must not fill up we page by frequently repeat , as a ordinary parson fill he sermon by repea he text at the end of every paragraph . we be contente that it must appear , however unhappily have er in she opinion of , she have sufficient reason for she opinion ; since , I believe , every other young lady would , in she situation , have er in the same manner . Nay , have she follow she lover at this very time , and have enter this very alehause the moment he be depart from it , she would have find the landlord as well acquaint with she name and person as the wench at have appear to be . for while be examine he boy in whisper in a inner room , , who have no such delicacy in he disposition , be in the kitchen very openly catechise the other guide who have attend ; by which mean the landlord , whose ears be open on all such occasion , become perfectly well acquaint with the tumble of from she horse , & c. , with the mistake concern , with the many consequence of the punch , and , in short , with almost everything which have happene at the inn whence we despatch we lady in a coach - and - six when we last take we leave of they . chapter ix . contain little more than a few odd observation . Jones have be absent a full half - hour , when he return into the kitchen in a hurry , desire the landlord to let he know that instant what be to
to pay . and now the concern which feel at be oblige to quit the warm chimney - corner , and a cup of excellent liquor , be somewhat compensate by hearing that he be to proceed no farther on foot , for , by golden argument , have prevail with the boy to attend he back to the inn whither he have before conduct ; but to this however the lad consent , upon condition that the other guide would wait for he at the alehouse ; because , as the landlord at be a intimate acquaintance of the landlord at , it might some time or other come to the ear of the latter that he horse have be let to more than one person ; and so the boy might be bring to account for money which he wisely intend to put in he own pocket . we be oblige to mention this circumstance , trifl as it may seem , since it retarde a considerable time in he set out ; for the honesty of this latter boy be somewhat high -- that be , somewhat high - priced , and would indeed have cost Jones very dear , have not , who , as we have say , be a very cunning fellow , artfully throw in half - a - cry to be spend at that very alehouse , while the boy be wait for he companion . this half - cry the landlord no sooner get scent of , than he open after it with such vehement and persuasive outcry , that the boy be soon overcome , and consent to take half - a - cry more for he stay . here we can not help observe , that as there be so much of policy in the lowest life , great man often overvalue themselves on those refinement in imposture , in which they be frequently excel by some of the lowest of the human species . the horse be now produce , directly leapt into the side - saddle , on which he dear have rid . the lad , indeed , very civilly offer he the use of he ; but he choose the side - saddle , probably because it be softer . Partridge , however , though full as effeminate as , could not bear the thought of degrad he manhood ; he therefore accept the boy 's offer : and now , be mount on the side - saddle of he , the boy on that of , and bestrid the third horse , they set forwards on they journey , and within four hour arrive at the inn where the reader hath already spend so much time . be in very high spirit during the whole way , and often mention to the many good omen of he future success which have lately befriend he ; and which the reader , without be the least superstitious , must allow to have be particularly fortunate . be moreover better pleased with the present pursuit of he companion than he have be with he pursuit of glory ; and from these very omen , which assure the pedagogue of success , he likewise first acquire a clear idea of the amour between and ; to which he have before give very little attention , as he have originally take a wrong scent concern the reason of 's departure ; and as to what happen at , he be too much frightened just before and after he leave that place to draw any other conclusion from thence than that poor be a downright madman : a conceit which be not at all disagreeable to the opinion he before have of he extraordinary wildness , of which , he think , he behaviour on they quit so well justifi all the account he have formerly receive . he be now , however , pretty well satisfied with he present expedition , and henceforth begin to conceive much worthier sentiment of he friend 's understanding . the clock have just struck three when they arrive , and immediately bespeak post-horse ; but unluckily there be not a horse to be procure in the whole place ; which the reader will not wonder at when he consider the hurry in which the whole nation , and especially this part of it , be at this time engage , when expressis be pass and repasse every hour of the day and night . endeavoure all he could to prevail with he former guide to escorte he to Coventry ; but he be inexorable . while he be argue with the boy in the inn - yard , a person come up to he , and salut he by he name , enquire how all the good family do in ; and now cast he eye upon this person , presently discover he to be , the lawyer , with whom he have dine at , and with much courtesy return the salutation . Dowl very earnestly presse to go no further that night ; and back he solicitation with many unanswerable argument , such as , that it be almost dark , that the roads be very dirty , and that he would be able to travel much better by day - light , with many other equally good , some of which have probably suggest to himself before ; but as they be then ineffectual , so they be still : and he continue resolute in he design , even though he should be oblige to set out on foot . when the good attorney find he could not prevail on to stay , he as strenuously apply himself to persuade the guide to accompany he . he urge many motive to induce he to undertake this short journey , and at last concluded with say , " do you think the
the gentleman will not very well reward you for you trouble ? " two to one be odd at every other thing as well as at foot - ball . but the advantage which this united force hath in persuasion or entreaty must have be visible to a curious observer ; for he must have often seen , that when a father , a master , a wife , or any other person in authority , have stoutly adhere to a denial against all the reason which a single man could produce , they have afterwards yield to the repetition of the same sentiment by a second or third person , who hath undertake the cause , without attempt to advance anything new in its behalf . and hence , perhaps , proceed the phrase of seconde a argument or a motion , and the great consequence this be of in all assemblie of public debate . hence , likewise , probably it be , that in we court of law we often hear a learn gentleman ( generally a serjeant ) repeat for a hour together what another learn gentleman , who speak just before he , have be say . instead of accounting for this , we shall proceed in we usual manner to exemplify it in the conduct of the lad above mention , who submit to the persuasion of , and promise once more to admit into he side - saddle ; but insist on first give the poor creature a good bait , say , they have travel a great way , and be rid very hard . indeed this caution of the boy be needless ; for , notwithstand he hurry and impatience , would have order this of himself ; for he by no means agree with the opinion of those who consider animal as mere machine , and when they bury they spur in the belly of they horse , imagine the spur and the horse to have a equal capacity of feeling pain . while the beasts be eat they corn , or rather be suppose to eat it ( for , as the boy be take care of himself in the kitchen , the ostler take great care that he corn should not be consum in the stable ) , , at the earnest desire of , accompany that gentleman into he room , where they sit down together over a bottle of wine . chapter x . in which and drink a bottle together . , pour out a glass of wine , name the health of the good ; add , " if you please , sir , we will likewise remember he nephew and heir , the young squire : come , sir , here be to you , a very pretty young gentleman ; and who , I dare swear , will hereafter make a very considerable figure in he country . I have a borough for he myself in my eye . " " , " answer , " I be convince you do not intend to affront I , so I shall not resent it ; but I promise you , you have join two person very improperly together ; for one be the glory of the human species , and the other be a rascal who dishonour the name of man . " Dowling star at this . he say , " he think both the gentleman have a very unexceptionable character . as for himself , " say he , " I never have the happiness to see he ; but all the world talk of he goodness . and , indeed , as to the young gentleman , I never see he but once , when I carry he the news of the loss of he mother ; and then I be so hurried , and drive , and tore with the multiplicity of business , that I have hardly time to converse with he ; but he look so like a very honest gentleman , and behave himself so prettily , that I protest I never be more delighted with any gentleman since I be bear . " " I do not wonder , " answer , " that he should impose upon you in so short a acquaintance ; for he hath the cunning of the himself , and you may live with he many year , without discover he . I be breed up with he from my infancy , and we be hardly ever asunder ; but it be very lately only that I have discover half the villany which be in he . I own I never greatly like he . I think he want that generosity of spirit , which be the sure foundation of all that be great and noble in human nature . I see a selfishness in he long ago which I despise ; but it be lately , very lately , that I have find he capable of the basest and blackest design ; for , indeed , I have at last found out , that he hath take a advantage of the openness of my own temper , and hath concert the deepest project , by a long train of wicked artifice , to work my ruin , which at last he hath effect . " " ay ! ay ! " cry Dowling ; " I protest , then , it be a pity such a person should inherit the great estate of you uncle . " " Ala , sir , " cry , " you do I a honour to which I have no title . it be true , indeed , he goodness once allow I the liberty of call he by a much nearer name ; but as this be only a voluntary act of goodness , I can complain of no injustice when he think
think proper to deprive I of this honour ; since the loss can not be more unmerited than the gift originally be . I assure you , sir , I be no relation of ; and if the world , who be incapable of set a true value on he virtue , should think , in he behaviour to I , he hath deal hardly by a relation , they do a injustice to the best of man : for I -- but I ask you pardon , I shall trouble you with no particular relate to myself ; only as you seem to think I a relation of , I think proper to set you right in a matter that might draw some censure upon he , which I promise you I would rather lose my life than give occasion to . " " I protest , sir , " cry , " you talk very much like a man of honou ; but instead of give I any trouble , I protest it would give I great pleasure to know how you come to be think a relation of 's , if you be not . you horse will not be ready this half - hour , and as you have sufficient opportunity , I wish you would tell I how all that happen ; for I protest it seem very surprizing that you should pass for a relation of a gentleman , without be so . " , who in the compliance of he disposition ( though not in he prudence ) a little resemble he lovely , be easily prevail on to satisfy 's curiosity , by relate the history of he birth and education , which he do , like . ------even from he boyish year , to th' very moment he be bad to tell : the which to hear , Dowling , like , do seriously incline ; he swore ' twas strange , ' tbe pass strange ; ' Twas pitiful , ' twas wonderous pitiful . be indeed very greatly affect with this relation ; for he have not divest himself of humanity by be a attorney . indeed , nothing be more unjust than to carry we prejudice against a profession into private life , and to borrow we idea of a man from we opinion of he calling . , it be true , lessend the horror of those action which the profession make necessary , and consequently habitual ; but in all other instance , work in man of all profession alike ; nay , perhaps , even more strongly with those who give she , as it be , a holiday , when they be follow they ordinary business . a butcher , I make no doubt , would feel compunction at the slaughter of a fine horse ; and though a surgeon can feel no pain in cut off a limb , I have know he compassionate a man in a fit of the gout . the common hangman , who hath stretch the neck of hundred , be know to have tremble at he first operation on a head : and the very professor of human blood - shedding , who , in they trade of war , butcher thousand , not only of they fellow- professor , but often of woman and child , without remorse ; even these , I say , in time of peace , when drum and trumpet be laid aside , often lay aside all they ferocity , and become very gentle member of civil society . in the same manner a attorney may feel all the misery and distress of he fellow - creature , provide he happen not to be concerned against they . , as the reader know , be yet unacquainted with the very black colour in which he have be represent to ; and as to other matter , he do not show they in the most disadvantageous light ; for though he be unwilling to cast any blame on he former friend and patron ; yet he be not very desirous of heaping too much upon himself . Dowl therefore observe , and not without reason , that very ill office must have be do he by somebody : " for certainly , " cry he , " the squire would never have disinherit you only for a few fault , which any young gentleman might have commit . indeed , I can not properly say disinherit : for to be sure by law you can not claim as here . that be certain ; that nobody need go to counsel for . yet when a gentleman have in a manner adopt you thus as he own son , you might reasonably have expect some very considerable part , if not the whole ; nay , if you have expect the whole , I should not have blame you : for certainly all man be for get as much as they can , and they be not to be blame on that account . " " indeed you wrong I , " say ; " I should have be contente with very little : I never have any view upon 's fortune ; nay , I believe I may truly say , I never once consider what he could or might give I . this I solemnly declare , if he have do a prejudice to he nephew in my favour , I would have undo it again . I have rather enjoy my own mind than the fortune of another man . what be the poor pride arise from a magnificent house , a numerous equipage , a splendid table , and from all the other advantage or appearance of fortune , compare to the warm , solid content , the swelling satisfaction , the thrilling transport , and the exulting triumph ,
, which a good mind enjoy , in the contemplation of a generous , virtuous , noble , benevolent action ? I envy not in the prospect of he wealth ; nor shall I envy he in the possession of it . I would not think myself a rascal half a hour , to exchange situation . I believe , indeed , suspect I of the view you mention ; and I suppose these suspicions , as they arise from the baseness of he own heart , so they occasion he baseness to I . but , I thank Heaven , I know , I feel -- I feel my innocence , my friend ; and I would not part with that feel for the world . for as long as I know I have never do , nor even design , a injury to any being whatever , I pigri ubi nulla campis Arbor aestiva recreatur aura , latus mundi nebula , malusque urget . Pone sub curru nimium propinqui in ; , loquentem ._ [ *] [ *] place I where never summer breeze Unbinds the glebe , or warm the tree : where ever - lowere cloud appear , and angry deform th ' inclement year . place I beneath the burn ray , where roll the rapid car of day ; Love and the nymph shall charm my toil , the nymph who sweetly speak , and sweetly smile . . he then fill a bumper of wine , and drink it off to the health of he dear Lalage ; and , fill 's glass likewise up to the brim , insist on he pledge he . " why , then , here be 's health with all my heart , " cry Dowling . " I have hear she toast often , I protest , though I never see she ; but they say she be extremely handsome . " though the be not the only part of this speech which do not perfectly understand ; yet there be somewhat in it that make a very strong impression upon he . and though he endeavoure by winking , nodding , sneer , and grinn , to hide the impression from ( for we be as often asham of think right as of think wrong ) , it be certain he secretly approve as much of he sentiment as he understand , and really feel a very strong impulse of compassion for he . but we may possibly take some other opportunity of commenting upon this , especially if we should happen to meet Dowling any more in the course of we history . at present we be oblige to take we leave of that gentleman a little abruptly , in imitation of ; who be no sooner inform , by , that he horse be ready , than he deposit he reckoning , wish he companion a good night , mount , and set forward towards , though the night be dark , and it just then begin to rain very hard . chapter xi . the disaster which befel on he departure for ; with the sage remark of . no road can be plainer than that from the place where they now be to ; and though neither , nor , nor the guide , have ever travel it before , it would have be almost impossible to have miss they way , have it not be for the two reason mention in the conclusion of the last chapter . these two circumstance , however , happen both unfortunately to intervene , we traveller deviate into a much less frequented track ; and after ride full six mile , instead of arrive at the stately spire of Coventry , they find themselves still in a very dirty lane , where they see no symptom of approach the suburb of a large city . now declare that they must certainly have lose they way ; but this the guide insist upon be impossible ; a word which , in common conversation , be often used to signify not only improbable , but often what be really very likely , and , sometimes , what hath certainly happen ; a hyperbolical violence like that which be so frequently offer to the word infinite and eternal ; by the former of which it be usual to express a distance of half a yard , and by the latter , a duration of five minute . and thus it be as usual to assert the impossibility of lose what be already actually lose . this be , in fact , the case at present ; for , notwithstand all the confident assertion of the lad to the contrary , it be certain they be no more in the right road to , than the fraudulent , griping , cruel , canting miser be in the right road to heave . it be not , perhaps , easy for a reader , who hath never be in those circumstance , to imagine the horror with which darkness , rain , and wind , fill person who have lose they way in the night ; and who , consequently , have not the pleasant prospect of warm fire , dry cloath , and other refreshment , to support they mind in struggle with the inclemency of the weather . a very imperfect idea of this horror will , however , serve sufficiently to account for the conceit which now fill the head of , and which we shall presently be obliged to open . grow more and more positive that they be out of they road ; and the boy himself at last acknowledg he believe they be not in the right road to ; though he affir , at the same time , it be impossible they should have mist the way . but be of a different
different opinion . he say , " when they first set out he imagine some mischief or other would happen .-- do not you observe , sir , " say he to , " that old woman who stand at the door just as you be take horse ? I wish you have give she a small matter , with all my heart ; for she say then you might repent it ; and at that very instant it begin to rain , and the wind hath continue rise ever since . whatever some people may think , I be very certain it be in the power of witch to raise the wind whenever they please . I have see it happen very often in my time : and if ever I see a witch in all my life , that old woman be certainly one . I think so to myself at that very time ; and if I have have any halfpence in my pocket , I would have give she some ; for to be sure it be always good to be charitable to those sort of people , for fear what may happen ; and many a person hath lose he cattle by save a halfpenny . " , though he be horridly vex at the delay which this mistake be likely to occasion in he journey , could not help smile at the superstition of he friend , whom a accident now greatly confirm in he opinion . this be a tumble from he horse ; by which , however , he receive no other injury than what the dirt confer on he cloath . have no sooner recover he leg , than he appeal to he fall , as conclusive evidence of all he have assert ; but finde he be unhurt , answer with a smile : " this witch of yours , , be a most ungrateful jade , and doth not , I find , distinguish she friend from other in she resentment . if the old lady have be angry with I for neglect she , I do not see why she should tumble you from you horse , after all the respect you have express for she . " " it be ill jesting , " cry , " with people who have power to do these thing ; for they be often very malicious . I remember a farrier , who provoke one of they , by ask she when the time she have bargain with the devil for would be out ; and within three month from that very day one of he best cow be drown . be she satisfie with that ; for a little time afterwards he lose a barrel of best - drink : for the old witch pull out the spigot , and let it run all over the cellar , the very first evening he have tap it to make merry with some of he neighbour . in short , nothing ever thrive with he afterwards ; for she worry the poor man so , that he take to drink ; and in a year or two he stock be seize , and he and he family be now come to the parish . " the guide , and perhaps he horse too , be both so attentive to this discourse , that , either through want of care , or by the malice of the witch , they be now both sprawl in the dirt . entirely impute this fall , as he have do he own , to the same cause . he tell , " it would certainly be he turn next ; and earnestly entreate he to return back , and find out the old woman , and pacify she . we shall very soon , " add he , " reach the inn ; for though we have seem to go forward , I be very certain we be in the identical place in which we be a hour ago ; and I dare swear , if it be daylight , we might now see the inn we set out from . " instead of return any answer to this sage advice , be entirely attentive to what have happene to the boy , who receive no other hurt than what have before befall Partridge , and which he cloath very easily bore , as they have be for many year inure to the like . he soon regain he side - saddle , and by the hearty curse and blow which he bestow on he horse , quickly satisfied that no harm be done . chapter xii . relate that continue he journey , contrary to the advice of , with what happen on that occasion . they now discover a light at some distance , to the great pleasure of , and to the no small terror of , who firmly believe himself to be bewitch , and that this light be a Jack - with - a - lantern , or somewhat more mischievous . but how be these fear increase , when , as they approach nearer to this light ( or light as they now appear ) , they hear a confused sound of human voice ; of singing , laugh , and hallow , together with a strange noise that seem to proceed from some instrument ; but could hardly be allow the name of music ! indeed , to favour a little the opinion of , it might very well be call music bewitch . it be impossible to conceive a much greater degree of horror than what now seize on Partridge ; the contagion of which have reach the post -boy , who have be very attentive to many thing that the other have utter . he now , therefore , join in petitioning to return ; say he
he firmly believe what have just before say , that though the horse seem to go on , they have not move a step forwards during at least the last half - hour . Jones could not help smile in the midst of he vexation , at the fear of these poor fellow . " either we advance , " say he , " towards the light , or the light have advanc towards we ; for we be now at a very little distance from they ; but how can either of you be afraid of a set of people who appear only to be merry - make ? " " Merry - make , sy ! " cry Partridge ; " who could be merry - make at this time of night , and in such a place , and such weather ? they can be nothing but ghost or witch , or some evil spirit or other , that be certain . " " let they be what they will , " cry , " I be resolve to go up to they , and enquire the way to Coventry . all witch , , be not such ill - natured hag as that we have the misfortune to meet with last . " " o , sir , " cry , " there be no know what humwe they will be in ; to be sure it be always best to be civil to they ; but what if we should meet with something worse than witch , with evil spirit themselves ?----Pray , sir , be advise ; pray , sy , do . if you have read so many terrible account as I have of these matters , you would not be so fool - hardy .---- the know whither we have get already , or whither we be go ; for sure such darkness be never see upon earth , and I question whether it can be darker in the other world . " put forwards as fast as he could , notwithstand all these hint and caution , and poor Partridge be oblige to follow ; for though he hardly da to advance , he da still less to stay behind by himself . at length they arrive at the place whence the light and different noise have issue . this perceive to be no other than a barn , where a great number of man and woman be assemble , and divert themselves with much apparent jollity . no sooner appear before the great door of the barn , which be open , than a masculine and very rough voice from withing demand , who be there ?-- to which gently answer , a friend ; and immediately ask the road to . " if you be a friend , " cry another of the man in the barn , " you have better alight till the storm be over " ( for indeed it be now more violent than ever ;) " you be very welcome to put up you horse ; for there be sufficient room for he at the end of the barn . " " you be very obliging , " return ; " and I will accept you offer for a few minute , whilst the rain continue ; and here be two more who will be glad of the same favour . " this be accord with more good - while than it be accept : for would rather have submit to the utmost inclemency of the weather than have trust to the clemency of those whom he take for hobgoblin ; and the poor post -boy be now infect with the same apprehension ; but they be both oblige to follow the example of ; the one because he durst not leave he horse , and the other because he fear nothing so much as be leave by himself . have this history be writ in the day of superstition , I should have have too much compassion for the reader to have leave he so long in suspense , whether or be about actually to appear in person , with all he hellish retinue ; but as these doctrine be at present very unfortunate , and have but few , if any believer , I have not be much aware of convey any such terror . to say truth , the whole furniture of the infernal region hath long be appropriate by the manager of playhouse , who seem lately to have lay they by as rubbish , capable only of affect the upper gallery ; a place in which few of we reader ever sit . however , though we do not suspect raise any great terror on this occasion , we have reason to fear some other apprehension may here arise in we reader , into which we would not willingly betray he ; I mean that we be go to take a voyage into fairy - land , and introduce a set of being into we history , which scarce any one be ever childish enough to believe , though many have be foolish enough to spend they time in writing and read they adventur . to prevent , therefore , any such suspicion , so prejudicial to the credit of a historian , who profess to draw he material from nature only , we shall now proceed to acquaint the reader who these people were , whose sudden appearance have struck such terror into , have more than half frighten the post -boy , and have a little surprized even himself . the people then assemble in this barn be no other than a company of , or , as they be vulgarly call , gypsy , and they be now celebrat the wedding of one of they society . it be impossible to conceive a happier set of people
people than appear here to be meet together . the utmost mirth , indeed , shew itself in every countenance ; nor be they ball totally void of all order and decorum . perhaps it have more than a country assembly be sometimes conduct with : for these people be subject to a formal government and law of they own , and all pay obedience to one great magistrate , whom they call they king . plenty , likewise , be nowhere to be see than what flourish in this barn . here be indeed no nicety nor elegance , nor do the keen appetite of the guest require any . here be good store of bacon , fowl , and , to which every one present provide better sauce himself than the best and dearest french cook can prepare . be not describe under more consternation in the temple of , stupet obtutuque haeret defixus in uno_ , than be we heroe at what he see in this barn . while he be look everywhere round he with astonishment , a venerable person approach he with many friendly salutation , rather of too hearty a kind to be call courtly . this be no other than the king of the gypsy himself . he be very little distinguished in dress from he subject , nor have he any regalia of majesty to support he dignity ; and yet there seem ( as say ) to be somewhat in he air which denote authority , and inspire the beholder with a idea of awe and respect ; though all this be perhaps imaginary in ; and the truth may be , that such idea be incident to power , and almost inseparable from it . there be somewhat in the open countenance and courteous behaviour of which , be accompany with much comeliness of person , greatly recommend he at first sight to every beholder . these be , perhaps , a little heighten in the present instance , by that profound respect which he pay to the king of the gypsy , the moment he be acquaint with he dignity , and which be the sweeter to he gypseian majesty , as he be not use to receive such homage from any but he own subject . the king order a table to be spread with the choicest of they provision for he accommodation ; and , have place himself at he right hand , he majesty begin to discourse with we heroe in the follow manner :-- " I doubt not , sir , but you have often see some of my people , who be what you call de party detache : for dey go about everywhere ; but I fancy you imagine not we be so considrable body as we be ; and may be you will be surprize more when you hear de gypsy be as orderly and well govern people as any upon face of de earth . " I have honour , as I say , to be deir king , and no monarch can do boast of more dutiful subject , ne no more affectionate . how far I deserve dere good - will , I no say ; but dis I can say , dat I never design anyting but to do dem good . I sall no do boast of that neider : for what can I do oderwise dan consider of de good of dose poor people who go about all day to give I always de best of what dey get . Dey love and honour I darefore , because I do love and take care of dem ; dat be all , I know no oder reason . " about a tousand or two tousand year ago , I can not tell to a year or two , as can neider write nor read , dere be a great what you call -- a volution among de gypsy ; for dere be de lord gypsy in dose day ; and dese lord do quarrel vid one anoder about place ; but de king of de gypsy do demolish dem all , and make all he subject equal vid each oder ; and since that time dey have agree very well ; for dey no tink of be king , and may be it be better for dem as dey be ; for I assure you it be ver troublesome ting to be k , and always to do justice ; I have often wish to be private gypsy when I have be force to punish my dear friend and relation ; for dough we never put to death , we punishment be ver severe . Dey make gypsy asham of demself , and that be ver terrible punishment ; I ave scarce ever know de gypsy so punish do harm any more . " the king then proceed to express some wonder that there be no such punishment as shame in other government . upon which assure he to the contrary ; for that there be many crime for which shame be inflict by the english law , and that it be indeed one consequence of all punishment . " that be ver strange , " say the king ; " for I know and hear good deal of you people , dough I no live among dem ; and I have often hear that sham be de consequence and de cause too of many of you reward . be you reward and punishment den de same ting ? " while he majesty be thus discourse with , a sudden uproar arise in the barn , and as it seem upon this occasion :-- the courtesy of these people have by degree remove all the apprehension of , and he be prevail upon not only to stuff himself with they food , but to taste some of they
they liquor , which by degree entirely expel all fear from he composition , and in its stead introduce much more agreeable sensation . a young female gypsy , more remarkable for she wit than she beauty , have decoy the honest fellow aside , pretend to tell he fortune . now , when they be alone together in a remote part of the barn , whether it proceed from the strong liquor , which be never so apt to inflame inordinate desire as after moderate fatigue ; or whether the fair gypsy herself throw aside the delicacy and decency of she sex , and temp the youth Partridge with express solicitation ; but they be discover in a very improper manner by the husband of the gypsy , who , from jealousy it seem , have keep a watchful eye over he wife , and have dog she to the place , where he find she in the arm of she gallant . to the great confusion of , be now hurry before the king ; who hear the accusation , and likewise the culprit 's defence , which be indeed very trifling ; for the poor fellow be confound by the plain evidence which appear against he , and have very little to say for himself . he majesty , then turn towards , say , " Sir , you have hear what dey say ; what punishment do you tink you man deserve ? " answer , " he be sorry for what have happen , and that Partridge should make the husband all the amend in he power : he say , he have very little money about he at that time ; " and , put he hand into he pocket , offer the fellow a guinea . to which he immediately answer , " he hope he honou would not think of give he less than five . " this sum , after some altercation , be reduce to two ; and , have stipulate for the full forgiveness of both and the wife , be go to pay the money ; when he majesty , restrain he hand , turn to the witness and ask he , " at what time he have discover the criminal ? " to which he answer , " that he have be desire by the husband to watch the motion of he wife from she first speak to the stranger , and that he have never lose sight of she afterwards till the crime have be commit . " the king then ask , " if the husband be with he all that time in he lurking - place ? " to which he answer in the affirmative . he egyptian majesty then address himself to the husband as follow : " I be sorry to see any gypsy dat have no more honour dan to sell de honour of he wife for money . if you have love for you wife , you would have prevent dis matter , and not endeavou to make she de whore dat you might discover she . I do order that you have no money give you , for you deserve punishment , not reward ; I do order derefore , that you be de infamous gypsy , and do wear pair of horn upon you forehead for one month , and that you wife be call whore , and point at all that time ; for you be de infamous gypsy , but she be no less de infamous whore . " the gypsy immediately proceed to execute the sentence , and leave and alone with he majesty . greatly applaude the justice of the sentence : upon which the king , turn to he , say , " I believe you be surprize : for I suppose you have ver bad opinion of my people ; I suppose you tink we all de tieve . " " I must confess , sir , " say , " I have not hear so favourable a account of they as they seem to deserve . " " I vil tell you , " say the king , " how the difference be between you and we . my people rob you people , and you people rob one anoder . " afterwards proceed very gravely to s forth the happiness of those subject who live under such a magistrate . indeed they happiness appear to have be so compleat , that we be aware lest some advocate for arbitrary power should hereafter quote the case of those people , as a instance of the great advantage which attend that government above all other . and here we will make a concession , which would not perhaps have be expect from we , that no limited form of government be capable of rise to the same degree of perfection , or of produce the same benefit to society , with this . have never be so happy , as when the greatest part of the then know world be under the dominion of a single master ; and this state of they felicity continue during the reign of five successive prince . [ *] this be the true aera of the golden age , and the only golden age which ever have any existence , unless in the warm imagination of the poet , from the expulsion from down to this day . [ *] , , , and the two . in reality , I know but of one solid objection to absolute monarchy . the only defect in which excellent constitution seem to be , the difficulty of find any man adequate to the office of a absolute monarch : for this indispensably require three qualitie very difficult , as it appear from history , to be find in princely nature : first , a sufficient quantity of moderation in
in the prince , to be contente with all the power which be possible for he to have . 2ndly , enough of wisdom to know he own happiness . and , 3rdly , sufficient to support the happiness of other , when not only compatible with , but instrumental to he own . now if a absolute monarch , with all these great and rare qualification , should be allow capable of conferr the greatest good on society ; it must be surely grant , on the contrary , that absolute power , vest in the hand of one who be deficient in they all , be likely to be attend with no less a degree of evil . in short , we own religion furnish we with adequate idea of the blessing , as well as curse , which may attend absolute power . the picture of heaven and of hell will place a very lively image of both before we eye ; for though the prince of the latter can have no power but what he originally derive from the omnipotent in the former , yet it plainly appear from Scripture that absolute power in he infernal dominion be grant to they diabolical ruler . this be indeed the only absolute power which can by be derive from heaven . if , therefore , the several tyranny upon earth can prove any title to a authority , it must be derive from this original grant to the prince of darkness ; and these subordinate deputation must consequently come immediately from he whose stamp they so expressly bear . to conclude , as the example of all ag show we that mankind in general desire power only to do harm , and , when they obtain it , use it for no other purpose ; it be not consonant with even the least degree of prudence to hazard a alteration , where we hope be poorly keep in countenance by only two or three exception out of a thousand instance to alarm we fear . in this case it will be much wiser to submit to a few inconveniency arise from the dispassionate deafness of law , than to remedy they by apply to the passionate open ear of a tyrant . nor can the example of the gypsy , though possibly they may have long be happy under this form of government , be here urge ; since we must remember the very material respect in which they differ from all other people , and to which perhaps this they happiness be entirely owing , namely , that they have no false honour among they , and that they look on shame as the most grievous punishment in the world . chapter xiii . a dialogue between and . the honest lover of liberty will , we doubt not , pardon that long digression into which we be lead at the close of the last chapter , to prevent we history from be apply to the use of the most pernicious doctrine which priestcraft have ever the wickedness or the impudence to preach . we will now proceed with , who , when the storm be over , take leave of he egyptian majesty , after many thanks for he courteous behaviour and kind entertainment , and set out for ; to which place ( for it be still dark ) a gypsy be order to conduct he . Jones have , by reason of he deviation , travel eleven mile instead of six , and most of those through very execrable road , where no expedition could have be make in quest of a midwife , do not arrive at Coventry till near twelve . could he possibly get again into the saddle till past two ; for post-horse be now not easy to get ; nor be the hostler or post -boy in half so great a hurry as himself , but choose rather to imitate the tranquil disposition of ; who , be deny the nourishment of sleep , take all opportunity to supply it be place with every other kind of nourishment , and be never better pleased than when he arrive at a inn , nor ever more dissatisfied than when he be again force to leave it . now travel post ; we will follow he , therefore , accord to we custom , and to the rule of , in the same manner . from Coventry he arrive at , from at , and from at , whither he come the next day a little after noon , and within a few hour after have leave it ; and though he be oblige to stay here longer than he wish , while a smith , with great deliberation , shoe the post-horse he be to ride , he doubt not but to overtake he before she should set out from ; at which place he conclude , and very reasonably , that he lordship would stop and dine . and have he be right in this conjecture , he most probably would have overtake he angel at the aforesaid place ; but unluckily my lord have appoint a dinner to be prepare for he at he own house in , and , in order to enable he to reach that place in proper time , he have order a relay of horse to meet he at . when therefore arrive there , he be inform that the coach - and - six have set out two hour before . if fresh post-horse have be now ready , as they be not , it seem so apparently impossible to overtake the coach before it reach , that think he have now a proper opportunity to remind he friend of a matter which he see entirely to have forget ; what this be the reader will guess , when we inform he that
that have eat nothing more than one poach egg since he have leave the alehouse where he have first meet the guide return from ; for with the gypsy he have feast only he understanding . the landlord so entirely agree with the opinion of , that he no sooner hear the latter desire he friend to stay and dine , than he very readily put in he word , and retract he promise before give of furnish the horse immediately , he assure he would lose no time in bespeak a dinner , which , he say , could be get ready sooner than it be possible to get the horse up from grass , and to prepare they for they journey by a feed of corn . be at length prevail on , chiefly by the latter argument of the landlord ; and now a joint of mutton be put down to the fire . while this be prepare , , be admit into the same apartment with he friend or master , begin to harangue in the follow manner . " certainly , sir , if ever man deserve a young lady , you deserve young Madam western ; for what a vast quantity of love must a man have , to be able to live upon it without any other food , as you do ? I be positive I have eat thirty time as much within these last twenty - four hour as you honour , and yet I be almost famish ; for nothing make a man so hungry as travel , especially in this cold raw weather . and yet I can not tell how it be , but you honour be seemingly in perfect good health , and you never look better nor fresher in you life . it must be certainly love that you live upon . " " and a very rich diet too , , " answer . " but do not fortune send I a excellent dainty yesterday ? Dost thou imagine I can not live more than twenty - four hour on this dear pocket - book ? " " undoubtedly , " cry , " there be enough in that pocket - book to purchase many a good meal . Fortune send it to you honour very opportunely for present use , as you honour 's money must be almost out by this time . " " what do you mean ? " answer ; " I hope you do not imagine that I should be dishonest enough , even if it belong to any other person , besides ---- " " ! " reply , " heaven forbid I should wrong you honour so much ! but where be the dishonesty in borrow a little for present spending , since you will be so well able to pay the lady hereafter ? no , indeed , I would have you honour pay it again , as soon as it be convenient , by all mean ; but where can be the harm in make use of it now you want it ? indeed , if it belong to a poor body , it would be another thing ; but so great a lady , to be sure , can never want it , especially now as she be along with a lord , who , it can not be doubt , will let she have whatever she hath need of . besides , if she should want a little , she can not want the whole , therefore I would give she a little ; but I would be hang before I mention the having find it at first , and before I get some money of my own ; for , I have hear , be the very worst of place to be in without money . indeed , if I have not know to whom it belong , I might have think it be the devil 's money , and have be afraid to use it ; but as you know otherwise , and come honestly by it , it would be a affront to fortune to part with it all again , at the very time when you want it most ; you can hardly expect she should ever do you such another good turn ; for _fortuna nunquam perpetuo est bona_ . you will do as you please , notwithstand all I say ; but for my part , I would be hang before I mention a word of the matter . " " by what I can see , , " cry , " hang be a matter _non longe alienum a Scaevolae studiis _. " " you should say _alienus , " say ,--" I remember the passage ; it be a example under _communis , alienus , immunis , tvariis casibus serviunt_. " " if you do remember it , " cry , " I find you do not understand it ; but I tell thee , friend , in plain , that he who find another 's property , and wilfully detain it from the know owner , deserve , _in foor conscientia , to be hang , no less than if he have steal it . and as for this very identical bill , which be the property of my angel , and be once in she dear possession , I will not deliver it into any hand but she own , upon any consideration whatever , no , though I be as hungry as thou art , and have no other means to satisfy my craving appetite ; this I hope to do before I sleep ; but if it should happen otherwise , I charge thee , if thou would 'st not incur my displeasure for ever , not to shock I any more by the bare mention of such detestable baseness . " "
" I should not have mention it now , " cry , " if it have appear so to I ; for I be sure I scorn any wickedness as much as another ; but perhaps you know better ; and yet I might have imagine that I should not have live so many year , and have teach school so long , without be able to distinguish between _fa et nefas ; but it seem we be all to live and learn . I remember my old schoolmaster , who be a prodigious great scholar , use often to say , Polly matete cry town be my daskalon . the of which , he tell we , be , that a child may sometimes teach he grandmother to suck egg . I have live to a fine purpose , truly , if I be to be teach my grammar at this time of day . perhaps , young gentleman , you may change you opinion , if you live to my year : for I remember I think myself as wise when I be a stripling of one or two and twenty as I be now . I be sure I always teach _alienus , and my master read it so before I . " there be not many instance in which Partridge could provoke , nor be there many in which himself could have be hurrie out of he respect . Unluckily , however , they have both hit on one of these . we have already see could not bear to have he learning attack , nor could bear some passage or other in the foregoing speech . and now , look upon he companion with a contemptuous and disdainful air ( a thing not usual with he ) , he cry , " Partridge , I see thou be a conceit old fool , and I wish thou be not likewise a old rogue . indeed , if I be as well convince of the latter as I be of the former , thou should 'st travel no farther in my company . " the sage pedagogue be contente with the vent which he have already give to he indignation ; and , as the vulgar phrase be , immediately draw in he horn . he say , he be sorry he have utter anything which might give offence , for that he have never intend it ; but omnibus horis sapit . as have the vice of a warm disposition , he be entirely free from those of a cold one ; and if he friend must have confest he temper to have be a little too easily ruffle , he enemy must at the same time have confest , that it as soon subsid ; nor do it at all resemble the sea , whose swell be more violent and dangerous after a storm be over than while the storm itself subsist . he instantly accept the submission of , shook he by the hand , and with the most benign aspect imaginable , say twenty kind thing , and at the same time very severely condemn himself , though not half so severely as he will most probably be condemn by many of we good reader . be now highly comfort , as he fear of have offend be at once abolished , and he pride completely satisfy by have own himself in the wrong , which submission he instantly apply to what have principally nettle he , and repeat in a mutter voice , " to be sure , sir , you knowledge may be superior to mine in some thing ; but as to the grammar , I think I may challenge any man liive . I think , at least , I have that at my finger 's end . " if anything could add to the satisfaction which the poor man now enjoy , he receive this addition by the arrival of a excellent shoulder of mutton , that at this instant come smoak to the table . on which , have both plentifully feast , they again mount they horse , and set forward for . xiv. what happen to in he journey from . they be get about two mile beyond , and it be now the dusk of the evening , when a genteel - look man , but upon a very shabby horse , ride up to , and ask he whether he be go to ; to which answer in the affirmative . the gentleman reply , " I should be oblige to you , sir , if you will accept of my company ; for it be very late , and I be a stranger to the road . " readily comply with the request ; and on they travel together , hold that sort of discourse which be usual on such occasion . of this , indeed , robbery be the principal topic : upon which subject the stranger express great apprehension ; but declare he have very little to lose , and consequently as little to fear . here could not forbear put in he word . " you honour , " say he , " may think it a little , but I be sure , if I have a hundred - pound bank - note in my pocket , as you have , I should be very sorry to lose it ; but , for my part , I never be less afraid in my life ; for we be four of we , and if we all stand by one another , the best man in can not rob we . suppose he should have a pistol , he can kill but one of we , and a man can die but once .-- that be my comfort , a man can die but once . " besides the
the reliance on superior number , a kind of valour which hath raise a certain nation among the modern to a high pitch of glory , there be another reason for the extraordinary courage which now discover ; for he have at present as much of that quality as be in the power of liquor to bestow . we company be now arrive within a mile of , when the stranger turn short upon , and pull out a pistol , demand that little bank - note which have mention . be at first somewhat shocked at this unexpected demand ; however , he presently recollect himself , and tell the highwayman , all the money he have in he pocket be entirely at he service ; and so say , he pull out upward of three guinea , and offer to deliver it ; but the other answer with a oath , that would not do . answer coolly , he be very sorry for it , and return the money into he pocket . the highwayman then threaten , if he do not deliver the bank - note that moment , he must shoot he ; hold he pistol at the same time very near to he breast . instantly catch hold of the fellow 's hand , which tremble so that he could scarce hold the pistol in it , and turn the muzzle from he . a struggle then ensue , in which the former wrest the pistol from the hand of he antagonist , and both come from they horse on the ground together , the highwayman upon he back , and the victorious upon he . the poor fellow now begin to implore mercy of the conqueror : for , to say the truth , he be in strength by no means a match for . " indeed , sir , " say he , " I could have have no intention to shoot you ; for you will find the pistol be not load . this be the first robbery I ever attempt , and I have be drive by distress to this . " at this instant , at about a hundred and fifty yard ' distance , lay another person on the ground , roar for mercy in a much louder voice than the highwayman . this be no other than himself , who , endeavour to make he escape from the engagement , have be throw from he horse , and lay flat on he face , not da to look up , and expect every minute to be shoot . in this posture he lay , till the guide , who be no otherwise concerned than for he horse , have secure the stumbling beast , come up to he , and tell he he master have get the better of the highwayman . Partridge leapt up at this news , and run back to the place where stand with he sword draw in he hand to guard the poor fellow ; which Partridge no sooner saw than he cry out , " kill the villain , sir , run he through the body , kill he this instant ! " luckily , however , for the poor wretch , he have fall into more merciful hand ; for have examine the pistol , and find it to be really unloaded , begin to believe all the man have tell he , before come up : namely , that he be a novice in the trade , and that he have be drive to it by the distress he mention , the greatest indeed imaginable , that of five hungry child , and a wife lie in of the sixth , in the utmost want and misery . the truth of all which the highwayman most vehemently assert , and offer to convince of it , if he would take the trouble to go to he house , which be not above two mile off ; say , " that he desire no favour , but upon condition of prove all he have all alledge . " Jones at first pretend that he would take the fellow at he word , and go with he , declare that he fate should depend entirely on the truth of he story . upon this the poor fellow immediately express so much alacrity , that be perfectly satisfied with he veracity , and begin now to entertain sentiment of compassion for he . he return the fellow he empty pistol , advise he to think of honester means of relieive he distress , and give he a couple of guinea for the immediate support of he wife and he family ; add , " he wish he have more for he sake , for the hundred pound that have be mention be not he own . " we reader will probably be divide in they opinion concern this action ; some may applaud it perhaps as a act of extraordinary humanity , while those of a more saturnine temper will consider it as a want of regard to that justice which every man owe he country . certainly see it in that light ; for he testify much dissatisfaction on the occasion , quote a old proverb , and say , he should not wonder if the rogue attack they again before they reach . the highwayman be full of expressions of thankfulness and gratitude . he actually dropt tear , or pretend so to do . he vow he would immediately return home , and would never afterwards commit such a transgression : whether he keep he word or no , perhaps may appear hereafter . we traveller have remount they horse , arrive in town without encounter any new mishap . on the road much pleasant discourse pass between and , on the subject of they last adventure : in which
which exprest a great compassion for those highwayman who be , by unavoidable distress , drive , as it be , to such illegal course , as generally bring they to a shameful death : " I mean , " say he , " those only whose highest guilt extend no farther than to robbery , and who be never guilty of cruelty nor insult to any person , which be a circumstance that , I must say , to the honour of we country , distinguish the robber of from those of all other nation ; for murder be , amongst those , almost inseparably incident to robbery . " " no doubt , " answer , " it be better to take away one 's money than one be life ; and yet it be very hard upon honest man , that they can not travel about they business without be in danger of these villain . and to be sure it would be better that all rogue be hang out of the way , than that one honest man should suffer . for my own part , indeed , I should not care to have the blood of any of they on my own hand ; but it be very proper for the law to hang they all . what right hath any man to take sixpence from I , unless I give it he ? be there any honesty in such a man ? " " no , surely , " cry , " no more than there be in he who take the horse out of another man 's stable , or who apply to he own use the money which he find , when he know the right owner . " these hint stopt the mouth of ; nor do he open it again till , have throw some sarcastical joke on he cowardice , he offer to excuse himself on the inequality of fire - arm , say , " a thousand naked man be nothing to one pistol ; for though it be true it will kill but one at a single discharge , yet who can tell but that one may be himself ? " . contain the Space of . I . a Invocation . come , bright love of fame , inspire my glowing breast : not thee I will call , who , over swell tides of blood and tear , dost bear the heroe on to glory , while sigh of million waft he spread sail ; but thee , fair , gentle maid , whom , happy nymph , first on the bank of do produce . , whom educate , whom char , and who , on that fair hill which overlook the proud metropolis of , sit 'st , with thy , sweetly tune the heroic lyre ; fill my ravished fancy with the hope of charming age yet to come . Foretel I that some tender maid , whose grandmother be yet unborn , hereafter , when , under the fictitious name of , she read the real worth which once exist in my , shall from she sympathetic breast send forth the heaving sigh . do thou teach I not only to foresee , but to enjoy , nay , even to feed on future praise . Comfort I by a solemn assurance , that when the little parlour in which I sit at this instant shall be reduce to a worse furnished box , I shall be read with honour by those who never know nor see I , and whom I shall neither know nor see . and thou , much plumper dame , whom no airy form nor phantom of imagination cloathe ; whom the well - seasoned beef , and pudd richly stain with plum , delight : thee I call : of whom in a treckschuyte , in some canal , the fat ufrow gelt , impregnate by a jolly merchant of , be deliver : in - street school didst thou suck in the element of thy erudition . here hast thou , in thy maturer age , teach poetry to tickle not the fancy , but the pride of the patron . from thee learn a grave and solemn air ; while tragedy storm aloud , and rend th ' affright theatre with its thunder . to soothe thy weary limb in slumber , tell he tedious tale ; and , again , to awake thee , perform he surprize trick of dexterity . less thy well - feed bookseller obeys thy influence . by thy advice the heavy , unread , folio lump , which long have doze on the dusty shelf , piecemeal into number , run nimbly through the nation . instruct by thee , some book , like quack , impose on the world by promise wonder ; while other turn beaus , and trust all they merit to a gild outside . come , thou jolly substance , with thy shine face , keep back thy inspiration , but hold forth thy temp reward ; thy shine , chink heap ; thy quickly convertible bank - bill , big with unseen riche ; thy often - varie stock ; the warm , the comfortable house ; and , lastly , a fair portion of that bounteous mother , whose flow breasts yield redundant sustenance for all she numerous offspring , do not some too greedily and wantonly drive they breth from the teat . come thou , and if I be too tasteless of thy valuable treasure , warm my heart with the transporting think of convey they to other . tell I , that through thy bounty , the pratling babe , whose innocent play hath often be interrupt by my labour , may one time be amply reward for they . and now , this ill - yok pair
pair , this lean shadow and this fat substance , have prompt I to write , whose assistance shall I invoke to direct my pen ? first , ; thout gift of ; without whose aid in vain we struggle against the stream of nature . thou who dost sow the generous seed which be nourishe , and bring to perfection . do thou kindly take I by the hand , and lead I through all the maze , the win labyrinth of nature . initiate I into all those mystery which profane eye never beheld . teach I , which to thee be no difficult task , to know mankind better than they know themselves . remove that mist which dim the intellect of mortal , and cause they to adore man for they art , or to detest they for they cunning , in deceive other , when they be , in reality , the only of ridicule , for deceive themselves . Strip off the thin disguise of wisdom from self - conceit , of plenty from avarice , and of glory from ambition . come , thout that hast inspire thy Aristophanes , thy Lucian , thy Cervantes , thy , thy , thy , thy , thy , fill my page with humour ; till mankind learn the good - nature to laugh only at the folly of other , and the humility to grieve at they own . and thou , almost the constant attendent on true genius , humanity , bring all thy tender sensation . if thou hast already dispose of they all between thy and , steal they a little while from they bosom . not without these the tender scene be paint . from these alone proceed the noble , disinterest friendship , the melting love , the generous sentiment , the ardent gratitude , the soft compassion , the candid opinion ; and all those strong energie of a good mind , which fill the moistened eye with tear , the glow cheek with blood , and swell the heart with tide of grief , joy , and benevolence . and thou , of ! ( for without thy assistance nothing pure , nothing correct , can genius produce ) do thou guide my pen . Thee in thy favourite field , where the limpid , gently - roll wash thy Etonian banks , in early youth I have worship . to thee , at thy birchan altar , with true devotion , I have sacrifice my blood . come then , and from thy vast , luxuriant store , in long antiquity pile up , pour forth the rich profusion . open thy Maeonian and thy Mantuan coffer , with whatever else include thy philosophic , thy poetic , and thy historical treasure , whether with or character thout hast chosen to inscribe the ponderous chest : give I a while that key to all thy treasure , which to thy thou hast entrust . Lastly , come experience , long conversant with the wise , the good , the learn , and the polite . nor with they only , but with every kind of character , from the minister at he levee , to the bailiff in he spunging - house ; from the dutchess at she drum , to the landlady behind she bar . from thee only can the manners of mankind be know ; to which the recluse pedant , however great he part or extensive he learning may be , hath ever be a stranger . come all these , and more , if possible ; for arduous be the task I have undertake ; and , without all you assistance , will , I find , be too heavy for I to support . but if you all smile on my labour I hope still to bring they to a happy conclusion . . what befel on he arrival in . the learn use to say , that the proper direction to he be Dr_ , _in the ; intimat that there be few people in it to whom he great reputation be not know . and , perhaps , upon a very nice examination into the matter , we shall find that this circumstance bear no inconsiderable part among the many blessing of grandeur . the great happiness of be know to posterity , with the hope of which we so delighte ourselves in the preceding chapter , be the portion of few . to have the several element which compose we name , as express it , repeat a thousand year hence , be a gift beyond the power of title and wealth ; and be scarce to be purchase , unless by the sword and the pen . but to avoid the scandalous imputation , while we yet live , of be _o whom nobody know ( a scandal , by the bye , as old as the day of Homer [ * ] ) will always be the envied portion of those , who have a legal title either to honour or estate . [ *] see the 2d Odyssey , ver . 175 . from that figure , therefore , which the irish peer , who bring to town , hath already make in this history , the reader will conclude , doubtless , it must have be a easy matter to have discover he house in without know the particular street or square which he inhabit , since he must have be one whom everybody know . to say the truth , so it would have be to any of those tradesman who be accustom to attend the region of the great ; for the door of the great be generally no less easy to find than it be difficult to get entrance into they . but , as well as , be a entire stranger
stranger in ; and as he happen to arrive first in a quarter of the town , the inhabitant of which have very little intercourse with the householder of or - square ( for he enter through 's - inn - lane ) , so he ramble about some time before he could even find he way to those happy mansion where fortune segregate from the vulgar those magnanimous heroe , the descendant of antient Britons , saxons , or , whose ancestor , be bear in better day , by sundry kind of merit , have entail riche and honour on they posterity . , be at length arrive at those terrestrial Elysian fields , would now soon have discover he lordship 's mansion ; but the peer unluckily quit he former house when he go for ; and as he be just enter into a new one , the fame of he equipage have not yet sufficiently blaze in the neighbourhood ; so that , after a successless enquiry till the clock have struck eleven , at last yielded to the advice of , and retreat to the and in , that be the inn where he have first alighted , and where he retire to enjoy that kind of repose which usually attend person in he circumstance . Early in the morning he again set forth in pursuit of ; and many a weary step he take to no better purpose than before . at last , whether it be that relent , or whether it be no longer in she power to disappoint he , he come into the very street which be honoure by he lordship 's residence ; and , be direct to the house , he give one gentle rap at the door . the porter , who , from the modesty of the knock , have conceive no high idea of the person approach , conceive but little better from the appearance of , who be drest in a suit of fustian , and have by he side the weapon formerly purchase of the serjeant ; of which , though the blade might be compose of well - tempere steel , the handle be compose only of brass , and that none of the brightest . when , therefore , enquire after the young lady who have come to tow with he lordship , this fellow answer surlily , " that there be no lady there . " then desire to see the master of the house ; but be inform that he lordship would see nobody that morning . and upon grow more presse the porter say , " he have positive order to let no person in ; but if you think proper , " say he , " to leave you name , I will acquaint he lordship ; and if you call another time you shall know when he will see you . " now declare , " that he have very particular business with the young lady , and could not depart without see she . " upon which the porter , with no very agreeable voice or aspect , affirm , " that there be no young lady in that house , and consequently none could he see ; " add , " sure you be the strangest man I ever meet with , for you will not take a answer . " I have often think that , by the particular description of , the porter of hell , in the 6th , might possibly intend to satirize the porter of the great man in he time ; the picture , at least , resemble those who have the honour to attend at the door of we great man . the porter in he lodge answer exactly to in he den , and , like he , must be appease by a sop before access can be gain to he master . perhaps might have see he in that light , and have recollect the passage where the , in order to procure a entrance for Aeneas , present the keeper of the Stygian avenue with such a sop . , in like manner , now begin to offer a bribe to the human , which a footman , overhear , instantly advanced , and declare , " if would give he the sum propose , he would conduct he to the lady . " instantly agree , and be forthwith conduct to the lodging of by the very fellow who have attend the lady thither the day before . nothing more aggravate ill success than the near approach to good . the gamester , who lose he party at piquet by a single point , lament he bad luck ten time as much as he who never come within a prospect of the game . so in a lottery , the proprietor of the next number to that which win the great prize be apt to account themselves much more unfortunate than they fellow - sufferer . in short , these kind of hairbreadth missing of happiness look like the insult of , who may be consider as thus play trick with we , and wantonly divert herself at we expense . , who more than once already have experience this frolicsome disposition of the heathe goddess , be now again doom to be tantalize in the like manner ; for he arrive at the door of about ten minute after the departure of . he now address himself to the waiting - woman belong to ; who tell he the disagreeable news that the lady be go , but could not tell he whither ; and the same answer he afterwards receive from herself . for as that lady make no doubt but that be a person detach from she uncle western , in pursuit of he daughter , so she be too generous
generous to betray she . though have never see , yet he have hear that a cousin of be marry to a gentleman of that name . this , however , in the present tumult of he mind , never once recur to he memory ; but when the footman , who have conduct he from he lordship 's , acquaint he with the great intimacy between the ladie , and with they call each other cousin , he then recollect the story of the marriage which he have formerly heard ; and as he be presently convinced that this be the same woman , he become more surprized at the answer which he have receive , and very earnestly desire leave to wait on the lady herself ; but she as positively refuse he that honour . , who , though he have never see a court , be better breed than most who frequent it , be incapable of any rude or abrupt behaviour to a lady . when he have receive , therefore , a peremptory denial , he retire for the present , say to the waiting - woman , " that if this be a improper hour to wait on she lady , he would return in the afternoon ; and that he then hope to have the honour of see she . " the civility with which he utter this , add to the great comeliness of he person , make a impression on the waiting - woman , and she could not help answer ; " perhaps , sir , you may ; " and , indeed , she afterwards say everything to she mistress , which she think most likely to prevail on she to admit a visit from the handsome young gentleman ; for so she call he . very shrewdly suspect that herself be now with she cousin , and be deny to he ; which he impute to she resentment of what have happene at . have , therefore , dispatch to procure he lodging , he remain all day in the street , watch the door where he think he angel lay conceal ; but no person do he see issue forth , except a servant of the house , and in the evening he return to pay he visit to , which that good lady at last condescended to admit . there be a certain air of natural gentility , which it be neither in the power of dress to give , nor to conceal . , as hath be before hinte , be possess of this in a very eminent degree . he meet , therefore , with a reception from the lady somewhat different from what he apparel seem to demand ; and after he have pay she he proper respects , be desire to sit down . the reader will not , I believe , be desirous of know all the particular of this conversation , which end very little to the satisfaction of poor . for though soon discover the lover ( as all woman have the eye of hawk in those matters ) , yet she still think it be such a lover , as a generous friend of the lady should not betray she to . in short , she suspect this be the very , from whom have fly ; and all the answer which she artfully draw from , concern 's family , confirm she in this opinion . she therefore strictly deny any knowledge concern the place whither be go ; nor could aobtain more than a permission to wait on she again the next evening . when be depart communicate she suspicion concern to she maid ; who answer , " sure , madam , he be too pretty a man , in my opinion , for any woman in the world to run away from . I have rather fancy it be . " -- " ! " say the lady , " what ? " for have not give the least hint of any such person in all they conversation ; but have be much more communicative , and have acquaint she sister Abigail with the whole history of , which this now again related to she mistress . no sooner receive this information , than she immediately agree with the opinion of she maid ; and , what be very unaccountable , see charms in the gallant , happy lover , which she have overlook in the slighted squire . " Betty , " say she , " you be certainly in the right : he be a very pretty fellow , and I do not wonder that my cousin 's maid should tell you so many woman be fond of he . I be sorry now I do not inform he where my cousin be ; and yet , if he be so terrible a rake as you tell I , it be a pity she should ever see he any more ; for what but she ruin can happen from marry a rake and a beggar against she father 's consent ? I protest , if he be such a man as the wench describe he to you , it be but a office of charity to keep she from he ; and I be sure it would be unpardonable in I to do otherwise , who have taste so bitterly of the misfortune attend such marriage . " here she be interrupt by the arrival of a visitor , which be no other than he lordship ; and as nothing pass at this visit either new or extraordinary , or any way material to this history , we shall here put a end to this chapter . chapter iii . a project of , and she visit to . when retir to rest , she thought be entirely take up by she
she cousin and . she be , indeed , a little offended with the former , for the disingenuity which she now discover . in which meditation she have not long exercise she imagination before the follow conceit suggest itself ; that could she possibly become the means of preserve from this man , and of restore she to she father , she should , in all human probability , by so great a service to the family , reconcile to herself both she uncle and she aunt western . as this be one of she most favourite wish , so the hope of success seem so reasonable , that nothing remain but to consider of proper method to accomplish she scheme . to attempt to reason the case with do not appear to she one of those methods : for as have report from , that have a violent inclination to , she conceive that to dissuade she from the match be a endeavour of the same kind , as it would be very heartily and earnestly to entreat a moth not to fly into a candle . if the reader will please to remember that the acquaintance which have with be contract at the house of , and must have grow at the very time when live with this latter lady , he will want no information , that must have be acquaint with she likewise . they be , besides , both equally she distant relation . after much consideration , therefore , she resolve to go early in the morning to that lady , and endeavou to see she , unknown to , and to acquaint she with the whole affair . for she do not in the least doubt , but that the prudent lady , who have often ridicule romantic love , and indiscreet marriage , in she conversation , would very readily concur in she sentiment concern this match , and would lend she utmost assistance to prevent it . this resolution she accordingly execute ; and the next morning before the sun , she huddle on she cloath , and at a very unfashionable , unseasonable , unvisitable hour , go to , to whom she get access , without the least knowledge or suspicion of , who , though not asleep , lay at that time awake in she bed , with snor by she side . make many apology for a early , abrupt visit , at a hour when , she say , " she should not have think of disturb she ladyship , but upon business of the utmost consequence . " she then open the whole affair , tell all she have hear from ; and do not forget the visit which have pay to herself the preceding evening . answer with a smile , " then you have see this terrible man , madam ; pray , be he so very fine a figure as he be represent ? for entertain I last night almost two hour with he . the wench I believe be in love with he by reputation . " here the reader will be apt to wonder ; but the truth be , that Mrs , who have the honour to pin and unpin the , have receive compleat information concern the say , and have faithfully convey the same to she lady last night ( or rather that morning ) while she be undressing ; on which account she have be detain in she office above the space of a hour and a half . the lady indeed , though generally well enough pleased with the narrative of at those season , give a extraordinary attention to she account of ; for have describe he as a very handsome fellow , and , in she hurry , add so much to the beauty of he person to she report , that begin to conceive he to be a kind of miracle in nature . the curiosity which she woman have inspire be now greatly increase by , who speak as much in favour of the person of as she have before speak in dispraise of he birth , character , and fortune . when have hear the whole , she answer gravely , " indeed , madam , this be a matter of great consequence . nothing can certainly be more commendable than the part you act ; and I shall be very glad to have my share in the preservation of a young lady of so much merit , and for whom I have so much esteem . " " not you ladyship think , " say eagerly , " that it would be the best way to write immediately to my uncle , and acquaint he where my cousin be ? " the lady ponder a little upon this , and thus answer -- " why , no , madam , I think not . di western hath describe she brother to I to be such a brute , that I can not consent to put any woman under he power who hath escape from it . I have hear he behave like a monster to he own wife , for he be one of those wretch who think they have a right to tyrannise over we , and from such I shall ever esteem it the cause of my sex to rescue any woman who be so unfortunate to be under they power .-- the business , dear cousin , will be only to keep western from see this young fellow , till the good company , which she will have a opportunity of meeting here , give she a properer turn . " " if he should find she out , madam , " answer the other , " you ladyship may be assure he will leave nothing unattempted to come at she . " " but ,
, madam , " reply the lady , " it be impossible he should come here -- though indeed it be possible he may get some intelligence where she be , and then may lurk about the house -- I wish therefore I know he person . " be there no way , madam , by which I could have a sight of he ? for , otherwise , you know , cousin , she may contrive to see he here without my knowledge . " answer , " that he have threaten she with another visit that afternoon , and that , if she ladyship pleased to do she the honour of call upon she then , she would hardly fail of see he between six and seven ; and if he come earlier she would , by some means or other , detain he till she ladyship 's arrival . " -- reply , " she would come the moment she could get from dinner , which she suppose would be by seven at farthest ; for that it be absolutely necessary she should be acquaint with he person . upon my word , madam , " say she , " it be very good to take this care of ; but common humanity , as well as regard to we family , require it of we both ; for it would be a dreadful match indeed . " fail not to make a proper return to the compliment which have bestow on she cousin , and , after some little immaterial conversation , withdrew ; and , get as fast as she could into she chair , unseen by or , return home . I v. which consist of visiting . have walk within sight of a certain door during the whole day , which , though one of the shortest , appear to he to be one of the longest in the whole year . at length , the clock have struck five , he return to , who , though it be a full hour earlier than the decent time of visiting , receive he very civilly ; but still persist in she ignorance concern . , in ask for he angel , have drop the word cousin , upon which say , " then , sir , you know we be relate : and , as we be , you will permit I the right of enquir into the particular of you business with my cousin . " here hesitate a good while , and at last answer , " he have a considerable sum of money of hers in he hand , which he desire to deliver to she . " he then produce the pocket - book , and acquaint with the contents , and with the method in which they come into he hand . he have scarce finish he story , when a most violent noise shook the whole house . to attempt to describe this noise to those who have hear it would be in vain ; and to aim at give any idea of it to those who have never hear the like , would be still more vain : for it may be truly say -- _-- non acuof Sic geminant aera ._ the priest of Cybele do not so ratle they sound brass . in short , a footman knock , or rather thunder , at the door . be a little surprized at the sound , have never hear it before ; but very calmly say , that , as some company be come , she could not make he any answer now ; but if he pleas to stay till they be go , she intimate she have something to say to he . the door of the room now fly open , and , after push in she hoop sideway before she , enter , who have first make a very low courtesy to , and as low a one to , be usher to the upper end of the room . we mention these minute matter for the sake of some country lady of we acquaintance , who think it contrary to the rule of modesty to bend they knee to a man . the company be hardly well settle , before the arrival of the peer lately mention , cause a fresh disturbance , and a repetition of ceremonial . these be over , the conversation begin to be ( as the phrase be ) extremely brilliant . however , as nothing past in it which can be think material to this history , or , indeed , very material in itself , I shall omit the relation ; the rather , as I have know some very fine polite conversation grow extremely dull , when transcribe into book , or repeat on the stage . indeed , this mental repast be a dainty , of which those who be exclude from polite assemblie must be contente to remain as ignorant as they must of the several dainty of french cookery , which be serve only at the table of the great . to say the truth , as neither of these be adapt to every taste , they might both be often throw away on the vulgar . poor be rather a spectator of this elegant scene , than a actor in it ; for though , in the short interval before the peer 's arrival , first , and afterwards , have address some of they discourse to he ; yet no sooner be the noble lord enter , than he engross the whole attention of the two lady to himself ; and as he take no more notice of than if no such person have be present , unless by now and then star at he , the lady follow he example . the company have now staid so
so long , that plainly perceive they all design to stay out each other . she therefore resolve to ry herself of , he be the visitant to whom she think the least ceremony be due . take therefore a opportunity of a cessation of chat , she address herself gravely to he , and say , " , I shall not possibly be able to give you a answer to - night as to that business ; but if you please to leave word where I may send to you to - morrow --- " have natural , but not artificial good - breeding . instead therefore of communicate the secret of he lodging to a servant , he acquaint the lady herself with it particularly , and soon after very ceremoniously withdraw . he be no sooner gone than the great personage , who have take no notice of he present , begin to take much notice of he in he absence ; but if the reader hath already excuse we from relate the more brilliant part of this conversation , he will surely be very ready to excuse the repetition of what may be call vulgar abuse ; though , perhaps , it may be material to we history to mention a observation of , who take she leave in a few minute after he , and then say to , at she departure , " I be satisfy on the account of my cousin ; she can be in no danger from this fellow . " we history shall follow the example of , and take leave of the present company , which be now reduce to two person ; between whom , as nothing pass , which in the least concern we or we reader , we shall not suffer ourselves to be divert by it from matter which must seem of more consequence to all those who be at all interested in the affair of we heroe . v. a adventure which happen to at he lodging , with some account of a young gentleman who lod there , and of the mistress of the house , and she two daughter . the next morning , as early as it be decent , attend at 's door , where he be answer that the lady be not at home ; a answer which surprize he the more , as he have walk backwards and forward in the street from break of day ; and if she have go out , he must have see she . this answer , however , he be oblige to receive , and not only now , but to five several visit which he make she that day . to be plain with the reader , the noble peer have from some reason or other , perhaps from a regard for the lady 's honour , insist that she should not see , whom he look on as a scrub , any more ; and the lady have comply in make that promise to which we now see she so strictly adhere . but as we gentle reader may possibly have a better opinion of the young gentleman than she ladyship , and may even have some concern , should it be apprehend that , during this unhappy separation from , he take up he residence either at a inn , or in the street ; we shall now give a account of he lodging , which be indeed in a very reputable house , and in a very good part of the town . , then , have often hear mention the gentlewoman at whose house he use to lodge when he be in town . this person , who , as likewise know , live in bond - street , be the widow of a clergyman , and be leave by he , at he decease , in possession of two daughter , and of a compleat set of manuscript sermon . of these two daughter , , the elder , be now arrive at the age of seventeen , and , the younger , at that of ten . have despatch Partridge , and in this house he be provide with a room for himself in the second floor , and with one for in the fourth . the first floor be inhabit by one of those young gentleman , who , in the last age , be call man of wit and pleasure about town , and properly enough ; for as man be usually denominate from they business or profession , so pleasure may be say to have be the only business or profession of those gentleman to whom fortune have make all useful occupations unnecessary . Playhouse , coffeehouse , and tavern be the scene of they rendezvous . wit and humwe be the entertainment of they looser hour , and love be the business of they more serious moments . wine and the muse conspire to kindle the brightest flame in they breast ; nor do they only admire , but some be able to celebrate the beauty they admire , and all to judge of the merit of such composition . such , therefore , be properly call the man of wit and pleasure ; but I question whether the same appellation may , with the same propriety , be give to those young gentleman of we time , who have the same ambition to be distinguished for part . win certainly they have nothing to do with . to give they they due , they soar a step higher than they predecessor , and may be call man of wisdom and vert ( take heed you do not read virtue ) . thus at a age when the gentleman above mention employ they time in toast the charms of a woman , or in make sonnet in she praise ; in
in give they opinion of a play at the theatre , or of a poem at 's or 's ; these gentleman be consider the methods to bribe a corporation , or meditat speech for the of , or rather for the magazine . but the science of gaming be that which above all other employ they thought . these be the study of they graver hour , while for they amusement they have the vast circle of connoisseurship , painting , music , statuary , and natural philosophy , or rather _unnatural , which deal in the wonderful , and know nothing of , except she monster and imperfection . when have spend the whole day in vain enquirie after , he return at last disconsolate to he apartment . here , while he be vent he grief in private , he hear a violent uproar below - stair ; and soon after a female voice beg he for heaven 's sake to come and prevent murder . , who be never backward on any occasion to help the distressed , immediately run down - stair ; when step into the dining - room , whence all the noise issue , he beheld the young gentleman of wisdom and vert just before mention , pin close to the wall by he footman , and a young woman stand by , wringe she hand , and cry out , " he will be murder ! he will be murder ! " and , indeed , the poor gentleman seem in some danger of be choak , when fly hastily to he assistance , and rescue he , just as he be breathe he last , from the unmerciful clutch of the enemy . though the fellow have receive several kick and cuff from the little gentleman , who have more spirit than strength , he have make it a kind of scruple of conscience to strike he master , and would have contente himself with only choak he ; but towards he bear no such respect ; he no sooner therefore find himself a little roughly handle by he new antagonist , than he give he one of those punch in the gut which , though the spectator at 's amphitheatre have such exquisite delight in see they , convey but very little pleasure in the feeling . the lusty youth have no sooner receive this blow , than he meditate a most grateful return ; and now ensue a combat between and the footman , which be very fierce , but short ; for this fellow be no more able to contend with than he master have before be to contend with he . and now , , accord to she usual custom , reverse the face of affair . the former victor lay breathless on the ground , and the vanquished gentleman have recovere breath enough to thank for he seasonable assistance ; he receive likewise the hearty thanks of the young woman present , who be indeed no other than , the eldest daughter of the house . the footman , have now recover he leg , shook he head at , and , with a sagacious look , cry -- " of -- and I , I will have nothing more to do with you ; you have be upon the stage , or I be d -- nably mistaken . " and indeed we may forgive this he suspicion ; for such be the agility and strength of we heroe , that he be , perhaps , a match for one of the first - rate boxer , and could , with great ease , have beat all the muffle [ * ] graduate of 's school . [ *] Lest posterity should be puzzl by this epithet , I think proper to explain it by a advertisement which be publish 1 , 1747 . N.B.-- propose , with proper assistance , to open a academy at he house in the Haymarket , for the instruction of those who be willing to be initiate in the mystery of boxing : where the whole theory and practice of that truly british art , with all the various stop , blows , cross - buttock , & c. , incidend to combatant , will be fully teach and explain ; and that person of quality and distinction may not be deter from enter into course of those lecture , they will be give with the utmost tenderness and regard to the delicacy of the frame and constitution of the pupil , for which reason muffle be provide , that will effectually secure they from the inconveniency of black eye , break jaw , and bloody nos . the master , foam with wrath , order he man immediately to strip , to which the latter very readily agree , on condition of receive he wage . this condition be presently complied with , and the fellow be discharge . and now the young gentleman , whose name be Nightingale , very strenuously insist that he deliverer should take part of a bottle of wine with he ; to which , after much entreaty , consent , though more out of complacence than inclination ; for the uneasiness of he mind fit he very little for conversation at this time . Nancy likewise , who be the only female then in the house , she mamma and sister be both go to the play , condescende to favour they with she company . when the bottle and glassis be on the table the gentleman begin to relate the occasion of the preceding disturbance . " I hope , sir , " say he to , " you will not from this accident conclude , that I make a custom of strike my servants , for I assure you this be the first time I have be guilty of it
it in my remembrance , and I have pass by many provoke fault in this very fellow , before he could provoke I to it ; but when you hear what hath happen this evening , you will , I believe , think I excusable . I happen to come home several hour before my usual time , when I find four gentleman of the cloth at whist by my fire ; -- and my Hoyle , sir -- my best Hoyle , which cost I a guinea , lie open on the table , with a quantity of porter spilt on one of the most material leave of the whole book . this , you will allow , be provoke ; but I say nothing till the rest of the honest company be go , and then give the fellow a gentle rebuke , who , instead of express any concern , make I a pert answer , ` that servants must have they diversion as well as other people ; that he be sorry for the accident which have happen to the book , but that several of he acquaintance have buy the same for a shilling , and that I might stop as much in he wage , if I please . ' I now give he a severer reprimand than before , when the rascal have the insolence to --- in short , he impute my early come home to ---- in short , he cast a reflection ---- he mention the name of a young lady , in a manner -- in such a manner that incense I beyond all patience , and , in my passion , I strike he . " answer , " that he believe no person live would blame he ; for my part , " say he , " I confess I should , on the last - mention provocation , have do the same thing . " we company have not sit long before they be join by the mother and daughter , at they return from the play . and now they all spend a very chearful evening together ; for all but be heartily merry , and even he put on as much constrained mirth as possible . indeed , half he natural flow of animal spirit , join to the sweetness of he temper , be sufficient to make a most amiable companion ; and notwithstand the heaviness of he heart , so agreeable do he make himself on the present occasion , that , at they break up , the young gentleman earnestly desire he further acquaintance . be well pleased with he ; and the widow , quite charme with she new lodger , invite he , with the other , next morning to breakfast . on he part be no less satisfied . as for , though a very little creature , she be extremely pretty , and the widow have all the charms which can adorn a woman near fifty . as she be one of the most innocent creature in the world , so she be one of the most chearful . she never think , nor spoke , nor wish any ill , and have constantly that desire of pleasing , which may be call the happiest of all desire in this , that it scarce ever fail of attaining its end , when not disgrac by affectation . in short , though she power be very small , she be in she heart one of the warmest friend . she have be a most affectionate wife , and be a most fond and tender mother . as we history doth not , like a newspaper , give great character to people who never be heard of before , nor will ever be hear of again , the reader may hence conclude , that this excellent woman will hereafter appear to be of some importance in we history . be a little pleased with the young gentleman himself , whose wine he have be drink . he think he discern in he much good sense , though a little too much taint with town - foppery ; but what recommend he most to be some sentiment of great generosity and humanity , which occasionally dropt from he ; and particularly many expression of the highest disinterestedness in the affair of love . on which subject the young gentleman deliver himself in a language which might have very well become a Arcadian shepherd of old , and which appear very extraordinary when proceed from the lip of a modern fine gentleman ; but he be only one by imitation , and mean by nature for a much better character . chapter vi . what arrive while the company be at breakfast , with some hint concern the government of daughter . we company bring together in the morning the same good inclination towards each other , with which they have separate the evening before ; but poor be extremely disconsolate ; for he have just receive information from , that have leave she lodging , and that he could not learn whither she be go . this news highly afflict he , and he countenance , as well as he behaviour , in defiance of all he endeavour to the contrary , betrayed manifest indication of a disorder mind . the discourse turn at present , as before , on love ; and again express many of those warm , generous , and disinterest sentiment upon this subject , which wise and sober man call romantic , but which wise and sober woman generally regard in a better light . ( for so the mistress of the house be call ) greatly approve these sentiment ; but when the young gentleman appeal to , she answer only , " that she believe the gentleman who have speak the least be capable
capable of feel most . " this compliment be so apparently direct to , that we should have be sorry have he pass it by unregarded . he make she indeed a very polite answer , and conclude with a oblique hint , that she own silence subject she to a suspicion of the same kind : for indeed she have scarce open she lip either now or the last evening . " I be glad , , " say , " the gentleman hath make the observation ; I protest I be almost of he opinion . what can be the matter with you , child ? I never see such a alteration . what be become of all you gaiety ? would you think , sir , I use to call she my little prattler ? she hath not speak twenty word this week . " here they conversation be interrupt by the entrance of a maid - servant , who bring a bundle in she hand , which , she say , " be deliver by a porter for . " she add , " that the man immediately go away , say , it require no answer . " express some surprize on this occasion , and declare it must be some mistake ; but the maid persisting that she be certain of the name , all the woman be desirous of have the bundle immediately open ; which operation be at length perform by little , with the consent of : and the contents be find to be a domino , a mask , and a masquerade ticket . be now more positive than ever in assert , that these thing must have be deliver by mistake ; and herself express some doubt , and say , " she know not what to think . " but when be ask , he deliver a very different opinion . " all I can conclude from it , sir , " say he , " be , that you be a very happy man ; for I make no doubt but these be send you by some lady whom you will have the happiness of meeting at the masquerade . " have not a sufficient degree of vanity to entertain any such flatter imagination ; nor do herself give much assent to what have say , till have lift up the domino , a card dropt from the sleeve , in which be write as follow :-- to . the queen of the fairy send you this ; use she favour not amiss . and now both agree with ; nay , himself be almost persuade to be of the same opinion . and as no other lady but , he think , know he lodging , he begin to flatter himself with some hope , that it come from she , and that he might possibly see he . these hope have surely very little foundation ; but as the conduct of , in not see he accord to she promise , and in quit she lodging , have be very odd and unaccountable , he conceive some faint hope , that she ( of whom he have formerly hear a very whimsical character ) might possibly intend to do he that service in a strange manner , which she decline do by more ordinary method . to say the truth , as nothing certain could be conclude from so odd and uncommon a incident , he have the greater latitude to draw what imaginary conclusion from it he please . as he temper therefore be naturally sanguine , he indulge it on this occasion , and he imagination work up a thousand conceit , to favour and support he expectation of meet he dear in the evening . reader , if thou hast any good wish towards I , I will fully repay they by wishing thee to be possess of this sanguine disposition of mind ; since , after have read much and consider long on that subject of happiness which hath employ so many great pens , I be almost inclin to fix it in the possession of this temper ; which put we , in a manner , out of the reach of , and make we happy without she assistance . indeed , the sensation of pleasure it give be much more constant as well as much keener , than those which that blind lady bestow ; nature have wisely contrive , that some satiety and languor should be annex to all we real enjoyment , lest we should be so take up by they , as to be stopt from further pursuit . I make no manner of doubt but that , in this light , we may see the imaginary future chancellor just call to the bar , the archbishop in crape , and the prime minister at the tail of a opposition , more truly happy than those who be invest with all the power and profit of those respective office . have now determined to go to the masquerade that even , offer to conduct he thither . the young gentleman , at the same time , offer ticket to and she mother ; but the good woman would not accept they . she say , " she do not conceive the harm which some people imagine in a masquerade ; but that such extravagant diversion be proper only for person of quality and fortune , and not for young woman who be to get they living , and could , at best , hope to be marry to a good tradesman ." ----" a tradesman ! " cry , " you sha not undervalue my . there be not a nobleman upon earth above she merit . " " of fie ! , " answer , " you must not fill the girl 's head with such
such fancie : but if it be she good luck " ( say the mother with a simper ) " to find a gentleman of you generous way of think , I hope she would make a better return to he generosity than to give she mind up to extravagant pleasure . indeed , where young lady bring great fortune themselves , they have some right to insist on spend what be they own ; and on that account I have hear the gentleman say , a man have sometimes a better bargain with a poor wife , than with a rich one .----but let my daughter marry whom they will , I shall endeaavor to make they blessing to they husband :---- I beg , therefore , I may hear of no more masquerade . be , I be certain , too good a girl to desire to go ; for she must remember when you carry she thither last year , it almost turn she head ; and she do not return to herself , or to she needle , in a month afterwards . " though a gentle sigh , which steal from the bosom of , seem to argue some secret disapprobation of these sentiment , she do not dare openly to oppose they . for as this good woman have all the tenderness , so she have preserve all the authority of a parent ; and as she indulgence to the desire of she child be restrain only by she fear for they safety and future welfare , so she never suffer those command which proceed from such fear to be either disobey or dispute . and this the young gentleman , who have lod two year in the house , knew so well , that he presently acquiesce in the refusal . , who grow every minute fonder of , be very desirous of he company that day to dinner at the tavern , where he offer to introduce he to some of he acquaintance ; but beg to be excuse , " as he cloath , " he say , " be not yet come to town . " to confess the truth , be now in a situation , which sometimes happen to be the case of young gentleman of much better figure than himself . in short , he have not one penny in he pocket ; a situation in much greater credit among the antient philosopher than among the modern wise man who live in - street , or those who frequent 's chocolate - house . and , perhaps , the great honour which those philosopher have ascribe to a empty pocket may be one of the reason of that high contempt in which they be hold in the aforesaid street and chocolate - house . now if the antient opinion , that man might live very comfortably on virtue only , be , as the modern wise man just above - mention pretend to have discovered , a notorious error ; no less false is , I apprehend , that position of some writer of romance , that a man can live altogether on love ; for however delicious repast this may afford to some of we sense or appetite , it be most certain it can afford none to other . those , therefore , who have place too great a confidence in such writer , have experience they error when it be too late ; and have find that love be no more capable of allay hunger , than a rose be capable of delighte the ear , or a violin of gratify the smell . Notwithstand , therefore , all the delicacies which love have set before he , namely , the hope of see at the masquerade ; on which , however ill - foun he imagination might be , he have voluptuously feast during the whole day , the evening no sooner come than begin to languish for some food of a grosser kind . discover this by intuition , and take the occasion to give some oblique hint concern the bank - bill ; and , when these be reject with disdain , he collect courage enough once more to mention a return to . " Partridge , " cry , " you can not see my fortune in a more desperate light than I see it myself ; and I begin heartily to repent that I suffer you to leave a place where you be settle , and to follow I . however , I insist now on you return home ; and for the expense and trouble which you have so kindly put yourself to on my account , all the cloath I leave behind in you care I desire you would take as you own . I be sorry I can make you no other acknowledgment . " he speak these word with so pathetic a accent , that Partridge , among whose vice ill - nature or hardness of heart be not number , burst into tear ; and after swear he would not quit he in he distress , he begin with the most earnest entreaty to urge he return home . " for heaven 's sake , sir , " say he , " do but consider ; what can you honour do ?--how be it possible you can live in this town without money ? do what you will , sir , or go wherever you please , I be resolve not to desert you . but pray , sir , consider -- do pray , sir , for you own sake , take it into you consideration ; and I be sure , " say he , " that you own good sense will bid you return home . " " how often shall I tell thee , " answer , " that I have
have no home to return to ? have I any hope that 's door would be open to receive I , I want no distress to urge I -- nay , there be no other cause upon earth , which could detain I a moment from fly to he presence ; but , alas ! that I be for ever banish from . he last word be -- of , , they still ring in my ear -- he last word be , when he give I a sum of money -- what it be I know not , but considerable I be sure it be -- he last word be -- `I be resolve from this day forward , on no account to converse with you any more . ' " here passion stopt the mouth of , as surprize for a moment do that of Partridge ; but he soon recover the use of speech , and after a short preface , in which he declare he have no inquisitiveness in he temper , enquire what mean by a considerable sum -- he know not how much -- and what be become of the money . in both these point he now receive full satisfaction ; on which he be proceed to comment , when he be interrupt by a message from , who desire he master 's company in he apartment . when the two gentleman be both attire for the masquerade , and have give order for chair to be send for , a circumstance of distress occur to , which will appear very ridiculous to many of my reader . this be how to procure a shilling ; but if such reader will reflect a little on what they have themselves feel from the want of a thousand pound , or , perhaps , of ten or twenty , to execute a favourite scheme , they will have a perfect idea of what feel on this occasion . for this sum , therefore , he apply to , which be the first he have permit he to advance , and be the last he intend that poor fellow should advance in he service . to say the truth , Partridge have lately make no offer of this kind . whether it be that he desire to see the bank - bill break in , or that distress should prevail on to return home , or from what other motive it proceed , I will not determine . chapter vii . contain the whole humours of a masquerade . we cavalier now arrive at that temple , where Heydegger , the great , the great high - priest of pleasure , preside ; and , like other heathan priest , impos on he votary by the pretended presence of the deity , when in reality no such deity be there . , have take a turn or two with he companion , soon leave he , and walk off with a female , say , " now you be here , sir , you must beat about for you own game . " begin to entertain strong hope that he be present ; and these hope give he more spirit than the light , the music , and the company ; though these be pretty strong antidote against the spleen . he now accost every woman he see , whose stature , shape , or air , bear any resemblance to he angel . to all of whom he endeavoure to say something smart , in order to engage a answer , by which he might discover that voice which he think it impossible he should mistake . some of these answer by a question , in a squeaking voice , do you know I ? much the greater number say , I do not know you , sir , and nothing more . some call he a impertinent fellow ; some make he no answer at all ; some say , indeed I do not know you voice , and I shall have nothing to say to you ; and many give he as kind answer as he could wish , but not in the voice he desire to hear . whilst he be talk with one of these last ( who be in the habit of a shepherdess ) a lady in a domino come up to he , and slapp he on the shoulder , whisper he , at the same time , in the ear , " if you talk any longer with that trollop , I will acquaint . " no sooner hear that name , than , immediately quit he former companion , he apply to the domino , begge and entreat she to show he the lady she have mention , if she be then in the room . the mask walk hastily to the upper end of the innermost apartment before she speak ; and then , instead of answer he , sit down , and declare she be tired . sit down by she , and still persist in he entreaty ; at last the lady coldly answer , " I imagine have be a more discerning lover , than to suffer any disguise to conceal he mistress from he . " " be she here , then , madam ? " reply , with some vehemence . upon which the lady cry -- " Hush , sir , you will be observe . I promise you , upon my honour , be not here . " , now take the mask by the hand , fall to entreat she in the most earnest manner , to acquaint he where he might find ; and when he could obtain no direct answer , he begin to upbraid she gently for have disappoint he the day before ; and conclude , say , " indeed , my good fairy
fairy queen , I know you majesty very well , notwithstand the affect disguise of you voice . indeed , , it be a little cruel to divert yourself at the expense of my torment . " the mask answer , " though you have so ingeniously discover I , I must still speak in the same voice , lest I should be know by other . and do you think , good sir , that I have no greater regard for my cousin , than to assist in carry on a affair between you two , which must end in she ruin , as well as you own ? besides , I promise you , my cousin be not mad enough to consent to she own destruction , if you be so much she enemy as to tempt she to it . " " Ala , madam ! " say , " you little know my heart , when you call I a enemy of . " " and yet to ruin any one , " cry the other , " you will allow , be the act of a enemy ; and when by the same act you must knowingly and certainly bring ruin on yourself , be it not folly or madness , as well as guilt ? now , sir , my cousin hath very little more than she father will please to give she ; very little for one of she fashion -- you know he , and you know you own situation . " vow he have no such design on , " that he would rather suffer the most violent of death than sacrifice she interest to he desire . " he say , " he know how unworthy he be of she , every way , that he have long ago resolve to quit all such aspiring thought , but that some strange accident have make he desirous to see she once more , when he promise he would take leave of she for ever . no , madam , " conclude he , " my love be not of that base kind which seek its own satisfaction at the expense of what be most dear to its object . I would sacrifice everything to the possession of my , but herself . " though the reader may have already conceive no very sublime idea of the virtue of the lady in the mask ; and though possibly she may hereafter appear not to deserve one of the first character of she sex ; yet , it be certain , these generous sentiment make a strong impression upon she , and greatly add to the affection she have before conceive for we young heroe . the lady now , after silence of a few moment , say , " she do not see he pretension to so much in the light of presumption , as of imprudence . young fellow , " say she , " can never have to aspire thought . I love ambition in a young man , and I would have you cultivate it as much as possible . perhaps you may succeed with those who be infinitely superior in fortune ; nay , I be convince there be woman ---- but do not you think I a strange creature , , to be thus give advice to a man with whom I be so little acquaint , and one with whose behaviour to I I have so little reason to be pleased ? " here begin to apologize , and to hope he have not offend in anything he have say of she cousin .-- to which the mask answer , " and be you so little verse in the sex , to imagine you can well affront a lady more than by entertaine she with you passion for another woman ? if the fairy queen have conceive no better opinion of you gallantry , she would scarce have appoint you to meet she at the masquerade . " have never less inclination to a amour than at present ; but gallantry to the ladie be among he principle of honou ; and he hold it as much incumbent on he to accept a challenge to love , as if it have be a challenge to fight . Nay , he very love to make it necessary for he to keep well with the lady , as he make no doubt but she be capable of bring he into the presence of the other . he begin therefore to make a very warm answer to she last speech , when a mask , in the character of a old woman , join they . this mask be one of those ladie who go to a masquerade only to vent ill - nature , by tell people rude truth , and by endeavouring , as the phrase be , to spoil as much sport as they be able . this good lady , therefore , have observe , and he friend , whom she well know , in close consultation together in a corner of the room , conclude she could nowhere satisfy she spleen better than by interrupt they . she attack they , therefore , and soon drive they from they retirement ; nor be she contente with this , but pursue they to every place which they shift to avoid she ; till , see the distress of he friend , at last relieve he , and engage the old woman in another pursuit . while and he mask be walk together about the room , to ry themselves of the teazer , he observe he lady speak to several mask , with the same freedom of acquaintance as if they have be bareface . he could not help express he surprize at this ; say , " sure , madam , you must have infinite
infinite discernment , to know people in all disguise . " to which the lady answer , " you can not conceive anything more insipid and childish than a masquerade to the people of fashion , who in general know one another as well here as when they meet in a assembly or a draw - room ; nor will any woman of condition converse with a person with whom she be not acquaint . in short , the generality of person whom you see here may more properly be say to kill time in this place than in any other ; and generally retire from hence more tired than from the longest sermon . to say the truth , I begin to be in that situation myself ; and if I have any faculty at guessing , you be not much better pleased . I protest it would be almost charity in I to go home for you sake . " " I know but one charity equal to it , " cry , " and that be to suffer I to wait on you home . " " sure , " answer the lady , " you have a strange opinion of I , to imagine , that upon such a acquaintance , I would let you into my door at this time of night . I fancy you impute the friendship I have show my cousin to some other motive . confess honestly ; do not you consider this contrive interview as little better than a downright assignation ? be you use , , to make these sudden conquest ? " " I be not use , madam , " say , " to submit to such sudden conquest ; but as you have take my heart by surprize , the rest of my body hath a right to follow ; so you must pardon I if I resolve to attend you wherever you go . " he accompany these word with some proper action ; upon which the lady , after a gentle rebuke , and say they familiarity would be observe , tell he , " she be go to sup with a acquaintance , whither she hope he would not follow she ; for if you should , " say she , " I shall be think a unaccountable creature , though my friend indeed be not censorious : yet I hope you will not follow I ; I protest I shall not know what to say if you do . " the lady presently after quit the masquerade , and , notwithstand the severe prohibition he have receive , presume to attend she . he be now reduce to the same dilemma we have mention before , namely , the want of a shilling , and could not relieve it by borrowe as before . he therefore walk boldly on after the chair in which he lady rode , pursue by a grand huzza , from all the chairmen present , who wisely take the best care they can to discountenance all walk afoot by they betters . luckily , however , the gentry who attend at the - house be too busy to quit they stations , and as the lateness of the hour prevent he from meeting many of they breth in the street , he proceed without molestation , in a dress , which , at another season , would have certainly raise a mob at he heel . the lady be set down in a street not far from Hanover - square , where the door be presently open , she be carry in , and the gentleman , without any ceremony , walk in after she . and he companion be now together in a very well - furnish and well - warm room ; when the female , still speak in she masquerade , say she be surprize at she friend , who must absolutely have forget she appointment ; at which , after vent much resentment , she suddenly exprest some apprehension from , and ask he what the world would think of they have be alone together in a house at that time of night ? but instead of a direct answer to so important a question , begin to be very importunate with the lady to unmask ; and at length have prevail , there appear not , but the herself . it would be tedious to give the particular conversation , which consiste of very common and ordinary occurrence , and which last from two till six o'clock in the morning . it be sufficient to mention all of it that be anywise material to this history . and this be a promise that the lady would endeaavor to find out , and in a few day bring he to a interview with she , on condition that he would then take he leave of she . when this be thoroughly settled , and a second meeting in the evening appoint at the same place , they separate ; the lady return to she house , and to he lodging . chapter viii . contain a scene of distress , which will appear very extraordinary to most of we reader . have refresh himself with a few hour ' sleep , summon to he presence ; and deliver he a bank - note of fifty pound , order he to go and change it . receive this with sparkling eye , though , when he come to reflect farther , it raise in he some suspicion not very advantageous to the honour of he master : to these the dreadful idea he have of the masquerade , the disguise in which he master have go out and return , and he have be abroad all night , contribute . in plain language , the only way he could possibly find to account for the
the possession of this note , be by robbery : and , to confess the truth , the reader , unless he should suspect it be owe to the generosity of , can hardly imagine any other . to clear , therefore , the honour of , and to do justice to the liberality of the lady , he have really receive this present from she , who , though she do not give much into the hackney charity of the age , such as building hospital , & c. , be not , however , entirely void of that Christian virtue ; and conceive ( very rightly I think ) that a young fellow of merit , without a shilling in the world , be no improper object of this virtue . and have be invite to dine this day with . at the appointed hour , therefore , the two young gentleman , with the two girl , attend in the parlour , where they wait from three till almost five before the good woman appear . she have be out of town to visit a relation , of whom , at she return , she give the follow account . " I hope , gentlemen , you will pardon my make you wait ; I be sure if you know the occasion -- I have be to see a cousin of mine , about six mile off , who now lie in .-- it should be a warning to all persons ( say she , look at she daughter ) how they marry indiscreetly . there be no happiness in this world without a competency . of ! how shall I describe the wretched condition in which I find you poor cousin ? she hath scarce lain in a week , and there be she , this dreadful weather , in a cold room , without any curtain to she bed , and not a bushel of coal in she house to supply she with fire ; she second son , that sweet little fellow , lie ill of a quinzy in the same bed with he mother ; for there be no other be in the house . poor little ! I believe , , you will never see you favourite any more ; for he be really very ill . the rest of the child be in pretty good health : but , I be afraid , will do herself a injury : she be but thirteen year old , Mr Nightingale , and yet , in my life , I never see a better nurse : she tend both she mother and she brother ; and , what be wonderful in a creature so young , she show all the chearfulness in the world to she mother ; and yet I see she -- I see the poor child , , turn about , and privately wipe the tear from she eyes . " here be prevent , by she own tear , from go on , and there be not , I believe , a person present who do not accompany she in they ; at length she a little recover herself , and proceed thus : " in all this distress the mother support she spirits in a surprizing manner . the danger of she son sit heaviest upon she , and yet she endeavour as much as possible to conceal even this concern , on she husband 's account . she grief , however , sometimes get the better of all she endeavour ; for she be always extravagantly fond of this boy , and a most sensible , sweet - tempered creature it be . I protest I be never more affect in my life than when I hear the little wretch , who be hardly yet seven year old , while he mother be wett he with she tear , beg she to be comforte . ` indeed , mamma , ' cry the child , ` I sha not die ; , I be sure , will not take away ; let heaven be ever so fine a place , I have rather stay here and starve with you and my papa than go to it . ' pardon I , gentlemen , I can not help it " ( say she , wip she eye ) , " such sensibility and affection in a child . -- and yet , perhaps , he be least the object of pity ; for a day or two will , most probably , place he beyond the reach of all human evils . the father be , indeed , most worthy of compassion . poor man , he countenance be the very picture of horror , and he look like one rather dead than alive . oh heaven ! what a scene do I behold at my first come into the room ! the good creature be lie behind the bolster , support at once both he child and he wife . he have nothing on but a thin waistcoat ; for he coat be spread over the bed , to supply the want of blanket .-- when he rise up at my entrance , I scarce know he . as comely a man , , within this fortnight , as you ever beheld ; hath see he . he eye sink , he face pale , with a long beard . he body shiver with cold , and wear with hunger too ; for my cousin say she can hardly prevail upon he to eat .-- he tell I himself in a whisper -- he tell I -- I can not repeat it -- he say he could not bear to eat the bread he child want . and yet , can you believe it , gentlemen ? in all this misery he wife have as good caudle as if
if she lay in the midst of the greatest affluence ; I taste it , and I scarce ever taste better .-- the means of procuring she this , he say , he believe be send he by a angel from heaven . I know not what he mean ; for I have not spirits enough to ask a single question . " this be a love -match , as they call it , on both side ; that be , a match between two beggar . I must , indeed , say , I never see a fonder couple ; but what be they fondness good for , but to torment each other ? " " indeed , mamma , " cry , " I have always look on my cousin " ( for that be she name ) " as one of the happiest of woman . " " I be sure , " say , " the case at present be much otherwise ; for any one might have discern that the tender consideration of each other 's suffering make the most intolerable part of they calamity , both to the husband and wife . compare to which , hunger and cold , as they affect they own person only , be scarce evils . Nay , the very child , the youngest , which be not two year old , except , feel in the same manner ; for they be a most loving family , and , if they have but a bare competency , would be the happiest people in the world . " " I never see the least sign of misery at she house , " reply ; " I be sure my heart bleed for what you now tell I . " --" of child , " answer the mother , " she hath always endeavoure to make the best of everything . they have always be in great distress ; but , indeed , this absolute ruin hath be brotch upon they by other . the poor man be bail for the villain he brother ; and about a week ago , the very day before she lie - in , they goods be all carry away , and sell by a execution . he send a letter to I of it by one of the bailiff , which the villain never deliver .-- what must he think of my suffer a week to pass before he hear of I ? " it be not with dry eye that hear this narrative ; when it be end he take apart with he into another room , and , deliver she he purse , in which be the sum of  50 , desire she to send as much of it as she think proper to these poor people . the look which give , on this occasion , be not easy to be describe . she burst into a kind of agony of transport , and cry out -- " good heaven ! be there such a man in the world ? " -- but recollect herself , she say , " indeed I know one such ; but can there be another ? " " I hope , madam , " cry , " there be many who have common humanity ; for to relieve such distress in we fellow - creature , can hardly be call more . " then take ten guinea , which be the utmost he could prevail with she to accept , and say , " she would find some means of convey they early the next morning ; " add , " that she have herself do some little matter for the poor people , and have not leave they in quite so much misery as she find they . " they then return to the parlour , where express much concern at the dreadful situation of these wretch , whom indeed he know ; for he have see they more than once at 's . he inveigh against the folly of make oneself liable for the debt of other ; vent many bitter execration against the brother ; and conclude with wishing something could be do for the unfortunate family . " suppose , madam , " say he , " you should recommend they to ? or what think you of a collection ? I will give they a guinea with all my heart . " make no answer ; and , to whom she mother have whisper the generosity of , turn pale upon the occasion ; though , if either of they be angry with , it be surely without reason . for the liberality of , if he have know it , be not a example which he have any obligation to follow ; and there be thousand who would not have contribute a single halfpenny , as indeed he do not in effect , for he make no tender of anything ; and therefore , as the other think proper to make no demand , he keep he money in he pocket . I have , in truth , observe , and shall never have a better opportunity than at present to communicate my observation , that the world be in general divide into two opinion concern charity , which be the very reverse of each other . one party seem to hold , that all act of this kind be to be esteem as voluntary gift , and , however little you give ( if indeed no more than you good wish ) , you acquire a great degree of merit in so do . other , on the contrary , appear to be as firmly persuade , that beneficence be a positive duty , and that whenever the rich fall greatly short of they ability in relieive the distress of the poor , they pitiful largess
largess be so far from be meritorious , that they have only perform they duty by halve , and be in some sense more contemptible than those who have entirely neglect it . to reconcile these different opinion be not in my power . I shall only add , that the giver be generally of the former sentiment , and the receiver be almost universally inclin to the latter . chapter ix . which treat of matter of a very different kind from those in the precede chapter . in the evening meet he lady again , and a long conversation again ensue between they : but as it consist only of the same ordinary occurrence as before , we shall avoid mention particular , which we despair of render agreeable to the reader ; unless he be one whose devotion to the fair sex , like that of the papist to they saint , want to be raise by the help of picture . but I be so far from desire to exhibit such picture to the public , that I would wish to draw a curtain over those that have be lately set forth in certain french novel ; very bungling copy of which have be present we here under the name of translation . grow still more and more impatient to see ; and find , after repeat interview with , no likelihood of obtain this by she mean ( for , on the contrary , the lady begin to treat even the mention of the name of with resentment ) , he resolve to try some other method . he make no doubt but that know where he angel be , so he think it most likely that some of she servants should be acquaint with the same secret . Partridge therefore be employ to get acquainted with those servants , in order to fish this secret out of they . few situation can be imagine more uneasy than that to which he poor master be at present reduce ; for besides the difficulty he meet with in discovering , besides the fear he have of have disoblige she , and the assurance he have receive from of the resolution which have take against he , and of she have purposely conceal herself from he , which he have sufficient reason to believe might be true ; he have still a difficulty to combat which it be not in the power of he mistress to remove , however kind she inclination might have be . this be the exposing of she to be disinherit of all she father 's estate , the almost inevitable consequence of they come together without a consent , which he have no hope of ever obtain . add to all these the many obligation which , whose violent fondness we can no longer conceal , have heape upon he ; so that by she mean he be now become one of the best - dress man about town ; and be not only relieve from those ridiculous distress we have before mention , but be actually raise to a state of affluence beyond what he have ever kny . now , though there be many gentleman who very well reconcile it to they conscience to possess themselves of the whole fortune of a woman , without make she any kind of return ; yet to a mind , the proprietor of which doth not deserve to be hang , nothing be , I believe , more irksome than to support love with gratitude only ; especially where inclination pull the heart a contrary way . such be the unhappy case of ; for though the virtuous love he bear to , and which leave very little affection for any other woman , have be entirely out of the question , he could never have be able to have make any adequate return to the generous passion of this lady , who have indeed be once a object of desire , but be now enter at least into the autumn of life , though she wear all the gaiety of youth , both in she dress and manner ; nay , she contrive still to maintain the ros in she cheek ; but these , like flower force out of season by art , have none of that lively bloom freshness with which , at the proper time , bedeck she own production . she have , besides , a certain imperfection , which render some flower , though very beautiful to the eye , very improper to be place in a wilderness of sweet , and what above all other be most disagreeable to the breath of love . though see all these discouragement on the one side , he feel he obligation full as strongly on the other ; nor do he less plainly discern the ardent passion whence those obligation proceed , the extreme violence of which if he fail to equal , he well know the lady would think he ungrateful ; and , what be worse , he would have think himself so . he know the tacit consideration upon which all she favour be confer ; and as he necessity oblige he to accept they , so he honour , he conclude , force he to pay the price . this therefore he resolve to do , whatever misery it cost he , and to devote himself to she , from that great principle of justice , by which the law of some country oblige a debtor , who be no otherwise capable of discharge he debt , to become the slave of he creditor . while he be meditat on these matters , he receive the follow note from the lady :-- " a very foolish , but a very perverse accident hath happene since we last meeting , which make it improper I should see
see you any more at the usual place . I will , if possible , contrive some other place by to - morrow . in the meantime , adieu . " this disappointment , perhaps , the reader may conclude be not very great ; but if it be , he be quickly relieve ; for in less than a hour afterwards another note be bring he from the same hand , which contain as follow :-- " I have alter my mind since I write ; a change which , if you be no stranger to the tenderest of all passion , you will not wonder at . I be now resolve to see you this evening at my own house , whatever may be the consequence . come to I exactly at seven ; I dine abroad , but will be at home by that time . a day , I find , to those that sincerely love , seem longer than I imagine . " if you should accidentally be a few moments before I , bid they show you into the drawing - room . " to confess the truth , be less pleased with this last epistle than he have be with the former , as he be prevent by it from comply with the earnest entreaty of , with whom he have now contract much intimacy and friendship . these entreaty be to go with that young gentleman and he company to a new play , which be to be act that evening , and which a very large party have agree to damn , from some dislike they have take to the author , who be a friend to one of 's acquaintance . and this sort of fun , we heroe , we be asham to confess , would willingly have prefer to the above kind appointment ; but he honour get the better of he inclination . before we attend he to this intend interview with the lady , we think proper to account for both the preceding note , as the reader may possibly be not a little surprized at the imprudence of , in bring she lover to the very house where she rival be lod . first , then , the mistress of the house where these lover have hithertoo meet , and who have be for some year a pensioner to that lady , be now become a methodist , and have that very morning wait upon she ladyship , and after rebuk she very severely for she past life , have positively declare that she would , on no account , be instrumental in carry on any of she affair for the future . the hurry of spirit into which this accident throw the lady make she despair of possibly find any other convenience to meet that even ; but as she begin a little to recover from she uneasiness at the disappointment , she set she thought to work , when luckily it come into she head to propose to to go to the play , which be immediately consent to , and a proper lady provide for she companion . be likewise despatch with on the same errand of pleasure ; and thus she own house be leave free for the safe reception of , with whom she promise herself two or three hour of uninterrupted conversation after she return from the place where she dine , which be at a friend 's house in a pretty distant part of the town , near she old place of assignation , where she have engage herself before she be well apprize of the revolution that have happene in the mind and moral of she late confidante . chapter x . a chapter which , though short , may draw tear from some eyes . be just dress to wait on , when rap at he door ; and , be admit , very earnestly desire he company below - stair , to drink tea in the parlour . upon he entrance into the room , she presently introduce a person to he , say , " this , sir , be my cousin , who hath be so greatly beholden to you goodness , for which he beg to return you he sincerest thanks . " the man have scarce enter upon that speech which have so kindly preface , when both and he , look stedfastly at each other , show at once the utmost token of surprize . the voice of the latter begin instantly to faulter ; and , instead of finish he speech , he sink down into a chair , cry , " it be so , I be convince it be so ! " " bless I ! what be the meaning of this ? " cry ; " you be not ill , I hope , cousin ? some water , a dram this instant . " " be not fright , madam , " cry , " I have almost as much need of a dram as you cousin . we be equally surprize at this unexpected meeting . you cousin be a acquaintance of mine , . " " a acquaintance ! " cry the man .--" oh , heaven ! " " ay , a acquaintance , " repeat , " and a honoure acquaintance too . when I do not love and honour the man who dare venture everything to preserve he wife and child from instant destruction , may I have a friend capable of disown I in adversity ! " " oh , you be a excellent young man , " cry :--" yes , indeed , poor creature ! he hath venture everything .-- if he have not have one of the best of constitution , it must have kill he . " " cousin , " cry the man , who
who have now pretty well recover himself , " this be the angel from heaven whom I mean . this be he to whom , before I see you , I owe the preservation of my . he it be to whose generosity every comfort , every support which I have procure for she , be owe . he be , indeed , the worthiest , bravest , noblest ; of all human being . of cousin , I have obligation to this gentleman of such a nature ! " " mention nothing of obligation , " cry eagerly ; " not a word , I insist upon it , not a word " ( mean , I suppose , that he would not have he betray the affair of the robbery to any person ) . " if , by the trifle you have receive from I , I have preserve a whole family , sure pleasure be never buy so cheap . " " oh , sir ! " cry the man , " I wish you could this instant see my house . if any person have ever a right to the pleasure you mention , I be convince it be yourself . my cousin tell I she acquaint you with the distress in which she find we . that , sir , be all greatly remove , and chiefly by you goodness .---- my child have now a bed to lie on ---- and they have ---- they have ---- eternal blessing reward you for it !---- they have bread to eat . my little boy be recovere ; my wife be out of danger , and I be happy . all , all owe to you , sir , and to my cousin here , one of the best of woman . indeed , sir , I must see you at my house .-- indeed my wife must see you , and thank you .-- my child too must express they gratitude .----Indeed , sir , they be not without a sense of they obligation ; but what be my feeling when I reflect to whom I owe that they be now capable of express they gratitude .----Oh , sir , the little heart which you have warm have now be cold as ice without you assistance . " here attempt to prevent the poor man from proceeding ; but indeed the overflowing of he own heart would of itself have stop he word . and now likewise begin to pour forth thanksgiving , as well in she own name , as in that of she cousin , and conclude with say , " she doubt not but such goodness would meet a glorious reward . " answer , " he have be sufficiently reward already . you cousin 's account , madam , " say he , " hath give I a sensation more pleasing than I have ever kny . he must be a wretch who be unmoved at hear such a story ; how transport then must be the thought of have happily act a part in this scene ! if there be man who can not feel the delight of give happiness to other , I sincerely pity they , as they be incapable of taste what be , in my opinion , a greater honour , a higher interest , and a sweeter pleasure than the ambitious , the avaricious , or the voluptuous man can ever obtain . " the hour of appointment be now come , be force to take a hasty leave , but not before he have heartily shaken he friend by the hand , and desire to see he again as soon as possible ; promise that he would himself take the first opportunity of visit he at he own house . he then steep into he chair , and proceed to 's , greatly exult in the happiness which he have procure to this poor family ; nor could he forbear reflec , without horror , on the dreadful consequence which must have attend they , have he listen rather to the voice of strict justice than to that of mercy , when he be attack on the high road . sung forth the praise of during the whole evening , in which , while he stay , so passionately accompany she , that he be often on the very point of mention the circumstance of the robbery . however , he luckily recollect himself , and avoid a indiscretion which would have be so much the greater , as he know to be extremely strict and nice in she principle . he be likewise well apprize of the loquacity of this lady ; and yet such be he gratitude , that it have almost get the better both of discretion and shame , and make he publish that which would have defam he own character , rather than omin any circumstance which might do the fullest honour to he benefactor . chapter xi . in which the reader will be surprize . be rather earlier than the time appoint , and earlier than the lady ; whose arrival be hinder , not only by the distance of the place where she dine , but by some other cross accident very vexatious to one in she situation of mind . he be accordingly show into the drawing - room , where he have not be many minute before the door open , and in come ---- no other than herself , who have leave the play before the end of the first act ; for this , as we have already say , be , a new play , at which two large party meet , the one to damn , and the other to applaud , a violent uproar , and a engagement between the two party , have so terrified we heroine ,
, that she be glad to put herself under the protection of a young gentleman who safely convey she to she chair . as have acquaint she that she should not be at home till late , , expect to find no one in the room , come hastily in , and go directly to a glass which almost fronte she , without once look towards the upper end of the room , where the statue of now stand motionless .--- in this glass it be , after contemplate she own lovely face , that she first discover the say statue ; when , instantly turn about , she perceive the reality of the vision : upon which she give a violent scream , and scarce preserve herself from fainting , till be able to move to she , and support she in he arm . to paint the look or thought of either of these lover , be beyond my power . as they sensation , from they mutual silence , may be judge to have be too big for they own utterance , it can not be suppose that I should be able to express they : and the misfortune be , that few of my reader have be enough in love to feel by they own heart what past at this time in theirs . after a short pause , , with faultering accents , say -- " I see , madam , you be surprize . " -- " Surprize ! " answer she ; " oh heaven ! indeed , I be surprize . I almost doubt whether you be the person you seem . " -- " indeed , " cry he , " my , pardon I , madam , for this once call you so , I be that very wretched , whom fortune , after so many disappointment , hath , at last , kindly conduct to you . oh ! my , do you know the thousand torment I have suffer in this long , fruitless pursuit . " --" Pursuit of whom ? " say , a little recollect herself , and assume a reserve air .--" can you be so cruel to ask that question ? " cry ; " need I say , of you ? " " of I ! " answer : " , then , any such important business with I ? " --" to some , madam , " cry , " this might seem a important business " ( give she the pocket - book ) . " I hope , madam , you will find it of the same value as when it be lose . " take the pocket - book , and be go to speak , when he interrupt she thus :--" let we not , I beseech you , lose one of these precious moment which fortune hath so kindly send we . o , my ! I have business of a much superior kind . thus , on my knee , let I ask you pardon . " --" my pardon ! " cry she ; " sure , sir , after what be past , you can not expect , after what I have hear . " --" I scarce know what i say , " answer . " by heaven ! I scarce wish you should pardon I . of my ! henceforth never cast away a thought on such a wretch as I be . if any remembrance of I should ever intrude to give a moment 's uneasiness to that tender bosom , think of my unworthiness ; and let the remembrance of what pass at blot I for ever from you mind . " stand trembl all this while . she face be whiter than snow , and she heart be throbb through she stay . but , at the mention of , a blush arise in she cheek , and she eye , which before she have scarce lift up , be turn upon with a glance of disdain . he understand this silent reproach , and reply to it thus : " o my ! my only love ! you can not hate or despise I more for what happen there than I do myself ; but yet do I the justice to think that my heart be never unfaithful to you . that have no share in the folly I be guilty of ; it be even then unalterably yours . though I despaire of possesse you , nay , almost of ever see you more , I doate still on you charming idea , and could seriously love no other woman . but if my heart have not be engage , she , into whose company I accidently fell at that cursed place , be not a object of serious love . believe I , my angel , I never have see she from that day to this ; and never intend or desire to see she again . " , in she heart , be very glad to hear this ; but force into she face a air of more coldness than she have yet assume , " why , " say she , " , do you take the trouble to make a defence where you be not accuse ? if I think it worth while to accuse you , I have a charge of unpardonable nature indeed . " -- " what be it , for heaven 's sake ? " answer , trembl and pale , expect to hear of he amour with . " oh , " say she , " how be it possible ! can everything noble and everything base be lod together in the same bosom ? " , and the ignominious circumstance of have be keep , rise again in he mind , and stopt he mouth from any
any reply . " could I have expect , " proceed , " such treatment from you ? Nay , from any gentleman , from any man of honour ? to have my name traduce in public ; in inns , among the meanest vulgar ! to have any little favour that my unguarded heart may have too lightly betraye I to grant , boast of there ! nay , even to hear that you have be force to fly from my love ! " nothing could equal 's surprize at these word of ; but yet , not be guilty , he be much less embarrassed how to defend himself than if she have touch that tender string at which he conscience have be alarm . by some examination he presently find , that she suppose he guilty of so shock a outrage against he love , and she reputation , be entirely owe to 's talk at the inns before landlord and servants ; for confess to he it be from they that she receive she intelligence . he have no very great difficulty to make she believe that he be entirely innocent of a offence so foreign to he character ; but she have a great deal to hinder he from go instantly home , and put Partridge to death , which he more than once swore he would do . this point be clear up , they soon find themselves so well pleas with each other , that quite forget he have begin the conversation with conjur she to give up all thought of he ; and she be in a temper to have give ear to a petition of a very different nature ; for before they be aware they have both go so far , that he let fall some word that sound like a proposal of marriage . to which she reply , " that , do not she duty to she father forbid she to follow she own inclination , ruin with he would be more welcome to she than the most affluent fortune with another man . " at the mention of the word ruin , he start , let drop she hand , which he have hold for some time , and strike he breast with he own , cry out , " oh , ! can I then ruin thee ? no ; by heaven , no ! I never will act so base a part . , whatever it cost I , I will renounce you ; I will give you up ; I will tear all such hope from my heart as be inconsistent with you real good . my love I will ever retain , but it shall be in silence ; it shall be at a distance from you ; it shall be in some foreign land ; from whence no voice , no sigh of my despair , shall ever reach and disturb you ear . and when I be dead " -- he would have go on , but be stopt by a flood of tear which let fall in he bosom , upon which she lean , without be able to speak one word . he kiss they off , which , for some moment , she allow he to do without any resistance ; but then recollect herself , gently withdraw out of he arm ; and , to turn the discourse from a subject to tender , and which she find she could not support , bethotch herself to ask he a question she never have time to put to he before , " how he come into that room ? " he begin to stammer , and would , in all probability , have raise she suspicions by the answer he be go to give , when , at once , the door open , and in come . have advance a few step , and see and together , she suddenly stopt ; when , after a pause of a few moment , recollect herself with admirable presence of mind , she say -- though with sufficient indication of surprize both in voice and countenance --" I think , , you have be at the play ? " though have no opportunity of learning of by what mean he have discover she , yet , as she have not the least suspicion of the real truth , or that and be acquainted , so she be very little confound ; and the less , as the lady have , in all they conversation on the subject , entirely take she side against she father . with very little hesitation , therefore , she go through the whole story of what have happene at the play - house , and the cause of she hasty return . the length of this narrative give a opportunity of rally she spirits , and of consider in what manner to act . and as the behaviour of give she hope that have not betraye she , she put on a air of good humour , and say , " I should not have break in so abruptly upon you , , if I have know you have company . " fix she eye on whilst she speak these word . to which that poor young lady , have she face overspread with blush and confusion , answer , in a stammering voice , " I be sure , madam , I shall always think the honour of you ladyship 's company ---- " " I hope , at least , " cry , " I interrupt no business . " -- " no , madam , " answer , " we business be at a end . you ladyship may be pleased to remember I have often mention the loss of my pocket - book , which this gentleman , have very luckily
luckily find , be so kind to return it to I with the bill in it . " , ever since the arrival of , have be ready to sink with fear . he sit kick he heel , play with he finger , and look more like a fool , if it be possible , than a young booby squire , when he be first introduce into a polite assembly . he begin , however , now to recover himself ; and take a hint from the behaviour of , who he see do not intend to claim any acquaintance with he , he resolve as entirely to affect the stranger on he part . he say , " ever since he have the pocket - book in he possession , he have use great diligence in enquir out the lady whose name be writ in it ; but never till that day could be so fortunate to discover she . " have indeed mention the loss of she pocket - book to ; but as , for some reason or other , have never once hint to she that it be in he possession , she believe not one syllable of what now say , and wonderfully admire the extreme quickness of the young lady in invent such a excuse . the reason of 's leave the playhouse meet with no better credit ; and though she could not account for the meeting between these two lover , she be firmly persuade it be not accidental . with a affect smile , therefore , she say , " indeed , , you have have very good luck in recovere you money . not only as it fall into the hand of a gentleman of honour , but as he happen to discover to whom it belong . I think you would not consent to have it advertise .-- it be great good fortune , sir , that you find out to whom the note belong . " " oh , madam , " cry , " it be enclose in a pocket - book , in which the young lady 's name be write . " " that be very fortunate , indeed , " cry the lady :-- " and it be no less so , that you hear be at my house ; for she be very little know . " have at length perfectly recovere he spirits ; and as he conceive he have now a opportunity of satisfying as to the question she have ask he just before come in , he proceed thus : " why , madam , " answer he , " it be by the luckiest chance imaginable I make this discovery . I be mention what I have find , and the name of the owner , the other night to a lady at the masquerade , who tell I she believe she know where I might see ; and if I would come to she house the next morning she would inform I , I go accord to she appointment , but she be not at home ; nor could I ever meet with she till this morning , when she direct I to you ladyship 's house . I come accordingly , and do myself the honour to ask for you ladyship ; and upon my say that I have very particular business , a servant show I into this room ; where I have not be long before the young lady return from the play . " upon he mention the masquerade , he look very slily at , without any fear of be remark by ; for she be visibly too much confound to make any observation . this hint a little alarme the lady , and she be silent ; when , who see the agitation of 's mind , resolve to take the only method of relieive she , which be by retiring ; but , before he do this , he say , " I believe , madam , it be customary to give some reward on these occasion ; -- I must insist on a very high one for my honesty ; -- it be , madam , no less than the honour of be permit to pay another visit here . " " , " reply the lady , " I make no doubt that you be a gentleman , and my door be never shut to people of fashion . " then , after proper ceremonial , depart , highly to he own satisfaction , and no less to that of ; who be terribly alarme lest should discover what she know already but too well . upon the stair meet he old acquaintance , , who , notwithstand all she have say against he , be now so well breed to behave with great civility . this meeting prove indeed a lucky circumstance , as he communicate to she the house where he lod , with which be unacquainted . chapter xii . in which the thirteenth book be conclude . the elegant somewhere object to tell too much truth : by which it may be fairly inferred , that , in some case , to lie be not only excusable but commendable . and surely there be no person who may so properly challenge a right to this commendable deviation from truth , as young woman in the affair of love ; for which they may plead precept , education , and above all , the sanction , nay , I may say the necessity of custom , by which they be restrain , not from submit to the honest impulse of nature ( for that would be a foolish prohibition ) , but from own they . we be not , therefore , asham to say , that we heroine now pursue the dictate of the above
above -mention right honourable philosopher . as she be perfectly satisfied then , that be ignorant of the person of , so she determin to keep she in that ignorance , though at the expense of a little fibbing . have not be long go , before cry , " upon my word , a good pretty young fellow ; I wonder who he be ; for I do not remember ever to have see he face before . " " nor I neither , madam , " cry . " I must say he behave very handsomely in relation to my note . " " yes ; and he be a very handsome fellow , " say the lady : " do not you think so ? " " I do not take much notice of he , " answer , " but I think he seem rather awkward , and ungenteel than otherwise . " " you be extremely right , " cry : " you may see , by he manner , that he hath not keep good company . Nay , notwithstand he return you note , and refuse the reward , I almost question whether he be a gentleman .---- I have always observe there be a something in person well bear , which other can never acquire think I will give order not to be at home to he . " " Nay , sure , madam , " answer , " one can not suspect after what he hath do ;-- besides , if you ladyship observe he , there be a elegance in he discourse , a delicacy , a prettiness of expression that , that -- -- " " I confess , " say , " the fellow hath word ---- and indeed , , you must forgive I , indeed you must . " " I forgive you ladyship ! " say . " yes , indeed you must , " answer she , laugh ; " for I have a horrible suspicion when I first come into the room ---- I vow you must forgive it ; but I suspect it be himself . " " do you ladyship , indeed ? " cry , blush , and affect a laugh . " yes , I vow I do , " answer she . " I can not imagine what put it into my head : for , give the fellow he due , he be genteely drest ; which , I think , dear , be not commonly the case with you friend . " " this raillery , " cry , " be a little cruel , , after my promise to you ladyship . " " not at all , child , " say the lady ;----" it would have be cruel before ; but after you have promise I never to marry without you father 's consent , in which you know be imply you give up , sure you can bear a little raillery on a passion which be pardonable enough in a young girl in the country , and of which you tell I you have so entirely get the better . what must I think , my dear , if you can not bear a little ridicule even on he dress ? I shall begin to fear you be very far go indeed ; and almost question whether you have deal ingenuously with I . " " indeed , madam , " cry , " you ladyship mistake I , if you imagine I have any concern on he account . " " on he account ! " answer the lady : " you must have mistake I ; I go no farther than he dress ;---- for I would not injure you taste by any other comparison -- I do not imagine , my dear Sophy , if you have be such a fellow as this -- " " I think , " say , " you ladyship have allow he to be handsome " ---- " whom , pray ? " cry the lady hastily . " , " answer ; -- and immediately recollect herself , " !-- no , no ; I ask you pardon ;--I mean the gentleman who be just now here . " " of ! Sophy ! " cry the lady ; " this , I be afraid , still run in you head . " " then , upon my honour , madam , " say , " be as entirely indifferent to I , as the gentleman who just now leave we . " " upon my honour , " say , " I believe it . forgive I , therefore , a little innocent raillery ; but I promise you I will never mention he name any more . " and now the two lady separate , infinitely more to the delight of than of , who would willingly have torment she rival a little longer , have not business of more importance call she away . as for , she mind be not perfectly easy under this first practice of deceit ; upon which , when she retire to she chamber , she reflect with the highest uneasiness and conscious shame . nor could the peculiar hardship of she situation , and the necessity of the case , at all reconcile she mind to she conduct ; for the frame of she mind be too delicate to bear the thought of have be guilty of a falsehood , however qualified by circumstance . do this thought once suffer she to close she eye during the whole succeed night . . contain two Day . I . a essay to prove that a author will write the better for have some knowledge of the subject on which he write . as several gentleman in these time , by the wonderful force of
of genius only , without the least assistance of learning , perhaps , without be well able to read , have make a considerable figure in the republic of letter ; the modern critic , I be tell , have lately begin to assert , that all kind of learning be entirely useless to a writer ; and , indeed , no other than a kind of fetter on the natural sprightliness and activity of the imagination , which be thus weigh down , and prevent from soaring to those high flight which otherwise it would be able to reach . this doctrine , I be afraid , be at present carry much too far : for why should write differ so much from all other arts ? the nimbleness of a dancing - master be not at all prejudice by be teach to move ; nor doth any mechanic , I believe , exercise he tool the worse by have learnt to use they . for my own part , I can not conceive that or would have writ with more fire , if instead of be master of all the learning of they time , they have be as ignorant as most of the author of the present age . nor do I believe that all the imagination , fire , and judgment of , could have produce those oration that have make the senate of , in these we time , a rival in eloquence to and , if he have not be so well read in the writings of and , as to have transfer they whole spirit into he speech , and , with they spirit , they knowledge too . I would not here be understand to insist on the same fund of learning in any of my breth , as persuade we be necessary to the composition of a orator . on the contrary , very little reading be , I conceive , necessary to the poet , less to the critic , and the least of all to the politician . for the first , perhaps , Byshe be of , and a few of we modern poets , may suffice ; for the second , a moderate heap of play ; and , for the last , a indifferent collection of political journal . to say the truth , I require no more than that a man should have some little knowledge of the subject on which he treat , accord to the old maxim of law , quisque nrit artem in e se exerceat . with this alone a writer may sometimes do tolerably well ; and , indeed , without this , all the other learning in the world will stand he in little stead . for instance , let we suppose that and , and , and , could have meet all together , and have club they several talents to have compose a treatise on the art of dancing : I believe it will be readily agree they could not have equall the excellent treatise which hath give we on that subject , entitle , the Rudiment of . and , indeed , should the excellent be prevail on to set fist to paper , and to complete the above -said rudiment , by deliver down the true principles of athletic , I question whether the world will have any cause to lament , that none of the great writer , either antient or modern , have ever treat about that noble and useful art . to avoid a multiplicity of example in so aplain a case , and to come at once to my point , I be apt to conceive , that one reason why many English writer have totally fail in describe the manners of upper life , may possibly be , that in reality they know nothing of it . this be a knowledge unhappily not in the power of many author to arrive at . books will give we a very imperfect idea of it ; nor will the stage a much better : the fine gentleman form upon read the former will almost always turn out a pedant , and he who form himself upon the latter , a coxcomb . nor be the character draw from these model better support . and copy nature ; but they who copy they draw as unlike the present age as would do if he be to paint a rout or a drum in the dress of and of . in short , imitation here will not do the business . the picture must be after herself . a true knowledge of the world be gain only by conversation , and the manners of every rank must be see in order to be know . now it happen that this higher order of mortal be not to be see , like all the rest of the human species , for nothing , in the street , shop , and coffee - house ; nor be they show , like the upper rank of animal , for so much a -piece . in short , this be a sight to which no person be admit without one or other of these qualifications , viz. , either birth or fortune , or , what be equivalent to both , the honourable profession of a gamester . and , very unluckily for the world , person so qualified very seldom care to take upon themselves the bad trade of writing ; which be generally enter upon by the lower and poorer sort , as it be a trade which many think require no kind of stock to set up with . hence those strange monster in lace and embroidery , in silks and brocade , with vast wig and hoops ; which , under the name of lord and lady , strut the stage , to the great
great delight of attorney and they clerk in the pit , and of the citizen and they apprentice in the galleries ; and which be no more to be find in real life than the centaur , the chimera , or any other creature of mere fiction . but to let my reader into a secret , this knowledge of upper life , though very necessary for prevent mistakes , be no very great resource to a writer whose province be comedy , or that kind of novel which , like this I be write , be of the comic class . what say of woman be very applicable to most in this station , who be , indeed , so entirely make up of form and affectation , that they have no character at all , at least none which appear . I will venture to say the highest life be much the dullest , and afford very little humour or entertainment . the various callings in lower sphere produce the great variety of humorous character ; whereas here , except among the few who be engage in the pursuit of ambition , and the fewer still who have a relish for pleasure , all be vanity and servile imitation . Dressing and card , eat and drink , bow and courtesy , make up the business of they life . some there be , however , of this rank upon whom passion exercise its tyranny , and hurrie they far beyond the bounds which decorum prescribe ; of these the lady be as much distinguished by they noble intrepidity , and a certain superior contempt of reputation , from the frail one of meaner degree , as a virtuous woman of quality be by the elegance and delicacy of she sentiment from the honest wife of a yeoman and shopkeeper . be of this intrepid character ; but let not my country reader conclude from she , that this be the general conduct of woman of fashion , or that we mean to represent they as such . they might as well suppose that every clergyman be represent by , or every soldier by ensign . there be not , indeed , a greater error than that which universally prevail among the vulgar , who , borrowe they opinion from some ignorant satirist , have affix the character of lewdness to these time . on the contrary , I be convince there never be less of love intrigue carry on among person of condition than now . we present woman have be teach by they mother to fix they thought only on ambition and vanity , and to despise the pleasure of love as unworthy they regard ; and be afterwards , by the care of such mother , marry without have husband , they seem pretty well confirm in the justness of those sentiment ; whence they contend themselves , for the dull remainder of life , with the pursuit of more innocent , but I be afraid more childish amusement , the bare mention of which would ill suit with the dignity of this history . in my humble opinion , the true characteristic of the present beau monde be rather folly than vice , and the only epithet which it deserve be that of frivolous . . contain letter and other matters which attend amour . have not be long at home before he receive the follow letter :-- " I be never more surprized than when I find you be gone . when you leave the room I little imagine you intend to have leave the house without see I again . you behaviour be all of a piece , and convince I how much I ought to despise a heart which can doat upon a idiot ; though I know not whether I should not admire she cunn more than she simplicity : wonderful both ! for though she understand not a word of what pass between we , yet she have the skill , the assurance , the ---- what shall I call it ? to deny to my face that she know you , or ever see you before .---- be this a scheme laid between you , and have you be base enough to betray I ?----o how I despise she , you , and all the world , but chiefly myself ! for ---- I dare not write what I should afterwards run mad to read ; but remember , I can detest as violently as I have love . " have but little time give he to reflect on this letter , before a second be bring he from the same hand ; and this , likewise , we shall set down in the precise word . " when you consider the hurry of spirit in which I must have writ , you can not be surprize at any expression in my former note . -- , perhaps , on reflection , they be rather too warm . at least I would , if possible , think all owe to the odious playhouse , and to the impertinence of a fool , which detain I beyond my appointment .----How easy be it to think well of those we love !---- perhaps you desire I should think so . I have resolve to see you to - night ; so come to I immediately . " _p. ._-- I have order to be at home to none but yourself . " _p. ._-- will imagine I shall assist he in he defence ; for I believe he can not desire to impose on I more than I desire to impose on myself . " _P.S._-- immediately . " to the man of intrigue I refer the determination , whether the angry or the tender letter give the greatest uneasiness to . certain it be , he have no violent inclination
inclination to pay any more visit that even , unless to one single person . however , he think he honour engage , and have not this be motive sufficient , he would not have venture to blow the temper of into that flame of which he have reason to think it susceptible , and of which he fear the consequence might be a discovery to , which he dread . after some discontent walk therefore about the room , he be prepare to depart , when the lady kindly prevent he , not by another letter , but by she own presence . she enter the room very disorder in she dress , and very discomposed in she look , and throw herself into a chair , where , have recover she breath , she say -- " you see , sir , when woman have go one length too far , they will stop at none . if any person would have swear this to I a week ago , I would not have believe it of myself . " " I hope , madam , " say , " my charme will be as difficult to believe anything against one who be so sensible of the many obligation she hath confer upon he . " " indeed ! " say she , " sensible of obligation ! do I expect to hear such cold language from ? " " pardon I , my dear angel , " say he , " if , after the letter I have receive , the terror of you anger , though I know not how I have deserve it . " -- " and have I then , " say she , with a smile , " so angry a countenance ?-- Have I really bring a chiding face with I ? " --" if there be honour in man , " say he , " I have do nothing to merit you anger .-- you remember the appointment you send I ; I go in pursuance . " --" I beseech you , " cry she , " do not run through the odious recital .-- answer I but one question , and I shall be easy . have you not betraye my honour to she ? " -- fell upon he knee , and begin to utter the most violent protestation , when come dancing and cape into the room , like one drunk with joy , cry out , " she be find ! she be find !-- here , sir , here , she be here -- be upon the stair . " " stop she a moment , " cry -- " here , madam , step behind the bed , I have no other room nor closet , nor place on earth to hide you in ; sure never be so damne a accident . " --" d -- and would indeed ! " say the lady , as she go to she place of concealment ; and presently afterwards in come . " hey - day ! " say she , " , what be the matter ?-- that impudent rascal you servant would scarce let I come upstairs . I hope he hath not the same reason to keep I from you as he have at .-- I suppose you hardly expect to see I ; but you have certainly bewitch my lady . poor dear young lady ! to be sure , I love she as tenderly as if she be my own sister . have mercy upon you , if you do not make she a good husband ! and to be sure , if you do not , nothing can be bad enough for you . " beg she only to whisper , for that there be a lady die in the next room . " a lady ! " cry she ; " ay , I suppose one of you lady .-- of , there be too many of they in the world ; I believe we be get into the house of one , for my I darst to say be no better than she should be . " --" Hush ! hush ! " cry , " every word be overhear in the next room . " " I do not care a farthing , " cry , " I speak no scandal of any one ; but to be sure the servants make no scruple of say as how she ladyship meet man at another place -- where the house go under the name of a poor gentlewoman ; but she ladyship pay the rent , and many be the good thing besides , they say , she hath of she . " -- here , after express the utmost uneasiness , offer to stop she mouth :--" hey -day ! why sure , , you will let I speak ; I speak no scandal , for I only say what I hear from other -- and think I to myself , much good may it do the gentlewoman with she riche , if she come by it in such a wicked manner . to be sure it be better to be poor and honest . " " the servant be villain , " cry , " and abuse they lady unjustly . " -- " ay , to be sure , servants be always villain , and so my lady say , and will not hear a word of it . " -- " no , I be convinced , " say , " my be above listen to such base scandal . " " Nay , I believe it be no scandal , neither , " cry , " for why should she meet man at another house ?-- it can never be for any good : for if she have a lawful design of
of be courte , as to be sure any lady may lawfully give she company to man upon that account : why , where can be the sense ? " --" I protest , " cry , " I can not hear all this of a lady of such honour , and a relation of ; besides , you will distract the poor lady in the next room .-- let I entreat you to walk with I down stair . " -- " Nay , sir , if you will not let I speak , I have do .-- here , sir , be a letter from my young lady -- what would some man give to have this ? but , , I think you be not over and above generous , and yet I have hear some servants say ---- but I be sure you will do I the justice to own I never see the colour of you money . " here hastily take the letter , and presently after slipp five piece into she hand . he then return a thousand thanks to he dear in a whisper , and beg she to leave he to read she letter : she presently depart , not without express much grateful sense of he generosity . now come from behind the curtain . how shall I describe she rage ? she tongue be at first incapable of utterance ; but stream of fire dart from she eye , and well indeed they might , for she heart be all in a flame . and now as soon as she voice find way , instead of express any indignation against or she own servants , she begin to attack poor Jones . " you see , " say she , " what I have sacrifice to you ; my reputation , my honour -- gone for ever ! and what return have I find ? neglect , slighte for a country girl , for a idiot . " -- " what neglect , madam , or what slight , " cry , " have I be guilty of ? " -- " , " say she , " it be in vain to dissemble ; if you will make I easy , you must entirely give she up ; and as a proof of you intention , show I the letter . " -- " what letter , madam ? " say . " Nay , surely , " say she , " you can not have the confidence to deny you have receive a letter by the hand of that trollop . " -- " and can you ladyship , " cry he , " ask of I what I must part with my honour before I grant ? have I act in such a manner by you ladyship ? could I be guilty of betraie this poor innocent girl to you , what security could you have that I should not act the same part by yourself ? a moment 's reflection will , I be sure , convince you that a man with whom the secret of a lady be not safe must be the most contemptible of wretch . " --" very well , " say she -- " I need not insist on you become this contemptible wretch in you own opinion ; for the inside of the letter could inform I of nothing more than I know already . I see the footing you be upon . " -- here ensue a long conversation , which the reader , who be not too curious , will thank I for not insert at length . it shall suffice , therefore , to inform he , that grow more and more pacified , and at length believe , or affect to believe , he protestation , that he meeting with that evening be merely accidental , and every other matter which the reader already know , and which , as Jones set before she in the strongest light , it be plain that she have in reality no reason to be angry with he . she be not , however , in she heart perfectly satisfied with he refusal to show she the letter ; so deaf be we to the clearest reason , when it argue against we prevailing passion . she be , indeed , well convince that possess the first place in 's affections ; and yet , haughty and amorous as this lady be , she submit at last to bear the second place ; or , to express it more properly in a legal phrase , be contente with the possession of that of which another woman have the reversion . it be at length agree that should for the future visit at the house : for that , she maid , and all the servants , would place these visit to the account of ; and that she herself would be consider as the person impos upon . this scheme be contrive by the lady , and highly relish by , who be indeed glad to have a prospect of see he at any rate ; and the lady herself be not a little pleased with the imposition on , which , she think , could not possibly discover to she for he own sake . the next day be appoint for the first visit , and then , after proper ceremonial , the return home . chapter iii . contain various matters . be no sooner alone than he eagerly break open he letter , and read as follow :-- " , it be impossible to express what I have suffer since you leave this house ; and as I have reason to think you intend come here again , I have send , though so late at night , as she tell I she know you lodging ,
, to prevent you . I charge you , by all the regard you have for I , not to think of visit here ; for it will certainly be discover ; nay , I almost doubt , from some thing which have dropt from she ladyship , that she be not already without some suspicion . something favourable perhaps may happen ; we must wait with patience ; but I once more entreat you , if you have any concern for my ease , do not think of return hither . " this letter administer the same kind of consolation to poor , which formerly receive from he friend . besides disappoint all the hope which he promise to himself from see , he be reduce to a unhappy dilemma , with regard to ; for there be some certain engagement , which , as he well know , do very difficultly admit of any excuse for the failure ; and to go , after the strict prohibition from , he be not to be force by any human power . at length , after much deliberation , which during that night suppli the place of sleep , he determine to feign himself sick : for this suggest itself as the only means of fail the appointed visit , without incense , which he have more than one reason of desiring to avoid . the first thing , however , which he do in the morning , be , to write a answer to , which he inclose in one to . he then despatch another to , contain the above -mentioned excuse ; and to this he soon receive the follow answer :-- " I be vex that I can not see you here this afternoon , but more concerned for the occasion ; take great care of yourself , and have the best advice , and I hope there will be no danger .-- I be so torment all this morning with fool , that I have scarce a moment 's time to write to you . . " _p. ._-- I will endeaavor to call on you this evening , at nine .-- be sure to be alone . " now receive a visit from , who , after some formal introduction , begin the follow speech :--" I be very sorry , sir , to wait upon you on such a occasion ; but I hope you will consider the ill consequence which it must be to the reputation of my poor girl , if my house should once be talk of as a house of ill - fame . I hope you will not think I , therefore , guilty of impertinence , if I beg you not to bring any more lady in at that time of night . the clock have struck two before one of they go away . " --" I do assure you , madam , " say , " the lady who be here last night , and who stay the latest ( for the other only bring I a letter ) , be a woman of very great fashion , and my near relation . " --" I do not know what fashion she be of , " answer ; " but I be sure no woman of virtue , unless a very near relation indeed , would visit a young gentleman at ten at night , and stay four hour in he room with he alone ; besides , sir , the behaviour of she chairmen show what she be ; for they do nothing but make jest all the evening in the entry , and ask , in the hearing of my own maid , if madam intend to stay with he master all night ; with a great deal of stuff not proper to be repeat . I have really a great respect for you , , upon you own account ; nay , I have a very high obligation to you for you generosity to my cousin . indeed , I do not know how very good you have be till lately . little do I imagine to what dreadful course the poor man 's distress have drive he . little do I think , when you give I the ten guinea , that you have give they to a highwayman ! of heaven ! what goodness have you show ! how have you preserve this family !-- the character which hath formerly give I of you be , I find , strictly true . -- and indeed , if I have no obligation to you , my obligation to he be such , that , on he account , I should show you the utmost respect in my power .-- Nay , believe I , dear , if my daughter ' and my own reputation be out of the case , I should , for you own sake , be sorry that so pretty a young gentleman should converse with these woman ; but if you be resolve to do it , I must beg you to take another lodging ; for I do not myself like to have such thing carry on under my roof ; but more especially upon the account of my girl , who have little , heaven know , besides they character , to recommend they . " start and change colour at the name of . " indeed , , " answer he , a little warmly , " I do not take this at all kind . I will never bring any slander on you house ; but I must insist on see what company I please in my own room ; and if that give you any offence , I shall , as soon as I be able , look for another lodging . " --" I be sorry we must part then , sir
sir , " say she ; " but I be convince himself would never come within my door , if he have the least suspicion of my keep a ill house . " --" very well , madam , " say .--" I hope , sir , " say she , " you be not angry ; for I would not for the world offend any of 's family . I have not sleep a wink all night about this matter . " --" I be sorry I have disturb you rest , madam , " say , " but I beg you will send up to I immediately ; " which she promise to do , and then with a very low courtesy retire . as soon as arrive , fell upon he in the most outrageous manner . " how often , " say he , " be I to suffer for you folly , or rather for my own in keep you ? be that tongue off yours resolve upon my destruction ? " " what have I do , sy ? " answer affright Partridge . " who be it give you authority to mention the story of the robbery , or that the man you see here be the person ? " " I , sir ? " cry . " now do not be guilty of a falsehood in deny it , " say . " if I do mention such a matter , " answer Partridge , " I be sure I think no harm ; for I should not have open my lip , if it have not be to he own friend and relation , who , I imagine , would have let it go no farther . " " but I have a much heavier charge against you , " cry , " than this . how durst you , after all the precaution I give you , mention the name of in this house ? " deny that he ever have , with many oath . " how else , " say , " should be acquaint that there be any connexion between he and I ? and it be but this moment she tell I she respecte I on he account . " " o , sir , " say , " I desire only to be hear out ; and to be sure , never be anything so unfortunate : hear I but out , and you will own how wrongfully you have accuse I . when come downstairs last night she meet I in the entry , and ask I when my master have hear from ; and to be sure hear the very word ; and the moment madam Honou be go , she call I into the parlour to she . ` , ' say she , ` what be it that the gentlewoman mention ? be it the great of ? ' ` upon my word , madam , ' say I , ` I know nothing of the matter . ' ` sure , ' say she , ` you master be not the I have hear talk of ? ' ` upon my word , madam , ' say I , ` I know nothing of the matter . ' ` then , ' say she , turn to she daughter , say she , ` as sure as tenpence this be the very young gentleman , and he agree exactly with the squire 's description . ' the above know who it be tell she : for I be the arrantest villain that ever walk upon two leg if ever it come out of my mouth . I promise you , sir , I can keep a secret when I be desire . Nay , sir , so far be I from tell she anything about , that I tell she the very direct contrary ; for , though I do not contradict it at that moment , yet , as second thought , they say , be best , so when I come to consider that somebody must have inform she , think I to myself , I will put a end to the story ; and so I go back again into the parlour some time afterwards , and say I , upon my word , say I , whoever , say I , tell you that this gentleman be ; that be , say I , that this be that , tell you a confound lie : and I beg , say I , you will never mention any such matter , say I ; for my master , say I , will think I must have tell you so ; and I defy anybody in the house ever to say i mention any such word . to be certain , sir , it be a wonderful thing , and I have be think with myself ever since , how it be she come to know it ; not but I see a old woman here t'other day a begging at the door , who look as like she we see in , that cause all that mischief to we . to be sure it be never good to pass by a old woman without give she something , especially if she look at you ; for all the world shall never persuade I but that they have a great power to do mischief , and to be sure I shall never see a old woman again , but I shall think to myself , , regina , jube renovare dolorem ._ " the simplicity of a laughing , and put a final end to he anger , which have indeed seldom any long duration in he mind ; and , instead of commenting on he defence , he tell he he intend presently to leave those lodging
lodging , and order he to go and endeaavor to get he other . I v. which we hope will be very attentively peruse by young people of both sex . have no sooner leave than , with whom he have now contract a great intimacy , come to he , and , after a short salutation , say , " so , , I hear you have company very late last night . upon my soul you be a happy fellow , who have not be in town above a fortnight , and can keep chair waiting at you door till two in the morning . " he then run on with much commonplace raillery of the same kind , till Jones at last interrupt he , say , " I suppose you have receive all this information from , who hath be up here a little while ago to give I warning . the good woman be afraid , it seem , of the reputation of she daughter . " " oh ! she be wonderfully nice , " say , " upon that account ; if you remember , she would not let go with we to the masquerade . " " Nay , upon my honour , I think she be in the right of it , " say : " however , I have take she at she word , and have send to look for another lodging . " " if you will , " say , " we may , I believe , be again together ; for , to tell you a secret , which I desire you will not mention in the family , I intend to quit the house to - day . " " what , hath give you warn too , my friend ? " cry . " no , " answer the other ; " but the room be not convenient enough . besides , I be grow weary of this part of the town . I want to be nearer the place of diversion ; so I be go to - . " " and do you intend to make a secret of you go away ? " say . " I promise you , " answer , " I do not intend to bilk my lodging ; but I have a private reason for not take a formal leave . " " not so private , " answer ; " I promise you , I have see it ever since the second day of my come to the house . here will be some wet eye on you departure . poor , I pity she , faith ! indeed , , you have play the fool with that girl . you have give she a longing , which I be afraid nothing will ever cure she of . " Nightingale answer , " what the would you have I do ? would you have I marry she to cure she ? " " no , " answer , " I would not have have you make love to she , as you have often do in my presence . I have be astonish at the blindness of she mother in never see it . " " Pugh , see it ! " cry . " what , the should she see ? " " why , see , " say , " that you have make she daughter distractedly in love with you . the poor girl can not conceal it a moment ; she eye be never off from you , and she always colour every time you come into the room . indeed , I pity she heartily ; for she seem to be one of the best - natured and honestest of human creature . " " and so , " answer , " accord to you doctrine , one must not amuse oneself by any common gallantry with woman , for fear they should fall in love with we . " " indeed , , " say , " you wilfully misunderstand I ; I do not fancy woman be so apt to fall in love ; but you have go far beyond common gallantry . " " what , do you suppose , " say , " that we have be a - bed together ? " " no , upon my honour , " answer , very seriously , " I do not suppose so ill of you ; nay , I will go farther , I do not imagine you have lay a regular premeditated scheme for the destruction of the quiet of a poor little creature , or have even foresee the consequence : for I be sure thou be a very good - natured fellow ; and such a one can never be guilty of a cruelty of that kind ; but at the same time you have pleas you own vanity , without consider that this poor girl be make a sacrifice to it ; and while you have have no design but of amuse a idle hour , you have actually give she reason to flatter herself that you have the most serious design in she favour . , , answer I honestly ; to what have tend all those elegant and luscious description of happiness arise from violent and mutual fondness ? all those warm profession of tenderness , and generous disinterested love ? do you imagine she would not apply they ? or , speak ingenuously , do not you intend she should ? " " upon my soul , , " cry , " I do not think this be in thee . thou will make a admirable parson . so I suppose you would not go to bed to now , if she would let you ? " " no , " cry , " may I be d -- n'
n' if I would . " " , , " answer , " last night ; remember last night ---- when every eye be close , and the pale moon , and silent star , shone conscious of the theft . " " , , " say , " I be no canting hypocrite , nor do I pretend to the gift of chastity , more than my neighbour . I have be guilty with woman , I own it ; but be not conscious that I have ever injure any .-- would I , to procure pleasure to myself , be knowingly the cause of misery to any human being . " " well , well , " say , " I believe you , and I be convince you acquit I of any such thing . " " I do , from my heart , " answer , " of have debauch the girl , but not from have gain she affections . " " if I have , " say , " I be sorry for it ; but time and absence will soon wear off such impressions . it be a receipt I must take myself ; for , to confess the truth to you -- I never like any girl half so much in my whole life ; but I must let you into the whole secret , . my father hath provide a match for I with a woman I never see ; and she be now come to town , in order for I to make my address to she . " at these word burst into a loud fit of laughter ; when cry -- " Nay , prithee , do not turn I into ridicule . the take I if I be not half mad about this matter ! my poor ! oh ! , , I wish I have a fortune in my own possession . " " I heartily wish you have , " cry ; " for , if this be the case , I sincerely pity you both ; but surely you do not intend to go away without take you leave of she ? " " I would not , " answer , " undergo the pain of take leave , for ten thousand pound ; beside , I be convinced , instead of answer any good purpose , it would only serve to inflame my poor the more . I beg , therefore , you would not mention a word of it to - day , and in the evening , or to - morrow morning , I intend to depart . " promise he would not ; and say , upon reflection , he think , as he have determined and be obliged to leave she , he take the most prudent method . he then tell Nightingale he should be very glad to lodge in the same house with he ; and it be accordingly agree between they , that should procure he either the ground floor , or the two pair of stair ; for the young gentleman himself be to occupy that which be between they . this Nightingale , of whom we shall be presently obliged to say a little more , be in the ordinary transaction of life a man of strict honour , and , what be more rare among young gentleman of the town , one of strict honesty too ; yet in affair of love he be somewhat loose in he moral ; not that he be even here as void of principle as gentleman sometimes be , and oftener affect to be ; but it be certain he have be guilty of some indefensible treachery to woman , and have , in a certain mystery , call make love , practise many deceit , which , if he have use in trade , he would have be count the greatest villain upon earth . but as the world , I know not well for what reason , agree to see this treachery in a better light , he be so far from be asham of he iniquity of this kind , that he glory in they , and would often boast of he skill in gaining of woman , and he triumph over they heart , for which he have before this time receive some rebuke from , who always exprest great bitterness against any misbehaviour to the fair part of the species , who , if consider , he say , as they ink to be , in the light of the dearest friend , be to be cultivate , honoure , and caress with the utmost love and tenderness ; but , if regard as enemy , be a conquest of which a man ought rather to be asham than to value himself upon it . v. a short account of the history of . this day eat a pretty good dinner for a sick man , that be to say , the larger half of a shoulder of mutton . in the afternoon he receive a invitation from to drink tea ; for that good woman , have learnt , either by means of , or by some other means natural or supernatural , that he have a connexion with , could not endure the thought of part with he in a angry manner . accept the invitation ; and no sooner be the tea - kettle remove , and the girl send out of the room , than the widow , without much preface , begin as follow : " well , there be very surprizing thing happen in this world ; but certainly it be a wonderful business that I should have a relation of in my house , and never know anything of the matter . ! sir , you little imagine what a friend that best of gentleman hath
hath be to I and mine . yes , sir , I be not asham to own it ; it be owe to he goodness that I do not long since perish for want , and leave my poor little wretch , two destitute , helpless , friendless orphan , to the care , or rather to the cruelty , of the world . " you must know , sir , though I be now reduce to get my living by letting lodging , I be bear and breed a gentlewoman . my father be a officer of the army , and die in a considerable rank : but he live up to he pay ; and , as that expire with he , he family , at he death , become beggar . we be three sister . one of we have the good luck to die soon after of the small - pox ; a lady be so kind as to take the second out of charity , as she say , to wait upon she . the mother of this lady have be a servant to my grand - mother ; and , have inherit a vast fortune from she father , which he have get by pawnbroking , be marry to a gentleman of great estate and fashion . she use my sister so barbarously , often upbraid she with she birth and poverty , call she in derision a gentlewoman , that I believe she at length break the heart of the poor girl . in short , she likewise die within a twelvemonth after my father . Fortune think proper to provide better for I , and within a month from he decease I be marry to a clergyman , who have be my lover a long time before , and who have be very ill use by my father on that account : for through my poor father could not give any of we a shilling , yet he breed we up as delicately , consider we , and would have have we consider ourselves , as highly as if we have be the richest heiress . but my dear husband forget all this usage , and the moment we be become fatherless he immediately renew he address to I so warmly , that I , who always like , and now more than ever esteem he , soon comply . five year do I live in a state of perfect happiness with that best of man , till at last -- oh ! cruel ! cruel fortune , that ever separate we , that deprive I of the kindest of husband and my poor girl of the tenderest parent .-- of my poor girl ! you never know the blessing which ye lose .-- I be asham , , of this womanish weakness ; but I shall never mention he without tear . " " I ought rather , madam , " say , " to be asham that I do not accompany you . " " well , sir , " continue she , " I be now leave a second time in a much worse condition than before ; besides the terrible affliction I be to encounter , I have now two child to provide for ; and be , if possible , more pennyless than ever ; when that great , that good , that glorious man , , who have some little acquaintance with my husband , accidentally heard of my distress , and immediately writ this letter to I . here , sir , here it be ; I put it into my pocket to show it you . this be the letter , sir ; I must and will read it to you . " ' madam , " 'i heartily condole with you on you late grievous loss , which you own good sense , and the excellent lesson you must have lear nt from the worthiest of man , will better enable you to bear than any advice which I be capable of give . have I any doubt that you , whom I have hear to be the tenderest of mother , will suffer any immoderate indulgence of grief to prevent you from discharge you duty to those poor infant , who now alone stand in need of you tenderness . " ` however , as you must be suppose at present to be incapable of much worldly consideration , you will pardon my have order a person to wait on you , and to pay you twenty guinea , which I beg you will accept till I have the pleasure of see you , and believe I to be , madam , & c . ' " this letter , sir , I receive within a fortnight after the irreparable loss I have mention ; and within a fortnight afterwards , -- the bless , come to pay I a visit , when he place I in the house where you now see I , give I a large sum of money to furnish it , and settle a annuity of  50 a - year upon I , which I have constantly receive ever since . judge , then , , in what regard I must hold a benefactor , to whom I owe the preservation of my life , and of those dear child , for whose sake alone my life be valuable . do not , therefore , think I impertinent , ( since I must esteem one for whom I know hath so much value ) , if I beg you not to converse with these wicked woman . you be a young gentleman , and do not know half they artful wile . do not be angry with I , sir , for what I say upon account of my house ; you must be sensible it would
would be the ruin of my poor dear girl . besides , sir , you can not but be acquaint that himself would never forgive my conniving at such matter , and particularly with you . " " upon my word , madam , " say , " you need make no farther apology ; nor do I in the least take anything ill you have say ; but give I leave , as no one can have more value than myself for , to deliver you from one mistake , which , perhaps , would not be altogether for he honour ; I do assure you , I be no relation of he . " " ! sir , " answer she , " I know you be not , I know very well who you be ; for hath tell I all ; but I do assure you , have you be twenty time he son , he could not have express more regard for you than he hath often express in my presence . you need not be asham , sir , of what you be ; I promise you no good person will esteem you the less on that account . no , , the word ` dishonourable birth ' be nonsense , as my dear , dear husband use to say , unless the word ` dishonourable ' be apply to the parent ; for the child can derive no real dishonour from a act of which they be intirely innocent . " here heav a deep sigh , and then say , " Since I perceive , madam , you really do know I , and hath think proper to mention my name to you ; and since you have be so explicit with I as to you own affair , I will acquaint you with some more circumstance concern myself . " and these have express great desire and curiosity to hear , he begin and related to she he whole history , without once mention the name of . there be a kind of sympathy in honest mind , by means of which they give a easy credit to each other . believe all which tell she to be true , and exprest much pity and concern for he . she be begin to comment on the story , but interrupt she ; for , as the hour of assignation now draw nigh , he begin to stipulate for a second interview with the lady that even , which he promise should be the last at she house ; swear , at the same time , that she be one of great distinction , and that nothing but what be intirely innocent be to pass between they ; and I do firmly believe he intend to keep he word . be at length prevail on , and depart to he chamber , where he sit alone till twelve o'clock , but no appear . as we have say that this lady have a great affection for , and as it must have appear that she really have so , the reader may perhaps wonder at the first failure of she appointment , as she apprehend he to be confine by sickness , a season when friendship seem most to require such visit . this behaviour , therefore , in the lady , may , by some , be condemne as unnatural ; but that be not we fault ; for we business be only to record truth . chapter vi . contain a scene which we doubt not will affect all we reader . close not he eye during all the former part of the night ; not owe to any uneasiness which he conceive at be disappoint by ; nor be herself , though most of he waking hour be justly to be charge to she account , the present cause of dispell he slumber . in fact , poor be one of the best - natured fellow alive , and have all that weakness which be call compassion , and which distinguish this imperfect character from that noble firmness of mind , which roll a man , as it be , within himself , and like a polish bowl , enable he to run through the world without be once stop by the calamity which happen to other . he could not help , therefore , compassionat the situation of poor , whose love for see to he so apparent , that he be astonished at the blindness of she mother , who have more than once , the preceding evening , remark to he the great change in the temper of she daughter , " who from be , " she say , " one of the liveliest , merriest girl in the world , be , on a sudden , become all gloom and melancholy . " sleep , however , at length get the better of all resistance ; and now , as if he have already be a deity , as the antient imagine , and a offended one too , he seem to enjoy he dear - buy conquest .-- to speak simply , and without any metaphor , sleep till eleven the next morning , and would , perhaps , have continue in the same quiet situation much longer , have not a violent uproar awaken he . be now summon , who , be ask what be the matter , answer , " that there be a dreadful hurricane below - stair ; that be in fit ; and that the other sister , and the mother , be both cry and lament over she . " express much concern at this news ; which endeavoure to relieve , by say , with a smile , " he fancie the young lady be in no danger of death ; for that " ( which
which be the name of the maid ) " have give he to understand , it be nothing more than a common affair . in short , " say he , " hath have a mind to be as wise as she mother ; that be all ; she be a little hungry , it seem , and so sit down to dinner before be say ; and so there be a child come for the . " ----" Prithee , leave thy stupid jesting , " cry . " be the misery of these poor wretch a subject of mirth ? go immediately to , and tell she I beg leave -- stay , you will make some blunder ; I will go myself ; for she desire I to breakfast with she . " he then rise and dress himself as fast as he could ; and while he be dress , , notwithstand many severe rebuke , could not avoid throw forth certain piece of brutality , commonly call jest , on this occasion . be no sooner dress than he walk downstairs , and knock at the door , be presently admit by the maid , into the outward parlour , which be as empty of company as it be of any apparatus for eat . be in the inner room with she daughter , whence the maid presently bring a message to , " that she mistress hope he would excuse the disappointment , but a accident have happen , which make it impossible for she to have the pleasure of he company at breakfast that day ; and beg he pardon for not send he up notice sooner . " desire , " she would give herself no trouble about anything so trifl as he disappointment ; that he be heartily sorry for the occasion ; and that if he could be of any service to she , she might command he . " he have scarce spoke these word , when , who hear they all , suddenly throw open the door , and come out to he , in a flood of tear , say , " o ! you be certainly one of the best young man alive . I give you a thousand thanks for you kind offer of you service ; but , alas ! sir , it be out of you power to preserve my poor girl .-- of my child ! my child ! she be undone , she be ruin for ever ! " " I hope , madam , " say , " no villain " ---- " o ! " say she , " that villain who yesterday leave my lodging , hath betraye my poor girl ; hath destroy she .-- I know you be a man of honour . you have a good -- a noble heart , . the action to which I have be myself a witness , could proceed from no other . I will tell you all : nay , indeed , it be impossible , after what hath happen , to keep it a secret . that Nightingale , that barbarous villain , hath undone my daughter . she be -- she be -- oh ! , my girl be with child by he ; and in that condition he hath desert she . here ! here , sir , be he cruel letter : read it , , and tell I if such another monster life . " the letter be as follow : " , " as I find it impossible to mention to you what , I be afraid , will be no less shocking to you , than it be to I , I have take this method to inform you , that my father insist upon my immediately pay my address to a young lady of fortune , whom he hath provide for my -- I need not write the detested word . you own good understanding will make you sensible , how entirely I be oblige to a obedience , by which I shall be for ever exclude from you dear arm . the fondness of you mother may encourage you to trust she with the unhappy consequence of we love , which may be easily keep a secret from the world , and for which I will take care to provide , as I will for you . I wish you may feel less on this account than I have suffer ; but summon all you fortitude to you assistance , and forgive and forget the man , whom nothing but the prospect of certain ruin could have force to write this letter . I bid you forget I , I mean only as a lover ; but the best of friend you shall ever find in you faithful , though unhappy , " . " when have read this letter , they both stand silent during a minute , look at each other ; at last he begin thus : " I can not express , madam , how much I be shocked at what I have read ; yet let I beg you , in one particular , to take the writer 's advice . consider the reputation of you daughter . " ----" it be go , it be lost , , " cry she , " as well as she innocence . she receive the letter in a room full of company , and immediately swoon away upon open it , the contents be know to every one present . but the loss of she reputation , bad as it be , be not the worst ; I shall lose my child ; she hath attempt twice to destroy herself already ; and though she hath be hithertoo prevent , vow she will not outlive it ; nor could I myself outlive any accident of that nature
nature .-- what then will become of my little , a helpless infant orphan ? and the poor little wretch will , I believe , break she heart at the misery with which she see she sister and myself distract , while she be ignorant of the cause . of ' ti the most sensible , and best - natured little thing ! the barbarous , cruel ----hath destroy we all . of my poor child ! be this the reward of all my care ? be this the fruit of all my prospect ? have I so chearfully undergone all the labour and duty of a mother ? have I be so tender of they infancy , so careful of they education ? have I be toil so many year , deny myself even the convenience of life , to provide some little sustenance for they , to lose one or both in such a manner ? " " indeed , madam , " say , with tear in he eye , " I pity you from my soul. " --" , " answer she , " even you , though I know the goodness of you heart , can have no idea of what I feel . the best , the kindest , the most dutiful of child ! of my poor , the darling of my soul ! the delight of my eyes ! the pride of my heart ! too much , indeed , my pride ; for to those foolish , ambitious hope , arise from she beauty , I owe she ruin . ! I see with pleasure the liking which this young man have for she . I think it a honourable affection ; and flatter my foolish vanity with the thought of see she marry to one so much she superior . and a thousand time in my presence , nay , often in yours , he hath endeavoure to soothe and encourage these hope by the most generous expression of disinterested love , which he hath always direct to my poor girl , and which I , as well as she , believe to be real . could I have believe that these be only snare laid to betray the innocence of my child , and for the ruin of we all ? " -- at these word little come run into the room , cry , " dear mamma , for heaven 's sake come to my sister ; for she be in another fit , and my cousin can not hold she . " immediately obey the summon ; but first order to stay with , and beg he to entertain she a few minute , say , in the most pathetic voice , " good heaven ! let I preserve one of my child at least . " , in compliance with this request , do all he could to comfort the little girl , though he be , in reality , himself very highly affect with 's story . he tell she " she sister would be soon very well again ; that by take on in that manner she would not only make she sister worse , but make she mother ill too . " " indeed , sir , " say she , " I would not do anything to hurt they for the world . I would burst my heart rather than they should see I cry .--but my poor sister can not see I cry .-- I be afraid she will never be able to see I cry any more . indeed , I can not part with she ; indeed , I can not .-- and then poor mamma too , what will become of she ?-- she say she will die too , and leave I : but I be resolve I will not be leave behind . " " and be you not afraid to die , my little ? " say . " yes , " answer she , " I be always afraid to die ; because I must have leave my mamma , and my sister ; but I be not afraid of go anywhere with those I love . " be so pleased with this answer , that he eagerly kiss the child ; and soon after return , say , " she thank be now come to herself . and now , , " say she , " you may go in , for you sister be better , and long to see you . " she then turn to , and begin to renew she apology for have disappoint he of he breakfast . " I hope , madam , " say , " I shall have a more exquisite repast than any you could have provide for I . this , I assure you , will be the case , if I can do any service to this little family of love . but whatever success may attend my endeavour , I be resolve to attempt it . I be very much deceive in , if , notwithstand what hath happen , he hath not much goodness of heart at the bottom , as well as a very violent affection for you daughter . if this be the case , I think the picture which I shall lay before he will affect he . Endeavour , madam , to comfort yourself , and , as well as you can . I will go instantly in quest of ; and I hope to bring you good news . " fall upon she knee and invoke all the blessing of heaven upon ; to which she afterwards add the most passionate expression of gratitude . he then depart to find , and the good woman return to comfort she daughter , who be somewhat chear at what she mother tell she ; and both join in
in resoun the praise of . chapter vii . the interview between and . the good or evil we confer on other very often , I believe , recoil on ourselves . for as man of a benign disposition enjoy they own act of beneficence equally with those to whom they be do , so there be scarce any nature so entirely diabolical , as to be capable of do injury , without pay themselves some pang for the ruin which they bring on they fellow - creature . , at least , be not such a person . on the contrary , find he in he new lodging , sit melancholy by the fire , and silently lament the unhappy situation in which he have place poor . he no sooner see he friend appear than he arise hastily to meet he ; and after much congratulation say , " nothing could be more opportune than this kind visit ; for I be never more in the spleen in my life . " " I be sorry , " answer , " that I bring news very unlikely to relieve you : nay , what I be convince must , of all other , shock you the most . however , it be necessary you should know it . without further preface , then , I come to you , , from a worthy family , which you have involve in misery and ruin . " change colour at these word ; but , without regard it , proceed , in the liveliest manner , to paint the tragical story with which the reader be acquaint in the last chapter . Nightingale never once interrupt the narration , though he discover violent emotion at many part of it . but when it be conclude , after fetch a deep sigh , he say , " what you tell I , my friend , affect I in the tenderest manner . sure there never be so curse a accident as the poor girl 's betraie my letter . she reputation might otherwise have be safe , and the affair might have remain a profound secret ; and then the girl might have go off never the worse ; for many such thing happen in this town : and if the husband should suspect a little , when it be too late , it will be he wiser conduct to conceal he suspicion both from he wife and the world . " " indeed , my friend , " answer , " this could not have be the case with you poor . you have so entirely gain she affections , that it be the loss of you , and not of she reputation , which afflict she , and will end in the destruction of she and she family . " " Nay , for that matter , I promise you , " cry , " she hath my affections so absolutely , that my wife , whoever she be to be , will have very little share in they . " " and be it possible then , " say , " you can think of desert she ? " " why , what can I do ? " answer the other . " ask , " reply warmly . " in the condition to which you have reduce she , I sincerely think she ought to determine what reparation you shall make she . she interest alone , and not yours , ought to be you sole consideration . but if you ask I what you shall do , what can you do less , " cry , " than fulfil the expectation of she family , and she own ? Nay , I sincerely tell you , they be mine too , ever since I first see you together . you will pardon I if I presume on the friendship you have favour I with , move as I be with compassion for those poor creature . but you own heart will best suggest to you , whether you have never intend , by you conduct , to persuade the mother , as well as the daughter , into a opinion , that you design honourably : and if so , though there may have be no direct promise of marriage in the case , I will leave to you own good understanding , how far you be bound to proceed . " " Nay , I must not only confess what you have hint , " say ; " but I be afraid even that very promise you mention I have give . " " and can you , after own that , " say , " hesitate a moment ? " " consider , my friend , " answer the other ; " I know you be a man of honour , and would advise no one to act contrary to its rule ; if there be no other objection , can I , after this publication of she disgrace , think of such a alliance with honou ? " " undoubtedly , " reply , " and the very best and truest honour , which be goodness , require it of you . as you mention a scruple of this kind , you will give I leave to examine it . can you with honou be guilty of have under false pretence deceive a young woman and she family , and of have by these means treacherously rob she of she innocence ? can you , with honour , be the know , the wilful occasion , nay , the artful contriver of the ruin of a human being ? can you , with honou , destroy the fame , the peace , nay , probably , both the life and soul too , of this creature ? can honou bear the thought , that
that this creature be a tender , helpless , defenceless , young woman ? a young woman , who love , who doat on you , who die for you ; who hath place the utmost confidence in you promise ; and to that confidence hath sacrifice everything which be dear to she ? can honou support such contemplation as these a moment ? " " common sense , indeed , " say , " warrant all you say ; but yet you well know the opinion of the world be so contrary to it , that , be I to marry a whore , though my own , I should be asham of ever show my face again . " " Fie upon it , ! " say , " do not call she by so ungenerous a name : when you promise to marry she she become you wife ; and she hath sinn more against prudence than virtue . and what be this world which you would be asham to face but the vile , the foolish , and the profligate ? forgive I if I say such a shame must proceed from false modesty , which always attend false honour as its shadow .-- but I be well assure there be not a man of real sense and goodness in the world who would not honour and applaud the action . but , admit no other would , would not you own heart , my friend , applaud it ? and do not the warm , rapturous sensation , which we feel from the consciousness of a honest , noble , generous , benevolent action , convey more delight to the mind than the undeserved praise of million ? set the alternative fairly before you eye . on the one side , see this poor , unhappy , tender , believe girl , in the arm of she wretch mother , breathe she last . hear she break heart in agony , sigh out you name ; and lament , rather than accusing , the cruelty which weigh she down to destruction . paint to you imagination the circumstance of she fond despairing parent , drive to madness , or , perhaps , to death , by the loss of she lovely daughter . View the poor , helpless , orphan infant ; and when you mind hath dwelt a moment only on such idea , consider yourself as the cause of all the ruin of this poor , little , worthy , defenceless family . on the other side , consider yourself as relieive they from they temporary suffering . think with what joy , with what transport that lovely creature will fly to you arm . see she blood return to she pale cheek , she fire to she languid eye , and rapture to she torture breast . consider the exultation of she mother , the happiness of all . think of this little family make by one act of yours completely happy . think of this alternative , and sure I be mistaken in my friend if it require any long deliberation whether he will sink these wretch down for ever , or , by one generous , noble resolution , raise they all from the brink of misery and despair to the highest pitch of human happiness . add to this but one consideration more ; the consideration that it be you duty so to do -- that the misery from which you will relieve these poor people be the misery which you yourself have wilfully bring upon they . " " o , my dear friend ! " cry , " I want not you eloquence to rouse I . I pity poor from my soul , and would willingly give anything in my power that no familiarity have ever pass between we . Nay , believe I , I have many struggle with my passion before I could prevail with myself to write that cruel letter , which hath cause all the misery in that unhappy family . if I have no inclination to consult but my own , I would marry she to - morrow morning : I would , by heaven ! but you will easily imagine how impossible it would be to prevail on my father to consent to such a match ; besides , he hath provide another for I ; and to - morrow , by he express command , I be to wait on the lady . " " I have not the honour to know you father , " say ; " but , suppose he could be persuade , would you yourself consent to the only means of preserve these poor people ? " " as eagerly as I would pursue my happiness , " answer : " for I never shall find it in any other woman .-- o , my dear friend ! could you imagine what I have feel within these twelve hour for my poor girl , I be convince she would not engross all you pity . passion lead I only to she ; and , if I have any foolish scruple of honour , you have fully satisfied they : could my father be induced to comply with my desire , nothing would be want to compleat my own happiness or that of my . " " then I be resolve to undertake it , " say . " you must not be angry with I , in whatever light it may be necessary to set this affair , which , you may depend on it , could not otherwise be long hide from he : for thing of this nature make a quick progress when once they get abroad , as this unhappily hath already . besides , should any fatal accident follow , as upon my soul I be afraid will , unless immediately
immediately prevent , the public would ring of you name in a manner which , if you father hath common humanity , must offend he . if you will therefore tell I where I may find the old gentleman , I will not lose a moment in the business ; which , while I pursue , you can not do a more generous action than by pay a visit to the poor girl . you will find I have not exaggerate in the account I have give of the wretchedness of the family . " immediately consent to the proposal ; and now , have acquaint with he father 's lodging , and the coffee - house where he would most probably find he , he hesitate a moment , and then say , " my dear tom , you be go to undertake a impossibility . if you know my father you would never think of obtain he consent .---- stay , there be one way -- suppose you tell he I be already marry , it might be easier to reconcile he to the fact after it be do ; and , upon my honour , I be so affect with what you have say , and I love my so passionately , I almost wish it be do , whatever might be the consequence . " greatly approve the hint , and promise to pursue it . they then separate , to visit he , and in quest of the old gentleman . chapter viii . what pass between and old ; with the arrival of a person not yet mention in this history . Notwithstand the sentiment of the satirist , which deny the divinity of fortune , and the opinion of to the same purpose ; , who be , I believe , a wiser man than either of they , expressly hold the contrary ; and certain it be , there be some incident in life so very strange and unaccountable , that it seem to require more than human skill and foresight in produce they . of this kind be what now happen to , who find the elder in so critical a minute , that , if she be really worthy all the worship she receive at , could not have contrive such another . in short , the old gentleman , and the father of the young lady whom he intend for he son , have be hard at it for many hour ; and the latter be just now go , and have leave the former delighte with the thought that he have succeed in a long contention , which have be between the two fathers of the future bride and bridegroom ; in which both endeavoure to overreach the other , and , as it not rarely happen in such case , both have retreate fully satisfied of have obtain the victory . this gentleman , whom now visit , be what they call a man of the world ; that be to say , a man who direct he conduct in this world as one who , be fully persuade there be no other , be resolved to make the most of this . in he early year he have be breed to trade ; but , have acquire a very good fortune , he have lately decline he business ; or , to speak more properly , have change it from dealing in goods , to deal only in money , of which he have always a plentiful fund at command , and of which he know very well how to make a very plentiful advantage , sometimes of the necessity of private man , and sometimes of those of the public . he have indeed converse so entirely with money , that it may be almost doubt whether he imagine there be any other thing really exist in the world ; this at least may be certainly averred , that he firmly believe nothing else to have any real value . the reader will , I fancy , allow that Fortune could not have cull out a more improper person for to attack with any probability of success ; nor could the whimsical lady have direct this attack at a more unseasonable time . as money then be always uppermost in this gentleman 's thought , so the moment he see a stranger within he door it immediately occur to he imagination , that such stranger be either come to bring he money , or to fetch it from he . and accord as one or other of these thought prevail , he conceive a favourable or unfavourable idea of the person who approached he . Unluckily for , the latter of these be the ascendant at present ; for as a young gentleman have visit he the day before , with a bill from he son for a play debt , he apprehend , at the first sight of , that he be come on such another errand . therefore have no sooner tell he that he be come on he son 's account than the old gentleman , be confirm in he suspicion , burst forth into a exclamation , " that he would lose he labour . " " be it then possible , sir , " answer , " that you can guess my business ? " " if I do guess it , " reply the other , " I repeat again to you , you will lose you labour . what , I suppose you be one of those spark who lead my son into all those scene of riot and debauchery , which will be he destruction ? but I shall pay no more of he bill , I promise you . I expect he will quit all such company for the future . if I have imagine otherwise ,
, I should not have provide a wife for he ; for I would be instrumental in the ruin of nobody . " " how , sir , " say , " and be this lady of you provide ? " " pray , sir , " answer the old gentleman , " how come it to be any concern of yours ? " -- " Nay , dear sir , " reply , " be not offend that I interest myself in what regard you son 's happiness , for whom I have so great a honour and value . it be upon that very account I come to wait upon you . I can not express the satisfaction you have give I by what you say ; for I do assure you you son be a person for whom I have the highest honour .-- , sir , it be not easy to express the esteem I have for you ; who could be so generous , so good , so kind , so indulgent to provide such a match for you son ; a woman , who , I dare swear , will make he one of the happiest man upon earth . " there be scarce anything which so happily introduce man to we good liking , as have conceive some alarm at they first appearance ; when once those apprehension begin to vanish we soon forget the fear which they occasion , and look on ourselves as indebt for we present ease to those very person who at first raise we fear . thus it happen to , who no sooner find that have no demand on he , as he suspect , than he begin to be pleased with he presence . " pray , good sir , " say he , " be pleased to sit down . I do not remember to have ever have the pleasure of see you before ; but if you be a friend of my son , and have anything to say concern this young lady , I shall be glad to hear you . as to she make he happy , it will be he own fault if she doth not . I have discharge my duty , in take care of the main article . she will bring he a fortune capable of make any reasonable , prudent , sober man , happy . " " undoubtedly , " cry , " for she be in herself a fortune ; so beautiful , so genteel , so sweet - tempered , and so well - educated ; she be indeed a most accomplished young lady ; sings admirably well , and hath a most delicate hand at the harpsichord . " " I do not know any of these matters , " answer the old gentleman , " for I never see the lady : but I do not like she the worse for what you tell I ; and I be the better pleas with she father for not lay any stress on these qualification in we bargain . I shall always think it a proof of he understanding . a silly fellow would have bring in these article as a addition to she fortune ; but , to give he he due , he never mention any such matter ; though to be sure they be no disparagement to a woman . " " I do assure you , sir , " cry , " she hath they all in the most eminent degree : for my part , I own I be afraid you might have be a little backward , a little less inclin to the match ; for you son tell I you have never see the lady ; therefore I come , sir , in that case , to entreat you , to conjure you , as you value the happiness of you son , not to be averse to he match with a woman who hath not only all the good quality I have mention , but many more . " --" if that be you business , sir , " say the old gentleman , " we be both oblige to you ; and you may be perfectly easy ; for I give you my word I be very well satisfied with she fortune . " " , " answer , " I honour you every moment more and more . to be so easily satisfied , so very moderate on that account , be a proof of the soundness of you understanding , as well as the nobleness of you mind . " ----" not so very moderate , young gentleman , not so very moderate , " answer the father .--" still more and more noble , " reply ; " and give I leave to add , sensible : for sure it be little less than madness to consider money as the sole foundation of happiness . such a woman as this with she little , she nothing of a fortune " --" I find , " cry the old gentleman , " you have a pretty just opinion of money , my friend , or else you be better acquainted with the person of the lady than with she circumstance . why , pray , what fortune do you imagine this lady to have ? " " what fortune ? " cry , " why , too contemptible a one to be name for you son . " --" well , well , well , " say the other , " perhaps he might have do better . " --" that I deny , " say , " for she be one of the best of woman . " -- " ay , ay , but in point of fortune I mean , " answer the other . " and yet , as to
to that now , how much do you imagine you friend be to have ? " --" how much ? " cry , " how much ? why , at the utmost , perhaps  200 . " " do you mean to banter I , young gentleman ? " say the father , a little angry . " no , upon my soul , " answer , " I be in earnest : nay , I believe I have go to the utmost farthing . if I do the lady a injury , I ask she pardon . " " indeed you do , " cry the father ; " I be certain she hath fifty time that sum , and she shall produce fifty to that before I consent that she shall marry my son . " " Nay , " say , " it be too late to talk of consent now ; if she have not fifty farthing you son be married . " --" my son marry ! " answer the old gentleman , with surprize . " Nay , " say , " I think you be unacquainted with it . " " my son marry to ! " answer he again . " to ! " say ; " no , sir ; to , the daughter of , at whose house he lod ; a young lady , who , though she mother be reduce to let lodging --" -- " be you banter , or be you in earnest ? " cry the father , with a most solemn voice . " indeed , sir , " answer , " I scorn the character of a banterer . I come to you in most serious earnest , imagining , as I find true , that you son have never da acquaint you with a match so much inferior to he in point of fortune , though the reputation of the lady will suffer it no longer to remain a secret . " while the father stood like one struck suddenly dumb at this news , a gentleman come into the room , and salute he by the name of brother . but though these two be in consanguinity so nearly related , they be in they disposition almost the opposite to each other . the brother who now arrive have likewise be breed to trade , in which he no sooner see himself worth  6000 than he purchase a small estate with the greatest part of it , and retire into the country ; where he marry the daughter of a unbeneficed clergyman ; a young lady , who , though she have neither beauty nor fortune , have recommend herself to he choice entirely by she good humour , of which she possess a very large share . with this woman he have , during twenty - five year , live a life more resembl the model which certain poet ascribe to the golden age , than any of those pattern which be furnish by the present time . by she he have four child , but none of they arrive at maturity , except only one daughter , whom , in vulgar language , he and he wife have spoil ; that be , have educate with the utmost tenderness and fondness , which she return to such a degree , that she have actually refuse a very extraordinary match with a gentleman a little turn of forty , because she could not bring herself to part with she parent . the young lady whom have intend for he son be a near neighbour of he brother , and a acquaintance of he niece ; and in reality it be upon the account of he project match that he be now come to town ; not , indeed , to forward , but to dissuade he brother from a purpose which he conceive would inevitably ruin he nephew ; for he foresee no other event from a union with , notwithstand the largeness of she fortune , as neither she person nor mind seem to he to promise any kind of matrimonial felicity : for she be very tall , very thin , very ugly , very affected , very silly , and very ill - natured . he brother , therefore , no sooner mention the marriage of he nephew with , than he exprest the utmost satisfaction ; and when the father have very bitterly revil he son , and pronounce sentence of beggary upon he , the uncle begin in the follow manner : " if you be a little cooler , brother , I would ask you whether you love you son for he sake or for you own . you would answer , I suppose , and so I suppose you think , for he sake ; and doubtless it be he happiness which you intend in the marriage you propose for he . " now , brother , to prescribe rule of happiness to other hath always appear to I very absurd , and to insist on do this , very tyrannical . it be a vulgar error , I know ; but it be , nevertheless , a error . and if this be absurd in other thing , it be mostly so in the affair of marriage , the happiness of which depend entirely on the affection which subsist between the party . " I have therefore always think it unreasonable in parent to desire to chuse for they child on this occasion ; since to force affection be a impossible attempt ; nay , so much doth love abhor force , that I know not whether , through a unfortunate but uncurable perverseness in we nature , it may not be even impatient of persuasion . " it be , however , true that , though a parent will not
not , I think , wisely prescribe , he ought to be consult on this occasion ; and , in strictness , perhaps , should at least have a negative voice . my nephew , therefore , I own , in marrying , without ask you advice , hath be guilty of a fault . but , honestly speak , brother , have you not a little promote this fault ? have not you frequent declaration on this subject give he a moral certainty of you refusal , where there be any deficiency in point of fortune ? , doth not you present anger arise solly from that deficiency ? and if he hath fail in he duty here , do you not as much exceed that authority when you absolutely bargain with he for a woman , without he knowledge , whom you yourself never see , and whom , if you have see and know as well as , it must have be madness in you to have ever think of bring she into you family ? " still I own my nephew in a fault ; but surely it be not a unpardonable fault . he hath act indeed without you consent , in a matter in which he ought to have ask it , but it be in a matter in which he interest be principally concerned ; you yourself must and will acknowledge that you consult he interest only , and if he unfortunately differ from you , and hath be mistaken in he notion of happiness , will you , brother , if you love you son , carry he still wider from the point ? will you increase the ill consequence of he simple choice ? will you endeaavor to make a event certain misery to he , which may accidentally prove so ? in a word , brother , because he hath put it out of you power to make he circumstance as affluent as you would , will you distress they as much as you can ? " by the force of the true faith win upon the fish . and go a little farther , and by the charms of music enchant thing merely inanimate . wonderful , both ! but neither history nor fable have ever yet venture to record a instance of any one , who , by force of argument and reason , hath triumph over habitual avarice . , the father , instead of attempt to answer he brother , contente himself with only observe , that they have always differed in they sentiment concern the education of they child . " I wish , " say he , " brother , you would have confine you care to you own daughter , and never have trouble yourself with my son , who hath , I believe , as little profit by you precept , as by you example . " for young be he uncle 's godson , and have live more with he than with he father . so that the uncle have often declare he love he nephew almost equally with he own child . fall into rapture with this good gentleman ; and when , after much persuasion , they find the father grow still more and more irritated , instead of appease , conduct the uncle to he nephew at the house of . chapter ix . contain strange matters . at he return to he lodging , find the situation of affair greatly alte from what they have be in at he departure . the mother , the two daughter , and young , be now sit down to supper together , when the uncle be , at he own desire , introduce without any ceremony into the company , to all of whom he be well know ; for he have several time visit he nephew at that house . the old gentleman immediately walk up to , salute and wish she joy , as he do afterward the mother and the other sister ; and lastly , he pay the proper compliment to he nephew , with the same good humour and courtesy , as if he nephew have marry he equal or superior in fortune , with all the previous requisite first perform . and she suppose husband both turn pale , and look rather foolish than otherwise upon the occasion ; but take the first opportunity of withdrawing ; and , have send for into the dining - room , she throw herself at he foot , and in a most passionate flood of tear , call he she good angel , the preserver of she poor little family , with many other respectful and endearing appellation , and make he every acknowledgment which the highest benefit can extract from the most grateful heart . after the first gust of she passion be a little over , which she declare , if she have not vent , would have burst she , she proceed to inform that all matters be settle between and she daughter , and that they be to be marry the next morning ; at which have express much pleasure , the poor woman fall again into a fit of joy and thanksgive , which he at length with difficulty silence , and prevail on she to return with he back to the company , whom they find in the same good humour in which they have leave they . this little society now past two or three very agreeable hour together , in which the uncle , who be a very great lover of he bottle , have so well ply he nephew , that this latter , though not drink , begin to be somewhat flustered ; and now , take the old gentleman with he upstairs into the apartment he have lately occupied , unbosom himself as follow :-- " as
as you have be always the best and kindest of uncle to I , and as you have show such unparalleled goodness in forgive this match , which to be sure may be think a little improvident , I should never forgive myself if I attempt to deceive you in anything . " he then confess the truth , and open the whole affair . " how , ? " say the old gentleman , " and be you really then not marry to this young woman ? " " no , upon my honour , " answer , " I have tell you the simple truth . " " my dear boy , " cry the uncle , kiss he , " I be heartily glad to hear it . I never be better pleased in my life . if you have be marry I should have assist you as much as be in my power to have make the best of a bad matter ; but there be a great difference between consider a thing which be already do and irrecoverable , and that which be yet to do . let you reason have fair play , Jack , and you will see this match in so foolish and preposterous a light , that there will be no need of any dissuasive argument . " " how , sir ? " reply young Nightingale , " be there this difference between have already do a act , and be in honour engage to do it ? " " ! " say the uncle , " honou be a creature of the world 's make , and the world hath the power of a creator over it , and may govern and direct it as they please . now you well know how trivial these breach of contract be think ; even the grossest make but the wonder and conversation of a day . be there a man who afterwards will be more backward in give you he sister , or daughter ? or be there any sister or daughter who would be more backward to receive you ? Honou be not concerned in these engagement . " " pardon I , dear sir , " cry , " I can never think so ; and not only honour , but conscience and humanity , be concerned . I be well satisfie , that , be I now to disappoind the young creature , she death would be the consequence , and I should look upon myself as she murderer ; nay , as she murderer by the cruellest of all methods , by break she heart . " " break she heart , indeed ! no , no , , " cry the uncle , " the heart of woman be not so soon break ; they be tough , boy , they be tough . " " but , sir , " answer , " my own affections be engage , and I never could be happy with any other woman . how often have I hear you say , that child should be always suffer to chuse for themselves , and that you would let my cousin do so ? " " why , ay , " reply the old gentleman , " so I would have they ; but then I would have they chuse wisely .-- indeed , , you must and shall leave the girl . " ----" indeed , uncle , " cry the other , " I must and will have she . " " you will , young gentleman ; " say the uncle ; " I do not expect such a word from you . I should not wonder if you have use such language to you father , who hath always treat you like a dog , and keep you at the distance which a tyrant preserve over he subject ; but I , who have live with you upon a equal footing , might surely expect better usage : but I know how to account for it all : it be all owing to you preposterous education , in which I have have too little share . there be my daughter , now , whom I have bring up as my friend , never doth anything without my advice , nor ever refuse to take it when I give it she . " " you have never yet give she advice in a affair of this kind , " say ; " for I be greatly mistaken in my cousin , if she would be very ready to obey even you most positive command in abandon she inclination . " " do not abuse my girl , " answer the old gentleman with some emotion ; " do not abuse my Harriet . I have bring she up to have no inclination contrary to my own . by suffer she to do whatever she pleasis , I have enure she to a habit of be pleased to do whatever I like . " " , I , sir , " say , " I have not the least design to reflect on my cousin , for whom I have the greatest esteem ; and indeed I be convince you will never put she to so severe a tryal , or lay such hard command on she as you would do on I .-- but , dear sir , let we return to the company ; for they will begin to be uneasy at we long absence . I must beg one favour of my dear uncle , which be that he would not say anything to shock the poor girl or she mother . " " oh ! you need not fear I , " answer he , " I understand myself too well to affro nt woman ; so I will readily grant you that favour ;
; and in return I must expect another of you . " " there be but few of you command , sir , " say , " which I shall not very chearfully obey . " " Nay , sir , I ask nothing , " say the uncle , " but the honour of you company home to my lodging , that I may reason the case a little more fully with you ; for I would , if possible , have the satisfaction of preserve my family , notwithstand the headstrong folly of my brother , who , in he own opinion , be the wisest man in the world . " , who well know he uncle to be as headstrong as he father , submit to attend he home , and then they both return back into the room , where the old gentleman promise to carry himself with the same decorum which he have before maintain . chapter x . a short chapter , which conclude the book . the long absence of the uncle and nephew have occasion some disquiet in the mind of all whom they have leave behind they ; and the more , as , during the preceding dialogue , the uncle have more than once elevate he voice , so as to be hear downstair ; which , though they could not distinguish what he say , have cause some evil forebod in and she mother , and , indeed , even in himself . when the good company , therefore , again assemble , there be a visible alteration in all they face ; and the good - humour which , at they last meeting , universally shine forth in every countenance , be now change into a much less agreeable aspect . it be a change , indeed , common enough to the weather in this climate , from sunshine to cloud , from to . this alteration be not , however , greatly remark by any present ; for as they be all now endeavour to conceal they own thought , and to act a part , they become all too busily engage in the scene to be spectator of it . thus neither the uncle nor nephew see any symptom of suspicion in the mother or daughter ; nor do the mother or daughter remark the overacted complacence of the old man , nor the counterfeit satisfaction which grin in the feature of the young one . something like this , I believe , frequently happen , where the whole attention of two friend be engage in the part which each be to act , in order to impose on the other , neither see nor suspect the art practise against himself ; and thus the thrust of both ( to borrow no improper metaphor on the occasion ) alike take place . from the same reason it be no unusual thing for both party to be overreach in a bargain , though the one must be always the greater loser ; as be he who sell a blind horse , and receive a bad note in payment . we company in about half a hour break up , and the uncle carry off he nephew ; but not before the latter have assure , in a whisper , that he would attend she early in the morning , and fulfil all he engagement . , who be the least concerned in this scene , see the most . he do indeed suspect the very fact ; for , besides observe the great alteration in the behaviour of the uncle , the distance he assume , and he overstrained civility to ; the carry off a bridegroom from he bride at that time of night be so extraordinary a proceeding that it could be account for only by imagine that young Nightingale have reveal the whole truth , which the apparent openness of he temper , and he be flustere with liquor , make too probable . while he be reason with himself , whether he should acquaint these poor people with he suspicion , the maid of the house inform he that a gentlewoman desire to speak with he .---- he go immediately out , and , take the candle from the maid , usher he visitant upstairs , who , in the person of , acquaint he with such dreadful news concern he , that he immediately lose all consideration for every other person ; and he whole stock of compassion be entirely swallow up in reflection on he own misery , and on that of he unfortunate angel . what this dreadful matter be , the reader will be inform , after we have first relate the many preceding step which produce it , and those will be the subject of the follow book . . in which the . I . too short to need a preface . there be a set of religious , or rather moral writer , who teach that virtue be the certain road to happiness , and vice to misery , in this world . a very wholesome and comfortable doctrine , and to which we have but one objection , namely , that it be not true . indeed , if by virtue these writers mean the exercise of those cardinal virtue , which like good housewive stay at home , and mind only the business of they own family , I shall very readily concede the point ; for so surely do all these contribute and lead to happiness , that I could almost wish , in violation of all the antient and modern sage , to call they rather by the name of wisdom , than by that of virtue ; for , with regard to this life , no system , I conceive , be ever wiser than that of the antient , who
who hold this wisdom to constitute the chief good ; nor foolisher than that of they opposite , those modern epicure , who place all felicity in the abundant gratification of every sensual appetite . but if by virtue be mean ( as I almost think it ought ) a certain relative quality , which be always busy itself without - door , and seem as much interested in pursue the good of other as its own ; I can not so easily agree that this be the surest way to human happiness ; because I be afraid we must then include poverty and contempt , with all the mischief which backbiting , envy , and ingratitude , can bring on mankind , in we idea of happiness ; nay , sometimes perhaps we shall be oblige to wait upon the say happiness to a jail ; since many by the above virtue have bring themselves thither . I have not now leisure to enter upon so large a field of speculation , as here seem open upon I ; my design be to wipe off a doctrine that lay in my way ; since , while be act the most virtuous part imaginable in labouring to preserve he fellow -creature from destruction , the devil , or some other evil spirit , one perhaps cloath in human flesh , be hard at work to make he completely miserable in the ruin of he . this therefore would seem a exception to the above rule , if indeed it be a rule ; but as we have in we voyage through life see so many other exception to it , we chuse to dispute the doctrine on which it be founde , which we do not apprehend to be , which we be convince be not true , and which be indeed destructive of one of the noblest argument that reason alone can furnish for the belief of immortality . but as the reader 's curiosity ( if he hath any ) must be now awake , and hungry , we shall provide to feed it as fast as we can . . in which be open a very black design against . I remember a wise old gentleman who use to say , " when child be do nothing , they be do mischief . " I will not enlarge this quaint say to the most beautiful part of the creation in general ; but so far I may be allow , that when the effect of female jealousy do not appear openly in they proper colour of rage and fury , we may suspect that mischievous passion to be at work privately , and attempt to undermine , what it doth not attack above - ground . this be exemplify in the conduct of , who , under all the smile which she wear in she countenance , conceal much indignation against ; and as she plainly see that this young lady stood between she and the full indulgence of she desire , she resolve to get rid of she by some means or other ; nor be it long before a very favourable opportunity of accomplishing this present itself to she . the reader may be pleased to remember , that when be throw into that consternation at the playhouse , by the wit and humour of a set of young gentleman who call themselves the town , we inform he , that she have put herself under the protection of a young nobleman , who have very safely conduct she to she chair . this nobleman , who frequently visit , have more than once see there , since she arrival in town , and have conceive a very great liking to she ; which like , as beauty never look more amiable than in distress , have in this fright so encreased , that he might now , without any great impropriety , be say to be actually in love with she . it may easily be believe , that he would not suffer so handsome a occasion of improve he acquaintance with the beloved object as now offer itself to elapse , when even good breeding alone might have prompt he to pay she a visit . the next morning therefore , after this accident , he wait on , with the usual compliment , and hope that she have receive no harm from she last night 's adventure . as love , like fire , when once thoroughly kind , be soon blow into a flame , in a very short time compleate she conquest . time now fly away unperceived , and the noble lord have be two hour in company with the lady , before it enter into he head that he have make too long a visit . though this circumstance alone would have alarm , who be somewhat more a mistress of computation at present ; she have indeed much more pregnant evidence from the eyes of she lover of what past within he bosom ; nay , though he do not make any open declaration of he passion , yet many of he expression be rather too warm , and too tender , to have be impute to complacence , even in the age when such complacence be in fashion ; the very reverse of which be well kny to be the reign mode at present . have be apprize of he lordship 's visit at he first arrival ; and the length of it very well satisfi she , that thing go as she wish , and as indeed she have suspect the second time she see this young couple together . this business , she rightly I think concluded , that she should by no means forward by mix in the company while they be together ; she therefore order she servants , that when my lord
lord be go , they should tell he she desire to speak with he ; and employ the intermediate time in meditating how best to accomplish a scheme , which she make no doubt but he lordship would very readily embrace the execution of . ( for that be the title of this young nobleman ) be no sooner introduce to she ladyship , than she attack he in the follow strain : " I , my lord , be you here yet ? I think my servants have make a mistake , and let you go away ; and I want to see you about a affair of some importance ." ---- " indeed , , " say he , " I do not wonder you be astonished at the length of my visit ; for I have stay above two hour , and I do not think I have stay above half - a - one . " ----" what be I to conclude from thence , my lord ? " say she . " the company must be very agreeable which can make time slide away so very deceitfully . " ----" upon my honour , " say he , " the most agreeable I ever see . pray tell I , , who be this blazing star which you have produce among we all of a sudden ? " ----" what blaze star , my lord ? " say she , affect a surprize . " I mean , " say he , " the lady I see here the other day , whom I have last night in my arm at the playhouse , and to whom I have be make that unreasonable visit . " ----" o , my cousin western ! " say she ; " why , that blaze star , my lord , be the daughter of a country booby squire , and hath be in town about a fortnight , for the first time ." ---- " upon my soul , " say he , " I should swear she have be breed up in a court ; for besides she beauty , I never see anything so genteel , so sensible , so polite ." ----" of brave ! " cry the lady , " my cousin hath you , I find . " ----" upon my honour , " answer he , " I wish she have ; for I be in love with she to distraction . " ---- " Nay , my lord , " say she , " it be not wish yourself very ill neither , for she be a very great fortune : I assure you she be a only child , and she father 's estate be a good  3000 a - year . " " then I can assure you , madam , " answer the lord , " I think she the best match in . " " indeed , my lord , " reply she , " if you like she , I heartily wish you have she . " " if you think so kindly of I , madam , " say he , " as she be a relation of yours , will you do I the honour to propose it to she father ? " " and be you really then in earnest ? " cry the lady , with a affect gravity . " I hope , madam , " answer he , " you have a better opinion of I , than to imagine I would jest with you ladyship in a affair of this kind . " " indeed , then , " say the lady , " I will most readily propose you lordship to she father ; and I can , I believe , assure you of he joyful acceptance of the proposal ; but there be a bar , which I be almost asham to mention ; and yet it be one you will never be able to conquer . you have a rival , my lord , and a rival who , though I blush to name he , neither you , nor all the world , will ever be able to conquer . " " upon my word , , " cry he , " you have strike a damp to my heart , which hath almost deprive I of being . " " , my lord , " say she , " I should rather hope I have strike fire into you . a lover , and talk of damp in you heart ! I rather imagine you would have ask you rival 's name , that you might have immediately enter the list with he . " " I promise you , madam , " answer he , " there be very few thing I would not undertake for you charming cousin ; but pray , who be this happy man ? " --" why , he be , " say she , " what I be sorry to say most happy man with we be , one of the lowest fellow in the world . he be a beggar , a bastard , a foundling , a fellow in meaner circumstance than one of you lordship 's footman . " " and be it possible , " cry he , " that a young creature with such perfection should think of bestow herself so unworthily ? " " ! my lord , " answer she , " consider the country -- the bane of all young woman be the country . there they learn a set of romantic notion of love , and I know not what folly , which this town and good company can scarce eradicate in a whole winter . " " indeed , madam , " reply my lord , " you cousin be of too immense a value to be
be throw away ; such ruin as this must be prevent . " " Alas ! " cry she , " my lord , how can it be prevent ? the family have already do all in they power ; but the girl be , I think , intoxicate , and nothing less than ruin will content she . and to deal more openly with you , I expect every day to hear she be run away with he . " " what you tell I , , " answer he lordship , " affect I most tenderly , and only raise my compassion , instead of lessen my adoration of you cousin . some means must be find to preserve so inestimable a jewel . Hath you ladyship endeavoure to reason with she ? " here the lady affect a laugh , and cry , " my dear lord , sure you know we better than to talk of reason a young woman out of she inclination ? these inestimable jewel be as deaf as the jewel they wear : time , my lord , time be the only medicine to cure they folly ; but this be a medicine which I be certain she will not take ; nay , I live in hourly horror on she account . in short , nothing but violent method will do . " " what be to be do ? " cry my lord ; " what methods be to be take ?-- be there any method upon earth ?-- oh ! ! there be nothing which I would not undertake for such a reward . " ----" I really know not , " answer the lady , after a pause ; and then pause again , she cry out -- " upon my soul , I be at my wit 's end on this girl 's account . -- if she can be preserve , something must be do immediately ; and , as I say , nothing but violent method will do .---- if you lordship hath really this attachment to my cousin ( and to do she justice , except in this silly inclination , of which she will soon see she folly , she be every way deserve ) , I think there may be one way , indeed , it be a very disagreeable one , and what I be almost afraid to think of .-- it require a great spirit , I promise you . " " I be not conscious , madam , " say he , " of any defect there ; nor be I , I hope , suspect of any such . it must be a egregious defect indeed , which could make I backward on this occasion . " " Nay , my lord , " answer she , " I be so far from doubt you , I be much more inclined to doubt my own courage ; for I must run a monstrous risque . in short , I must place such a confidence in you honour as a wise woman will scarce ever place in a man on any consideration . " in this point likewise my lord very well satisfi she ; for he reputation be extremely clear , and common fame do he no more than justice , in speak well of he . " well , then , " say she , " my lord ,-- I -- I vow , I can not bear the apprehension of it .-- no , it must not be .---- at least every other method shall be try . can you get rid of you engagement , and dine here to - day ? you lordship will have a opportunity of see a little more of .-- I promise you we have no time to lose . here will be nobody but , and , and , and ; they will all go soon -- and I shall be at home to nobody . then you lordship may be a little more explicit . Nay , I will contrive some method to convince you of she attachment to this fellow . " my lord make proper compliment , accept the invitation , and then they part to dress , it be now past three in the morning , or to reckon by the old style , in the afternoon . chapter iii . a further explanation of the forego design . though the reader may have long since conclude to be a member ( and no inconsiderable one ) of the great world ; she be in reality a very considerable member of the little world ; by which appellation be distinguished a very worthy and honourable society which not long since flourish in this kingdom . among other good principles upon which this society be found , there be one very remarkable ; for , as it be a rule of a honourable club of heroe , who assemble at the close of the late war , that all the member should every day fight once at least ; so ' twas in this , that every member should , within the twenty - four hour , tell at least one merry fib , which be to be propagate by all the breth and sisterhood . many idle story be tell about this society , which from a certain quality may be , perhaps not unjustly , suppose to have come from the society themselves . as , that the devil be the president ; and that he sit in person in a elbow - chair at the upper end of the table ; but , upon very strict enquiry , I find there be not the least truth in any of those tale , and that the assembly consiste in reality of a set of very good sort of people , and the fib which they
they propagate be of a harmless kind , and ten only to produce mirth and good humour . be likewise a member of this comical society . to he therefore apply as a proper instrument for she purpose , and furnish he with a fib , which he be to vent whenever the lady give he she cue ; and this be not to be till the evening , when all the company but and himself be gone , and while they be engage in a rubber at whist . to this time then , which be between seven and eight in the evening , we will convey we reader ; when , , , and , be engage at whist , and in the last game of they rubber , receive he cue from , which be , " I protest , , you be grow intolerable lately ; you use to tell we all the news of the town , and now you know no more of the world than if you live out of it . " then begin as follow : " the fault be not mine , madam : it lie in the dulness of the age , that doth nothing worth talking of .----o la ! though now I think o not there hath a terrible accident befall poor .---- .----You know he , my lord , everybody know he ; faith ! I be very much concerned for he . " " what be it , pray ? " say . " why , he hath kill a man this morning in a duel , that be all . " he lordship , who be not in the secret , ask gravely , whom he have kill ? to which answer , " a young fellow we none of we know ; a lad just come to town , one he name be ; a near relation of one , of whom you lordship I believe hath hear . I see the lad lie dead in a coffee - house .-- Upon my soul , he be one of the finest corpse I ever see in my life ! " , who have just begin to deal as have mention that a man be kill , stopt she hand , and listen with attention ( for all story of that kind affect she ) , but no sooner have he arrive at the latter part of the story than she begin to deal again ; and have deal three card to one , and seven to another , and ten to a third , at last dropt the rest from she hand , and fall back in she chair . the company behave as usually on these occasion . the usual disturbance ensue , the usual assistance be summon , and at last , as it be usual , return again to life , and be soon after , at she earnest desire , lead to she own apartment ; where , at my lord 's request , acquaint she with the truth , attempt to carry it off as a jest of she own , and comforte she with repeat assurances , that neither he lordship nor Tom , though she have teach he the story , be in the true secret of the affair . there be no farther evidence necessary to convince Fellamar how justly the case have be represent to he by ; and now , at she return into the room , a scheme be laid between these two noble person , which , though it appear in no very heinous light to he lordship ( as he faithfully promise , and faithfully resolve too , to make the lady all the subsequent amend in he power by marriage ) , yet many of we reader , we doubt not , will see with just detestation . the next evening at seven be appoint for the fatal purpose , when undertake that should be alone , and he lordship should be introduce to she . the whole family be to be regulate for the purpose , most of the servants despatch out of the house ; and for , who , to prevent suspicion , be to be leave with she mistress till he lordship 's arrival , herself be to engage she in a apartment as distant as possible from the scene of the intend mischief , and out of the hearing of . matter be thus agree on , he lordship take he leave , and she ladyship retire to rest , highly pleased with a project , of which she have no reason to doubt the success , and which promise so effectually to remove from be any further obstruction to she amour with , by a means of which she should never appear to be guilty , even if the fact appear to the world ; but this she make no doubt of prevent by huddl up a marriage , to which she think the ravish would easily be bring to consent , and at which all the rest of she family would rejoice . but affairs be not in so quiet a situation in the bosom of the other conspirator ; he mind be tost in all the distracting anxiety so nobly describe by -- " between the acting of a dreadful thing , and the first motion , all the interim be like a phantasma , or a hideous dream ; the genius and the mortal instrument be then in council ; and the state of man , like to a little kingdom , suffer then the nature of a insurrection ." ---- though the violence of he passion have make he eagerly embrace the first hint of this design , especially as it come from a relation of the lady , yet when that friend to reflection , a pillow , have
have place the action itself in all its natural black colour before he eye , with all the consequence which must , and those which might probably attend it , he resolution begin to abate , or rather indeed to go over to the other side ; and after a long conflict , which last a whole night , between honour and appetite , the former at length prevail , and he determine to wait on , and to relinquish the design . be in bed , though very late in the morning , and sit by she bed - side , when the servant acquaint she that be below in the parlour ; upon which she ladyship desire he to stay , and that she would see he presently ; but the servant be no sooner depart than poor begin to intreat she cousin not to encourage the visit of that odious lord ( so she call he , though a little unjustly ) upon she account . " I see he design , " say she ; " for he make downright love to I yesterday morning ; but as I be resolve never to admit it , I beg you ladyship not to leave we alone together any more , and to order the servants that , if he enquire for I , I may be always deny to he . " " ! child , " say , " you country girl have nothing but sweetheart in you head ; you fancy every man who be civil to you be make love . he be one of the most gallant young fellow about town , and I be convince mean no more than a little gallantry . make love to you indeed ! I wish with all my heart he would , and you must be a arrant mad woman to refuse he . " " but as I shall certainly be that mad woman , " cry , " I hope he visit shall not be intrude upon I . " " of child ! " say , " you need not be so fearful ; if you resolve to run away with that , I know no person who can hinder you . " " upon my honour , madam , " cry , " you ladyship injure I . I will never run away with any man ; nor will I ever marry contrary to my father 's inclination . " " well , , " say the lady , " if you be not in a humour to see company this morning , you may retire to you own apartment ; for I be not frightene at he lordship , and must send for he up into my dressing - room . " thank she ladyship , and withdraw ; and presently afterwards be admit upstairs . chapter iv . by which it will appear how dangerous a advocate a lady be when she apply she eloquence to a ill purpose . when hear the young lord 's scruple , she treat they with the same disdain with which one of those sage of the law , call Newgate solicitor , treat the qualm of conscience in a young witness . " my dear lord , " say she , " you certainly want a cordial . I must send to for one of she best dram . Fie upon it ! have more resolution . be you frightene by the word rape ? or be you apprehensive ----? well ! if the story of be modern , I should think it unnatural . I mean the behaviour of , not the fondness of the lady ; for all woman love a man of spirit . there be another story of the lady -- and that too , I thank heaven , be very antient . you lordship , perhaps , will admire my reading ; but I think tell we , they make tolerable good wive 's afterwards . I fancy few of my married acquaintance be ravish by they husband . " " Nay , dear , " cry he , " do not ridicule I in this manner . " " why , my good lord , " answer she , " do you think any woman in would not laugh at you in she heart , whatever prudery she might wear in she countenance ?----You force I to use a strange kind of language , and to betray my sex most abominably ; but I be contente with know my intentions be good , and that I be endeavour to serve my cousin ; for I think you will make she a husband notwithstand this ; or , upon my soul , I would not even persuade she to fl herself away upon a empty title . she should not upbraid I hereafter with have lose a man of spirit ; for that he enemy allow this poor young fellow to be . " let those who have have the satisfaction of hearing reflection of this kind from a wife or a mistress , declare whether they be at all sweeten by come from a female tongue . certain it be , they sink deeper into he lordship than anything which or could have say on the occasion . , perceive she have fire the young lord 's pride , begin now , like a true orator , to rouse other passion to its assistance . " my lord , " say she , in a graver voice , " you will be pleased to remember , you mention this matter to I first ; for I would not appear to you in the light of one who be endeavour to put off my cousin upon you . Fourscore thousand pound do not stand in need of a advocate to recommend they . " " doth , " say
say he , " require any recommendation from she fortune ; for , in my opinion , no woman ever have half she charms . " " yes , yes , my lord , " reply the lady , look in the glass , " there have be woman with more than half she charms , I assure you ; not that I need lessen she on that account : she be a most delicious girl , that be certain ; and within these few hour she will be in the arm of one , who surely doth not deserve she , though I will give he he due , I believe he be truly a man of spirit . " " I hope so , madam , " say my lord ; " though I must own he doth not deserve she ; for , unless heaven or you ladyship disappoind I , she shall within that time be in mine . " " well speak , my lord , " answer the lady ; " I promise you no disappointment shall happen from my side ; and within this week I be convince I shall call you lordship my cousin in public . " the remainder of this scene consist entirely of rapture , excuse , and compliment , very pleasant to have hear from the party ; but rather dull when related at second hand . here , therefore , we shall put a end to this dialogue , and hasten to the fatal hour when everything be prepare for the destruction of poor . but this be the most tragical matter in we whole history , we shall treat it in a chapter by itself . chapter v. contain some matters which may affect , and other which may surprize , the reader . the clock have now struck seven , and poor , alone and melancholy , sit read a tragedy . it be the fatal marriage ; and she be now come to that part where the poor distrest Isabella dispose of she wedding - ring . here the book dropt from she hand , and a shower of tear run down into she bosom . in this situation she have continue a minute , when the door open , and in come . start from she chair at he entrance ; and he lordship advance forwards , and make a low bow , say , " I be afraid , , I break in upon you abruptly . " " indeed , my lord , " say she , " I must own myself a little surprized at this unexpected visit . " " if this visit be unexpected , madam , " answer , " my eye must have be very faithless interpreter of my heart , when last I have the honour of see you ; for surely you could not otherwise have hope to detain my heart in you possession , without receive a visit from its owner . " , confus as she be , answer this bombast ( and very properly I think ) with a look of inconceivable disdain . my lord then make another and a longer speech of the same sort . upon which , trembl , say , " be I really to conceive you lordship to be out of you sense ? sure , my lord , there be no other excuse for such behaviour . " " I be , indeed , madam , in the situation you suppose , " cry he lordship ; " and sure you will pardon the effect of a frenzy which you yourself have occasion ; for love hath so totally deprive I of reason , that I be scarce accountable for any of my action . " " upon my word , my lord , " say , " I neither understand you word nor you behaviour . " " suffer I then , madam , " cry he , " at you foot to explain both , by lay open my soul to you , and declare that I doat on you to the highest degree of distraction . of most adorable , most divine creature ! what language can express the sentiment of my heart ? " " I do assure you , my lord , " say , " I shall not stay to hear any more of this . " " do not , " cry he , " think of leave I thus cruelly ; could you know half the torment which I feel , that tender bosom must pity what those eye have cause . " then fetch a deep sigh , and lay hold of she hand , he run on for some minute in a strain which would be little more pleasing to the reader than it be to the lady ; and at last conclude with a declaration , " that if he be master of the world , he would lay it at she foot . " then , forcibly pull away she hand from he , answer with much spirit , " I promise you , sir , you world and its master I should spurn from I with equal contempt . " she then offer to go ; and , again lay hold of she hand , say , " pardon I , my beloved angel , freedom which nothing but despair could have temp I to take .---- believe I , could I have have any hope that my title and fortune , neither of they inconsiderable , unless when compare with you worth , would have be accept , I have , in the humblest manner , present they to you acceptance .----but I can not lose you .-- by heaven , I will sooner part with my soul !-- you be , you must , you shall be only mine .
. " " my lord , " say she , " I intreat you to desist from a vain pursuit ; for , upon my honour , I will never hear you on this subject . let go my hand , my lord ; for I be resolve to go from you this moment ; nor will I ever see you more . " " then , madam , " cry he lordship , " I must make the best use of this moment ; for I can not live , nor will I live without you . " ---- " what do you mean , my lord ? " say ; " I will raise the family . " " I have no fear , madam , " answer he , " but of lose you , and that I be resolve to prevent , the only way which despair point to I . " -- he then catch she in he arm : upon which she scream so loud , that she must have alarme some one to she assistance , have not take care to remove all ear . but a more lucky circumstance happen for poor ; another noise now break forth , which almost drown she cry ; for now the whole house ring with , " where be she ? d -- and I , I will unkennel she this instant . show I she chamber , I say . where be my daughter ? I know she be in the house , and I will see she if she be above - ground . show I where she be . " -- at which last word the door flew open , and in come Squire western , with he parson and a set of myrmidon at he heel . how miserable must have be the condition of poor , when the enraged voice of she father be welcome to she ear ! welcome indeed it be , and luckily do he come ; for it be the only accident upon earth which could have preserve the peace of she mind from be for ever destroy . , notwithstand she fright , presently know she father 's voice ; and he lordship , notwithstand he passion , kknow the voice of reason , which peremptorily assure he , it be not now a time for the perpetration of he villany . hear , therefore , the voice approach , and hear likewise whose it be ( for as the squire more than once roar forth the word daughter , so , in the midst of she struggling , cry out upon she father ) , he think proper to relinquish he prey , have only disorder she handkerchief , and with he rude lip commit violence on she lovely neck . if the reader 's imagination doth not assist I , I shall never be able to describe the situation of these two person when western come into the room . totter into a chair , where she sit disordered , pale , breathless , burst with indignation at ; affright , and yet more rejoiced , at the arrival of she father . he lordship sit down near she , with the bag of he wig hang over one of he shoulders , the rest of he dress be somewhat disorder , and rather a greater proportion of linen than be usual appear at he bosom . as to the rest , he be amaze , affright , vex , and asham . as to , he happen at this time to be overtake by a enemy , which very frequently pursue , and seldom fail to overtake , most of the country gentleman in this kingdom . he be , literally speak , drink ; which circumstance , together with he natural impetuosity , could produce no other effect than he run immediately up to he daughter , upon whom he fall foul with he tongue in the most inveterate manner ; nay , he have probably commit violence with he hand , have not the parson interpose , say , " for heaven 's sake , sir , animadvert that you be in the house of a great lady . let I beg you to mitigate you wrath ; it should minister a fulness of satisfaction that you have find you daughter ; for as to revenge , it belongeth not unto we . I discern great contrition in the countenance of the young lady . I stand assure , if you will forgive she , she will repent she of all past offence , and return unto she duty . " the strength of the parson 's arm have at first be of more service than the strength of he rhetoric . however , he last word wrotch some effect , and the squire answer , " I will forgee she if she wull ha un . if wot ha un , , I will forgee thee all . why dost unt speak ? Shat ha un ! -- and I , shat ha un ! why dost unt answer ? be ever such a stubborn tuoad ? " " let I intreat you , sir , to be a little more moderate , " say the parson ; " you frighten the young lady so , that you deprive she of all power of utterance . " " power of mine a --, " answer the squire . " you take she part then , you do ? a pretty parson , truly , to side with a undutiful child ! yes , yes , I will gee you a live with a pox . I will gee un to the devil sooner . " " I humbly crave you pardon , " say the parson ; " I assure you worship I mean no such matter . " my
my now enter the room , and come up to the squire , who no sooner see she , than , resolve to follow the instruction of he sister , he make she a very civil bow , in the rural manner , and pay she some of he best compliment . he then immediately proceed to he complaint , and say , " there , my lady cousin ; there stand the most undutiful child in the world ; she hanker after a beggarly rascal , and will not marry one of the greatest match in all , that we have provide for she . " " indeed , cousin western , " answer the lady , " I be persuade you wrong my cousin . I be sure she hath a better understanding . I be convince she will not refuse what she must be sensible be so much to she advantage . " this be a wilful mistake in , for she well know whom mean ; though perhaps she think he would easily be reconcile to he lordship 's proposal . " do you hear there , " quoth the squire , " what she ladyship say ? all you family be for the match . come , , be a good girl , and be dutiful , and make you father happy . " " if my death will make you happy , sir , " answer , " you will shortly be so . " " it be a lye , ; it be a -- nhave lye , and you know it , " say the squire . " indeed , , " say , " you injure you father ; he hath nothing in view but you interest in this match ; and I and all you friend must acknowledge the highest honour do to you family in the proposal . " " ay , all of we , " quoth the squire ; " nay , it be no proposal of mine . she know it be she aunt propose it to I first .-- , , once more let I beg you to be a good girl , and gee I you consent before you cousin . " " let I give he you hand , cousin , " say the lady . " it be the fashion now - a - day to dispense with time and long courtship . " " ! " say the squire , " what signify time ; will not they have time enough to court afterwards ? people may court very well after they have be a - bed together . " as be very well assure that he be mean by , so , never have hear nor suspect a word of , he make no doubt of he be mean by the father . come up , therefore , to the squire , he say , " though I have not the honour , sir , of be personally known to you , yet , as I find I have the happiness to have my proposal accept , let I intercede , sir , in behalf of the young lady , that she may not be more solicite at this time . " " you intercede , sy ! " say the squire ; " why , who the be you ? " " sir , I be , " answer he , " and be the happy man whom I hope you have do the honour of accepting for a son - in - law . " " you be a son of a benefit ----, " reply the squire , " for all you laced coat . you my son - in - law , and be d -- n' to you ! " " I shall take more from you , sir , than from any man , " answer the lord ; " but I must inform you that I be not use to hear such language without resentment . " " Resent my a --, " quoth the squire . " do not think I be afraid of such a fellow as thee art ! because hast get a spit there dangl at thy side . lay by you spit , and I will give thee enough of meddling with what doth not belong to thee . I will teach you to father - in - law I . I will lick thy jacket . " " it be very well , sir , " say my lord , " I shall make no disturbance before the lady . I be very well satisfied . you humble servant , sir ; , you most obedient . " he lordship be no sooner gone , than , come up to , say , " bless I , sir , what have you do ? you know not whom you have affront ; he be a nobleman of the first rank and fortune , and yesterday make proposal to you daughter ; and such as I be sure you must accept with the highest pleasure . " " answer for yourself , lady cousin , " say the squire , " I will have nothing to do with any of you lord . my daughter shall have a honest country gentleman ; I have pitch upon one for she -- and she shall ha ' un .-- I be sorry for the trouble she hath give you ladyship with all my heart . " make a civil speech upon the word trouble ; to which the squire answer -- " why , that be kind -- and I would do as much for you ladyship . to be sure relation should do for one another . so I wish you ladyship a good night .-- come , madam , you must go along with I by fair means ,
, or I will have you carry down to the coach . " say she would attend he without force ; but beg to go in a chair , for she say she should not be able to ride any other way . " Prithee , " cry the squire , " wout unt persuade I canst not ride in a coach , wouldst ? that be a pretty thing surly ! no , no , I will never let thee out of my sight any more till art marry , that I promise thee . " tell he , she see he be resolve to break she heart . " o break thy heart and be d -- n' , " quoth he , " if a good husband will break it . I do not value a brass varden , not a halfpenny , of any undutiful b -- upon earth . " he then take violent hold of she hand ; upon which the parson once more interfered , begge he to use gentle method . at that the squire thunder out a curse , and bid the parson hold he tongue , say , " at 'nt in pulpit now ? when be a get up there I never mind what dost say ; but I will not be priest - ridden , nor teach how to behave myself by thee . I wish you ladyship a good - night . come along , ; be a good girl , and all shall be well . Shat ha ' un , d -- and I , sant ha ' un ! " appear below - stair , and with a low curtesy to the squire offer to attend she mistress ; but he push she away , say , " hold , madam , hold , you come no more near my house . " " and will you take my maid away from I ? " say . " yes , indeed , madam , will I , " cry the squire : " you need not fear be without a servant ; I will get you another maid , and a better maid than this , who , I would lay five pound to a crown , be no more a maid than my grannum . no , no , , she shall contrive no more escape , I promise you . " he then pack up he daughter and the parson into the hackney coach , after which he mount himself , and order it to drive to he lodging . in the way thither he suffer to be quiet , and entertaine himself with read a lecture to the parson on good manners , and a proper behaviour to he betters . it be possible he might not so easily have carry off he daughter from , have that good lady desire to have detain she ; but , in reality , she be not a little pleased with the confinement into which be go ; and as she project with have fail of success , she be well content that other violent methods be now go to be use in favour of another man . chapter vi . by what mean the squire come to discover he daughter . though the reader , in many history , be oblige to digest much more unaccountable appearance than this of , without any satisfaction at all ; yet , as we dearly love to oblige he whenever it be in we power , we shall now proceed to show by what method the squire discover where he daughter be . in the third chapter , then , of the preceding book , we give a hint ( for it be not we custom to unfold at any time more than be necessary for the occasion ) that , who be very desirous of reconcile she uncle and aunt western , think she have a probable opportunity , by the service of preserve from commit the same crime which have draw on herself the anger of she family . after much deliberation , therefore , she resolve to inform she aunt western where she cousin be , and accordingly she writ the follow letter , which we shall give the reader at length , for more reason than one . " , " the occasion of my write this will perhaps make a letter of mine agreeable to my dear aunt , for the sake of one of she niece , though I have little reason to hope it will be so on the account of another . " without more apology , as I be come to throw my unhappy self at you foot , I meet , by the strangest accident in the world , my cousin , whose history you be better acquaint with than myself , though , alas ! I know infinitely too much ; enough indeed to satisfy I , that unless she be immediately prevent , she be in danger of run into the same fatal mischief , which , by foolishly and ignorantly refuse you most wise and prudent advice , I have unfortunately bring on myself . " in short , I have see the man , nay , I be most part of yesterday in he company , and a charme young fellow I promise you he be . by what accident he come acquaint with I be too tedious to tell you now ; but I have this morning change my lodging to avoid he , lest he should by my mean discover my cousin ; for he doth not yet know where she be , and it be adviseable he should not , till my uncle hath secure she .---- no time therefore be to be lose ; and I need only inform you , that she be now with , whom I
I have see , and who hath , I find , a design of conceal she from she family . you know , madam , she be a strange woman ; but nothing could misbecome I more than to presume to give any hint to one of you great understanding and great knowledge of the world , besides barely inform you of the matter of fact . " I hope , madam , the care which I have shew on this occasion for the good of my family will recommend I again to the favour of a lady who hath always exert so much zeal for the honour and true interest of we all ; and that it may be a means of restore I to you friendship , which hath make so great a part of my former , and be so necessary to my future happiness . " I be , with the utmost respect , honoure madam , you most dutiful obliged niece , and most obedient humble servant , . " be now at she brother 's house , where she have reside ever since the flight of , in order to administer comfort to the poor squire in he affliction . of this comfort , which she do out to he in daily portion , we have formerly give a specimen . she be now stand with she back to the fire , and , with a pinch of snuff in she hand , be deal forth this daily allowance of comfort to the squire , while he smoak he afternoon pipe , when she receive the above letter ; which she have no sooner read than she deliver it to he , say , " there , sir , there be a account of you lose sheep . Fortune hath again restore she to you , and if you will be govern by my advice , it be possible you may yet preserve she . " the squire have no sooner read the letter than he leape from he chair , throw he pipe into the fire , and give a loud huzza for joy . he then summon he servants , call for he boot , and order the and several other horsis to be saddle , and that parson Supple should be immediately send for . have do this , he turn to he sister , catch she in he arm , and give she a close embrace , say , " Zound ! you do not seem pleased ; one would imagine you be sorry I have find the girl . " " brother , " answer she , " the deepest politician , who see to the bottom , discover often a very different aspect of affair , from what swim on the surface . it be true , indeed , thing do look rather less desperate than they do formerly in , when the be at the gate of ; but there be a delicacy require in this matter , which you will pardon I , brother , if I suspect you want . there be a decorum to be use with a woman of figure , such as , brother , which require a knowledge of the world , superior , I be afraid , to yours . " " sister , " cry the squire , " I know you have no opinion of my part ; but I will show you on this occasion who be a fool . , quotha ! I have not be in the country so long without have some knowledge of warrant and the law of the land . I know I may take my own wherever I can find it . Shew I my own daughter , and if I do not know how to come at she , I will suffer you to call I a fool as long as I live . there be justex of peace in , as well as in other place . " " I protest , " cry she , " you make I tremble for the event of this matter , which , if you will proceed by my advice , you may bring to so good a issue . do you really imagine , brother , that the house of a woman of figure be to be attack by warrant and brutal justex of the peace ? I will inform you how to proceed . as soon as you arrive in town , and have get yourself into a decent dress ( for indeed , brother , you have none at present fit to appear in ) , you must send you compliment to , and desire leave to wait on she . when you be admit to she presence , as you certainly will be , and have tell she you story , and have make proper use of my name ( for I think you just know one another only by sight , though you be relation ) , I be confident she will withdraw she protection from my niece , who hath certainly impos upon she . this be the only method .-- Justice of peace , indeed ! do you imagine any such event can arrive to a woman of figure in a civilised nation ? " " d -- and they figure , " cry the squire ; " a pretty civilised nation , truly , where woman be above the law . and what must I stand send a parcel of compliment to a confound whore , that keep away a daughter from she own natural father ? I tell you , sister , I be not so ignorant as you think I ---- I know you would have woman above the law , but it be all a lye ; I hear he lordship say at size , that no one be above the law
law . but this of yours be law , I suppose . " " , " say she , " I think you dailly improve in ignorance .---- I protest you be grow a arrant bear . " " no more a bear than yourself , sister western , " say the squire .-- " ! you may talk of you civility a you will , I be sure you never show any to I . I be no bear , no , nor no dog neither , though I know somebody , that be something that begin with a benefit ; but pox ! I will show you I have get more good manners than some folk . " " , " answer the lady , " you may say what you please , _je vous mesprise de tout mon coeur ._ I shall not therefore be angry .----Besides , as my cousin , with that odious irish name , justly say , I have that regard for the honour and true interest of my family , and that concern for my niece , who be a part of it , that I have resolve to go to town myself upon this occasion ; for indeed , indeed , brother , you be not a fit minister to be employ at a polite court .-- -- should always be the scene of the tramontane negociation . " " I thank , " cry the squire , " I do not understand you now . you be get to you Hanoverian linguo . however , I will show you I scorn to be behind - hand in civility with you ; and as you be not angry for what I have say , so I be not angry for what you have say . indeed I have always think it a folly for relation to quarrel ; and if they do now and then give a hasty word , why , people should give and take ; for my part , I never bear malice ; and I take it very kind of you to go up to ; for I never be there but twice in my life , and then I do not stay above a fortnight at a time , and to be sure I can not be expect to know much of the street and the folk in that time . I never deny that you know ' all these matters better than I . for I to dispute that would be all as one as for you to dispute the management of a pack of dog , or the find a hare sit , with I . " -- " which I promise you , " say she , " I never will . " -- " well , and I promise you , " return he , " that I never will dispute the t'other . " here then a be struck ( to borrow a phrase from the lady ) between the contende party ; and now the parson arrive , and the horse be ready , the squire depart , have promise he sister to follow she advice , and she prepare to follow he the next day . but have communicate these matters to the parson on the road , they both agree that the prescribe formality might very well be dispense with ; and the squire , have change he mind , proceed in the manner we have already see . chapter vii . in which various misfortune befel poor . affairs be in the aforesaid situation when arrive at 's , and call out from the company , as we have before see , with whom , when she find herself alone , she begin as follow :-- " o , my dear sir ! how shall I get spirits to tell you ; you be undone , sir , and my poor lady 's undone , and I be undone . " " Hath anything happen to ? " cry , star like a madman . " all that be bad , " cry : " oh , I shall never get such another lady ! oh that I should ever live to see this day ! " at these word turn pale as ash , tremble , and stammer ; but go on -- " o ! , I have lose my lady for ever . " " how ? what ! for 's sake , tell I . o , my dear ! " " you may well call she so , " say ; " she be the dearest lady to I . I shall never have such another place ."----" d --n you place ! " cry ; " where be -- what -- what be become of my ? " " ay , to be sure , " cry she , " servants may be d -- n' . it signify nothing what become of they , though they be turn away , and ruin ever so much . to be sure they be not flesh and blood like other people . no , to be sure , it signify nothing what become of they . " " if you have any pity , any compassion , " cry , " I beg you will instantly tell I what hath happen to ? " " to be sure , I have more pity for you than you have for I , " answer ; " I do not d -- and you because you have lose the sweetest lady in the world . to be sure you be worthy to be pitie , and I be worthy to be pitie to : for , to be sure , if ever there be a good mistress ---- " " what hath happen ? " cry , in almost a raving fit . " what ?--
?-- what ? " say : " why , the worst that could have happen both for you and for I .-- she father be come to town , and hath carry she away from we both . " here fall on he knee in thanksgive that it be no worse . " no worse ! " repeat ; " what could be worse for either of we ? he carry she off , swear she should marry ; that be for you comfort ; and , for poor I , I be turn out of door . " " indeed , , " answer , " you frightene I out of my wit . I imagine some most dreadful sudden accident have happene to ; something , compare to which , even see she marry to would be a trifle ; but while there be life there be hope , my dear Honour . woman in this land of liberty , can not be marry by actual brutal force . " " to be sure , sir , " say she , " that be true . there may be some hope for you ; but alack - a - day ! what hope be there for poor I ? and to be sure , sir , you must be sensible I suffer all this upon you account . all the quarrel the squire hath to I be for take you part , as I have do , against . " " indeed , , " answer he , " I be sensible of my obligation to you , and will leave nothing in my power undone to make you amend . " " ! sir , " say she , " what can make a servant amend for the loss of one place but the get another altogether as good ? " " do not despair , , " say , " I hope to reinstate you again in the same . " " - a - day , sir , " say she , " how can I flatter myself with such hope when I know it be a thing impossible ? for the squire be so set against I : and yet , if you should ever have my lady , as to be sure I now hope heartily you will ; for you be a generous , good - natured gentleman ; and I be sure you love she , and to be sure she love you as dearly as she own soul ; it be a matter in vain to deny it ; because as why , everybody , that be in the least acquainted with my lady , must see it ; for , poor dear lady , she can not dissemble : and if two people who love one another a ' not happy , why who should be so ? happiness do not always depend upon what people have ; beside , my lady have enough for both . to be sure , therefore , as one may say , it would be all the pity in the world to keep two such lovier asunder ; nay , I be convinced , for my part , you will meet together at last ; for , if it be to be , there be no prevent it . if a marriage be make in heaven , all the justex of peace upon earth can not break it off . to be sure I wish that have but a little more spirit , to tell the squire of he wickedness in endeavouring to force he daughter contrary to she like ; but then he whole dependance be on the squire ; and so the poor gentleman , though he be a very religious good sort of man , and talk of the badness of such doings behind the squire 's back , yet he dare not say he soul be he own to he face . to be sure I never see he make so bold as just now ; I be afear the squire would have strike he . I would not have you honou be melancholy , sir , nor despair ; thing may go better , as long as you be sure of my lady , and that I be certain you may be ; for she never will be bring to consent to marry any other man . indeed I be terribly afear the squire will do she a mischief in he passion , for he be a prodigious passionate gentleman ; and I be afear to the poor lady will be bring to break she heart , for she be as tender - heart as a chicken . it be pity , methinks , she have not a little of my courage . if I be in love with a young man , and my father offer to lock I up , I would tear he eye out but I would come at he ; but then there be a great fortune in the case , which it be in she father 's power either to give she or not ; that , to be sure , may make some difference . " whether give strict attention to all the foregoing harangue , or whether it be for want of any vacancy in the discourse , I can not determine ; but he never once attempt to answer , nor do she once stop till come run into the room , and inform he that the great lady be upon the stair . nothing could equal the dilemma to which be now reduce . Honou know nothing of any acquaintance that subsist between he and , and she be almost the last person in the world to whom he would have communicate it . in this hurry and distress , he take ( as be common enough ) the
the worst course , and , instead of expose she to the lady , which would have be of little consequence , he choose to expose the lady to she ; he therefore resolve to hide , whom he have but just time to convey behind the bed , and to draw the curtain . the hurry in which have be all day engage on account of he poor landlady and she family , the terror occasion by , and the confusion into which he be throw by the sudden arrival of , have altogether drive former thought out of he head ; so that it never once occur to he memory to act the part of a sick man ; which , indeed , neither the gaiety of he dress , nor the freshness of he countenance , would have at all support . he receive she ladyship therefore rather agreeably to she desire than to she expectation , with all the good humour he could muster in he countenance , and without any real or affect appearance of the least disorder . no sooner enter the room , than she squat herself down on the bed : " so , my dear , " say she , " you find nothing can detain I long from you . perhaps I ought to be angry with you , that I have neither see nor hear from you all day ; for I perceive you distemper would have suffer you to come abroad : nay , I suppose you have not sit in you chamber all day drest up like a fine lady to see company after a lie - in ; but , however , do not think I intend to scold you ; for I never will give you a excuse for the cold behaviour of a husband , by put on the ill - humour of a wife . " " Nay , , " say , " I be sure you ladyship will not upbraid I with neglect of duty , when I only wait for order . who , my dear creature , hath reason to complain ? who miss a appointment last night , and leave a unhappy man to expect , and wish , and sigh , and languish ? " " do not mention it , my dear , " cry she . " if you know the occasion , you would pity I . in short , it be impossible to conceive what woman of condition be obliged to suffer from the impertinence of fool , in order to keep up the farce of the world . I be glad , however , all you languishing and wishing have do you no harm ; for you never look better in you life . upon my faith ! , you might at this instant sit for the picture of . " there be certain word of provocation which man of honou hold can properly be answer only by a blow . among lover possibly there may be some expression which can be answer only by a kiss . now the compliment which now make seem to be of this kind , especially as it be attend with a look , in which the lady convey more soft idea than it be possible to express with she tongue . be certainly at this instant in one of the most disagreeable and distress situation imaginable ; for , to carry on the comparison we make use of before , though the provocation be give by the lady , could not receive satisfaction , nor so much as offer to ask it , in the presence of a third person ; seconds in this kind of duel not be accord to the law of arm . as this objection do not occur to , who be ignorant of any other woman be there but herself , she wait some time in great astonishment for a answer from , who , conscious of the ridiculous figure he make , stand at a distance , and , not da to give the proper answer , give none at all . nothing can be imagine more comic , nor yet more tragical , than this scene would have be if it have last much longer . the lady have already change colour two or three time ; have get up from the bed and sit down again , while be wish the ground to sink under he , or the house to fall on he head , when a odd accident freed he from a embarrassment out of which neither the eloquence of a , nor the politics of a , could have deliver he , without utter disgrace . this be no other than the arrival of young Nightingale , dead drunk ; or rather in that state of drunkenness which deprive man of the use of they reason without deprive they of the use of they limb . and she daughter be in bed , and be smoak he pipe by the kitchen fire ; so that he arrive at 's chamber - door without any interruption . this he burst open , and be enter without any ceremony , when start from he seat and run to oppose he , which he do so effectually , that never come far enough within the door to see who be sit on the bed . have in reality mistaken 's apartment for that in which himself have lod ; he therefore strongly insist on come in , often swear that he would not be keep from he own bed . , however , prevail over he , and deliver he into the hand of , whom the noise on the stair soon summon to he master 's assistance . and now be unwillingly oblige to return to he own apartment , where at the very instant of he
he entrance he hear vent a exclamation , though not a very loud one ; and at the same time see she flinge herself into a chair in a vast agitation , which in a lady of a tender constitution would have be a hysteric fit . in reality the lady , frighten with the struggle between the two man , of which she do not know what would be the issue , as she hear swear many oath he would come to he own bed , attempt to retire to she know place of hiding , which to she great confusion she find already occupy by another . " be this usage to be borne , ? " cry the lady .--" Basest of man ?---- what wretch be this to whom you have expose I ? " " ! " cry Honou , burst in a violent rage from she place of concealment -- " come up !---- Wretch forsooth ?----a poor a wretch as I be , I be honest ; this be more than some folk who be richer can say . " , instead of apply himself directly to take off the edge of 's resentment , as a more experienced gallant would have do , fall to curse he star , and lament himself as the most unfortunate man in the world ; and presently after , address himself to , he fall to some very absurd protestation of innocence . by this time the lady , have recover the use of she reason , which she have as ready as any woman in the world , especially on such occasion , calmly reply : " , you need make no apology , I see now who the person be ; I do not at first know : but now I do , I can suspect nothing wrong between she and you ; and I be sure she be a woman of too good sense to put any wrong construction upon my visit to you ; I have be always she friend , and it may be in my power to be much more hereafter . " be altogether as placable as she be passionate . hear , therefore , assume the soft tone , she likewise soften hers .----" I be sure , madam , " say she , " I have be always ready to acknowledge you ladyship 's friendship to I ; sure I never have so good a friend as you ladyship ---- and to be sure , now I see it be you ladyship that I speak to , I could almost bite my tongue off for very mad .-- I construction upon you ladyship -- to be sure it doth not become a servant as I be to think about such a great lady -- I mean I be a servant : for indeed I be nobody be servant now , the more miserable wretch be I .-- I have lose the best mistress ---- " here Honou think fit to produce a shower of tear .-- " do not cry , child , " say the good lady ; " way perhaps may be find to make you amend . come to I to - morrow morning . " she then take up she fan which lay on the ground , and without even look at walk very majestically out of the room ; there be a kind of dignity in the impudence of woman of quality , which they inferior vainly aspire to attain to in circumstance of this nature . follow she downstair , often offer she he hand , which she absolutely refuse he , and get into she chair without take any notice of he as he stand bow before she . at he return upstairs , a long dialogue past between he and , while she be adjust herself after the discomposure she have undergone . the subject of this be he infidelity to she young lady ; on which she enlarge with great bitterness ; but at last found mean to reconcile she , and not only so , but to obtain a promise of most inviolable secrecy , and that she would the next morning endeavou to find out , and bring he a further account of the proceeding of the squire . thus end this unfortunate adventure to the satisfaction only of ; for a secret ( as some of my reader will perhaps acknowledge from experience ) be often a very valuable possession : and that not only to those who faithfully keep it , but sometimes to such as whisper it about till it come to the ear of every one except the ignorant person who pay for the suppose concealing of what be publickly kny . chapter viii . short and sweet . Notwithstand all the obligation she have receive from , could not forbear in the morning some gentle remonstrance for the hurricane which have happen the precede night in he chamber . these be , however , so gentle and so friendly , professe , and indeed truly , to aim at nothing more than the real good of himself , that he , far from be offend , thankfully receive the admonition of the good woman , express much concern for what have past , excuse it as well as he could , and promise never more to bring the same disturbance into the house . but though do not refrain from a short expostulation in private at they first meeting , yet the occasion of he be summon downstairs that morning be of a much more agreeable kind , be indeed to perform the office of a father to , and to give she in wedlock to , who be now ready drest , and full as sober as many of my reader will think a man ought to be who receive a
a wife in so imprudent a manner . and here perhaps it may be proper to account for the escape which this young gentleman have make from he uncle , and for he appearance in the condition in which we have see he the night before . now when the uncle have arrive at he lodging with he nephew , partly to indulge he own inclination ( for he dearly love he bottle ) , and partly to disqualify he nephew from the immediate execution of he purpose , he order wine to be set on the table ; with which he so briskly ply the young gentleman , that this latter , who , though not much use to drink , do not detest it so as to be guilty of disobedience or want of complacence by refusing , be soon completely finish . just as the uncle have obtain this victory , and be prepare a bed for he nephew , a messenger arrive with a piece of news , which so entirely disconcert and shock he , that he in a moment lose all consideration for he nephew , and he whole mind become entirely take up with he own concern . this sudden and afflicting news be no less than that he daughter have take the opportunity of almost the first moment of he absence , and have go off with a neighbour young clergyman ; against whom , though she father could have have but one objection , namely , that he be worth nothing , yet she have never think proper to communicate she amour even to that father ; and so artfully have she manage , that it have never be once suspect by any , till now that it be consummate . no sooner receive this account , than in the utmost confusion he order a post -chaise to be instantly get ready , and , have recommend he nephew to the care of a servant , he directly leave the house , scarce know what he do , nor whither he go . the uncle thus depart , when the servant come to attend the nephew to bed , have wake he for that purpose , and have at last make he sensible that he uncle be gone , he , instead of accept the kind office tender he , insist on a chair be call ; with this the servant , who have receive no strict order to the contrary , readily comply ; and , thus be conduct back to the house of , he have stagger up to 's chamber , as hath be before recount . this bar of the uncle be now remove ( though young Nightingale know not as yet in what manner ) , and all party be quickly ready , the mother , , , and he love , steep into a hackney - coach , which convey they to 's ; where be , in vulgar language , soon make a honest woman , and the poor mother become , in the purest sense of the word , one of the happiest of all human being . and now , have see he good office to that poor woman and she family bring to a happy conclusion , begin to apply himself to he own concern ; but here , lest many of my reader should censure he folly for thus trouble himself with the affair of other , and lest some few should think he act more disinterestedly than indeed he do , we think proper to assure we reader , that he be so far from be unconcerned in this matter , that he have indeed a very considerable interest in bring it to that final consummation . to explain this seem paradox at once , he be one who could truly say with he in , sum : humani nihil a I alienum puto_ . he be never a indifferent spectator of the misery or happiness of any one ; and he feel either the one or the other in great proportion as he himself contribute to either . he could not , therefore , be the instrument of raise a whole family from the lowest state of wretchedness to the highest pitch of joy without convey great felicity to himself ; more perhaps than worldly man often purchase to themselves by undergo the most severe labour , and often by wad through the deepest iniquity . those reader who be of the same complexion with he will perhaps think this short chapter contain abundance of matter ; while other may probably wish , short as it be , that it have be totally spare as impertinent to the main design , which I suppose they conclude be to bring to the gallow , or , if possible , to a more deplorable catastrophe . chapter ix . contain love - letter of several sort . , at he return home , find the follow letter lie on he table , which he luckily open in the order they be send . letter I . " surely I be under some strange infatuation ; I can not keep my resolution a moment , however strongly make or justly foun . last night I resolve never to see you more ; this morning I be willing to hear if you can , as you say , clear up this affair . and yet I know that to be impossible . I have say everything to myself which you can invent .---- perhaps not . perhaps you invention be stronger . come to I , therefore , the moment you receive this . if you can forge a excuse I almost promise you to believe it . betraye too ---- I will think no more .---- come to I directly .---- this be the third letter I have writ , the two
two former be burnt ---- I be almost inclin to burn this too ---- I wish I may preserve my sense .---- come to I presently . " letter ii . " if you ever expect to be forgive , or even suffer within my door , come to I this instant . " . " I now find you be not at home when my note come to you lodging . the moment you receive this let I see you ;-- I shall not stir out ; nor shall anybody be let in but yourself . sure nothing can detain you long . " have just read over these three billet when come into the room . " well , , " say he , " any news from , after last night 's adventure ? " ( for it be now no secret to any one in that house who the lady be ) . " the ? " answer very gravely .----" , dear , " cry , " do not be so reserve to you friend . though I be too drunk to see she last night , I see she at the masquerade . do you think I be ignorant who the queen of the fairy be ? " " and do you really then know the lady at the masquerade ? " say . " yes , upon my soul , do I , " say , " and have give you twenty hint of it since , though you see always so tender on that point , that I would not speak plainly . I fancy , my friend , by you extreme nicety in this matter , you be not so well acquaint with the character of the lady as with she person . do not be angry , , but upon my honour , you be not the first young fellow she hath debauch . she reputation be in no danger , believe I . " though have no reason to imagine the lady to have be of the vestal kind when he amour begin ; yet , as he be thoroughly ignorant of the town , and have very little acquaintance in it , he have no knowledge of that character which be vulgarly call a demirep ; that be to say , a woman who intrigue with every man she like , under the name and appearance of virtue ; and who , though some over -nice lady will not be see with she , be visit ( as they term it ) by the whole town , in short , whom everybody know to be what nobody call she . when he find , therefore , that be perfectly acquainted with he intrigue , and begin to suspect that so scrupulous a delicacy as he have hitherto observe be not quite necessary on the occasion , he give a latitude to he friend 's tongue , and desire he to speak plainly what he know , or have ever hear of the lady . , who , in many other instance , be rather too effeminate in he disposition , have a pretty strong inclination to title - tattle . he have no sooner , therefore , receive a full liberty of speak from , than he enter upon a long narrative concern the lady ; which , as it contain many particular highly to she dishonour , we have too great a tenderness for all woman of condition to repeat . we would cautiously avoid give a opportunity to the future commentator on we work , of make any malicious application and of force we to be , against we will , the author of scandal , which never enter into we head . , have very attentively hear all that Nightingale have to say , fetch a deep sigh ; which the other , observe , cry , " ! why , thou be not in love , I hope ! have I imagine my story would have affect you , I promise you should never have hear they . " " of my dear friend ! " cry , " I be so entangle with this woman , that I know not how to extricate myself . in love , indeed ! no , my friend , but I be under obligation to she , and very great one . since you know so much , I will be very explicit with you . it be owe , perhaps , solely to she , that I have not , before this , want a bit of bread . how can I possibly desert such a woman ? and yet I must desert she , or be guilty of the blackest treachery to one who deserve infinitely better of I than she can ; a woman , my Nightingale , for whom I have a passion which few can have a idea of . I be half distract with doubt how to act . " " and be this other , pray , a honourable mistress ? " cry . " Honourable ! " answer ; " no breath ever yet durst sully she reputation . the sweetest air be not purer , the limpid stream not clearer , than she honour . she be all over , both in mind and body , consummate perfection . she be the most beautiful creature in the universe : and yet she be mistress of such noble elevate qualitie , that , though she be never from my thought , I scarce ever think of she beauty but when I see it . " -- " and can you , my good friend , " cry , " with such a engagement as this upon you hand , hesitate a moment about quit such a -- " " hold , " say , " no more abuse of she
she : I detest the thought of ingratitude . " " Pooh ! " answer the other , " you be not the first upon whom she hath confer obligation of this kind . she be remarkably liberal where she like ; though , let I tell you , she favour be so prudently bestow , that they should rather raise a man 's vanity than he gratitude . " in short , proceed so far on this head , and tell he friend so many story of the lady , which he swore to the truth of , that he entirely remove all esteem for she from the breast of ; and he gratitude be lessen in proportion . indeed , he begin to look on all the favour he have receive rather as wage than benefit , which depreciate not only she , but himself too in he own conceit , and put he quite out of humour with both . from this disgust , he mind , by a natural transition , turn towards ; she virtue , she purity , she love to he , she suffering on he account , fill all he thought , and make he commerce with appear still more odious . the result of all be , that , though he turn himself out of she service , in which light he now see he affair with she , would be the loss of he bread ; yet he determine to quit she , if he could but find a handsome pretence : which be communicate to he friend , consider a little , and then say , " I have it , my boy ! I have find out a sure method ; propose marriage to she , and I would venture hang upon the success . " " marriage ? " cry . " ay , propose marriage , " answer , " and she will declare off in a moment . I know a young fellow whom she keep formerly , who make the offer to she in earnest , and be presently turn off for he pain . " declare he could not venture the experiment . " perhaps , " say he , " she may be less shocked at this proposal from one man than from another . and if she should take I at my word , where be I then ? catch , in my own trap , and undone for ever . " " no ; " answer , " not if I can give you a expedient by which you may at any time get out of the trap . " ----" what expedient can that be ? " reply . " this , " answer . " the young fellow I mention , who be one of the most intimate acquaintance I have in the world , be so angry with she for some ill office she hath since do he , that I be sure he would , without any difficulty , give you a sight of she letter ; upon which you may decently break with she ; and declare off before the knot be tye , if she should really be willing to tie it , which I be convince she will not . " after some hesitation , , upon the strength of this assurance , consent ; but , as he swore he want the confidence to propose the matter to she face , he write the follow letter , which dictate :-- " madam , " I be extremely concerned , that , by a unfortunate engagement abroad , I should have miss receive the honour of you ladyship 's command the moment they come ; and the delay which I must now suffer of vindicating myself to you ladyship greatly add to this misfortune . o , ! what a terror have I be in for fear you reputation should be expose by these perverse accident ! there be one only way to secure it . I need not name what that be . only permit I to say , that as you honour be as dear to I as my own , so my sole ambition be to have the glory of lay my liberty at you foot ; and believe I when I assure you , I can never be make completely happy without you generously bestow on I a legal right of call you mine for ever .-- I be , madam , with most profound respect , you ladyship 's most obliged , obedient , humble servant , . " to this she presently return the follow answer : " , " when I read over you serious epistle , I could , from its coldness and formality , have swear that you already have the legal right you mention ; nay , that we have for many year compose that monstrous animal a husband and wife . do you really then imagine I a fool ? or do you fancy yourself capable of so entirely persuade I out of my sense , that I should deliver my whole fortune into you power , in order to enable you to support you pleasur at my expense ? be these the proof of love which I expect ? be this the return for --? but I scorn to upbraid you , and be in great admiration of you profound respect . " p.s. I be prevent from revise :---- perhaps I have say more than I mean .---- come to I at eight this evening . " , by the advice of he privy -council , reply : " , " it be impossible to express how much I be shocked at the suspicion you entertain of I . can have confer favour on a man whom she could believe capable of so base a design ? or can she treat
treat the most solemn tie of love with contempt ? can you imagine , madam , that if the violence of my passion , in a unguarded moment , overcome the tenderness which I have for you honour , I would think of indulge myself in the continuance of a intercourse which could not possibly escape long the notice of the world ; and which , when discover , must prove so fatal to you reputation ? if such be you opinion of I , I must pray for a sudden opportunity of return those pecuniary obligation , which I have be so unfortunate to receive at you hand ; and for those of a more tender kind , I shall ever remain , & c . " and so conclude in the very word with which he have conclude the former letter . the lady answer as follow : " I see you be a villain ! and I despise you from my soul . if you come here I shall not be at home . " though be well satisfied with he deliverance from a thraldom which those who have ever experience it will , I apprehend , allow to be none of the lightest , he be not , however , perfectly easy in he mind . there be in this scheme too much of fallacy to satisfy one who utterly detest every species of falshood or dishonesty : nor would he , indeed , have submit to put it in practice , have he not be involved in a distressful situation , where he be oblige to be guilty of some dishonour , either to the one lady or the other ; and surely the reader will allow , that every good principle , as well as love , plead strongly in favour of . highly exult in the success of he stratagem , upon which he receive many thanks and much applause from he friend . he answer , " dear Tom , we have confer very different obligation on each other . to I you owe the regain you liberty ; to you I owe the loss of mine . but if you be as happy in the one instance as I be in the other , I promise you we be the two happiest fellow in . " the two gentleman be now summon down to dinner , where , who perform herself the office of cook , have exert she best talents to celebrate the wedding of she daughter . this joyful circumstance she ascribe principally to the friendly behaviour of , she whole soul be fire with gratitude towards he , and all she look , word , and action , be so busied in express it , that she daughter , and even she new son - in - law , be very little object of she consideration . dinner be just end when receive a letter ; but as we have have letter enow in this chapter , we shall communicate its contents in we next . chapter x . Consist partely of fact , and partly of observation upon they . the letter then which arrive at the end of the preceding chapter be from , and the purport of it be , he intention to come immediately to town , with he nephew , and a desire to be accommodate with he usual lodging , which be the first floor for himself , and the second for he nephew . the chearfulness which have before display itself in the countenance of the poor woman be a little clouded on this occasion . this news do indeed a good deal disconcer she . to requite so disinterest a match with she daughter , by presently turn she new son - in -law out of door , appear to she very unjustifiable on the one hand ; and on the other , she could scarce bear the thought of make any excuse to , after all the obligation receive from he , for deprive he of lodging which be indeed strictly he due ; for that gentleman , in conferr all he numberless benefit on other , act by a rule diametrically opposite to what be practise by most generous people . he contrive , on all occasion , to hide he beneficence , not only from the world , but even from the object of it . he constantly use the word and , instead of ; and by every other method he could invent , always lessen with he tongue the favour he confer , while he be heap they with both he hand . when he settle the annuity of  50 a year therefore on , he tell she , " it be in consideration of always have she first - floor when he be in town ( which he scarce ever intend to be ) , but that she might let it at any other time , for that he would always send she a month 's warning . " he be now , however , hurry to town so suddenly , that he have no opportunity of give such notice ; and this hurry probably prevent he , when he write for he lodging , add , if they be then empty ; for he would most certainly have be well satisfi to have relinquish they , on a less sufficient excuse than what could now have make . but there be a sort of person , who , as excellently well remark , direct they conduct by something beyond the fix have and settle rule of vice and virtue in the school , beyond the letter of the law . to these it be so far from be sufficient that they defence would acquit they at the , that they be not even contente , though conscience , the severest of all judg
judg , should discharge they . nothing short of the fair and honourable will satisfy the delicacy of they minds ; and if any of they action fall short of this mark , they mope and pine , be as uneasy and restless as a murderer , who be afraid of a ghost , or of the hangman . be one of these . she could not conceal she uneasiness at this letter ; with the contents of which she have no sooner acquaint the company , and give some hint of she distress , than , she good angel , presently relieve she anxiety . " as for myself , madam , " say he , " my lodging be at you service at a moment 's warning ; and , I be sure , as he can not yet prepare a house fit to receive he lady , will consent to return to he new lodging , whither will certainly consent to go . " with which proposal both husband and wife instantly agree . the reader will easily believe , that the cheek of begin again to glow with additional gratitude to ; but , perhaps , it may be more difficult to persuade he , that have in he last speech call she daughter ( it be the first time that agreeable sound have ever reach she ear ) , give the fond mother more satisfaction , and warm she heart more towards , than he have dissipate she present anxiety . the next day be then appoint for the removal of the new - marry couple , and of , who be likewise to be provide for in the same house with he friend . and now the serenity of the company be again restore , and they past the day in the utmost chearfulness , all except , who , though he outwardly accompany the rest in they mirth , feel many a bitter pang on the account of he , which be not a little heighten by the news of 's come to town ( for he clearly see the intention of he journey ) ; and what greatly aggravate he concern be , that , who have promise to inquire after , and to make she report to he early the next evening , have disappoint he . in the situation that he and he mistress be in at this time , there be scarce any grounds for he to hope that he should hear any good news ; yet he be as impatient to see as if he have expect she would bring he a letter with a assignation in it from , and bear the disappointment as ill . whether this impatience arise from that natural weakness of the human mind , which make it desirous to know the worst , and render uncertainty the most intolerable of pain ; or whether he still flatter himself with some secret hope , we will not determine . but that it might be the last , whoever have love can not but know . for of all the powers exercise by this passion over we minds , one of the most wonderful be that of support hope in the midst of despair . difficulty , improbability , nay , impossibility , be quite overlook by it ; so that to any man extremely in love , may be apply what say of , " the Alps , and Pyrenaeans , sink before he ! " yet it be equally true , that the same passion will sometimes make mountain of molehill , and produce despair in the midst of hope ; but these cold fit last not long in good constitution . which temper be now in , we leave the reader to guess , have no exact information about it ; but this be certain , that he have spend two hour in expectation , when , be unable any longer to conceal he uneasiness , he retire to he room ; where he anxiety have almost make he frantick , when the follow letter be bring he from , with which we shall present the reader _verbatim et literatim ._ " sir , " I shud sartenly haf kale on you a cordin too mi prommiss haddunt itt bin that yohu lashipp prevent mee ; for to bee sur , Sir , you nose very well that evere persun must luk furst at ome , and sartenly such anuther offar mite not have ever hapn , so as I shuld ave justly to , have I not accept of it when she lashipp be so veri kind as to offar to mak mee hur one uman without mi ever askin any such thing , to be sur shee be win of thee best ladi in thee wurld , and pepil who sase to the kontrari must bee veri wiket pepil in thare hart . to bee sur if ever I ave sad any thing of that kine it as bin through ignoren , and I be hartili sorri for it . I nose you onur to be a genteelman of more onur and onesty , if I ever say ani such thing , to repete it to hurt a pore servant that as talwais add thee gratest respect in thee wurld for ure onur . to be yosu win shud kepe wons tung within wons tooth , for no boddi nose what may hapen ; and to bee sur if ani boddi ad tolde mee yesterday , that I shuld haf bin in so gud a plase to day , I shuld not haf beleeve it ; for to be sur I never be a dremd of any such thing , nor shuld I ever have soft after ani other bodi 's plase ; but as she lashipp wass so kine of she one a cord to give it mee without
without askin , to be sur herself , nor no other boddi can blbe mee for exceptin such a thing when it fal in mi waye . I beg ure not to menshion ani thing of what I haf sad , for I wish ure yoOnu all thee gud luk in the wurld ; and I do not cuestion butt thatt you will haf in the end ; butt ass to miself ure onur nose I kant bee of ani farder sarvis to you in that matar , nou bein under thee cumand off anuther parson , and nott mi one mistress , I begg ure yoOnu to say nothing of what past , and belive I to be , sir , ure 's umble servant to cumand till deth , " . " various be the conjecture which Jones entertain on this step of ; who , in reality , have little farther design than to secure within she own house the repository of a secret , which she chose should make no farther progress than it have make already ; but mostly , she desire to keep it from the ear of ; for though that young lady be almost the only one who would never have repeat it again , she ladyship could not persuade herself of this ; since , as she now hate poor with most implacable hatred , she conceive a reciprocal hatred to herself to be lod in the tender breast of we heroine , where no such passion have ever yet find a entrance . while be terrifie himself with the apprehension of a thousand dreadful machination , and deep political designs , which he imagine to be at the bottom of the promotion of , , who hithertoo seem to have be a utter enemy to he match with , try a new method to put a final end to it , by throw a temptation in he way , which in he present desperate situation it see unlikly he should be able to resist . chapter xi . contain curiious , but not unprecedented matter . there be a lady , one , who have often see Jones at the house where he lod , be intimately acquaint with the woman there , and indeed a very great friend to . she age be about thirty , for she own six - and - twenty ; she face and person very good , only inclin a little too much to be fat . she have be marry young by she relation to a old merchant , who , have get a great fortune , have leave off trade . with he she live without reproach , but not without pain , in a state of great self - denial , for about twelve year ; and she virtue be reward by he dying and leave she very rich . the first year of she widowhood be just at a end , and she have past it in a good deal of retirement , see only a few particular friend , and divide she time between she devotion and novel , of which she be always extremely fond . very good health , a very warm constitution , and a good deal of religion , make it absolutely necessary for she to marry again ; and she resolve to please herself in she second husband , as she have do she friend in the first . from she the follow billet be bring to :-- " sir , " from the first day i see you , I doubt my eye have tell you too plainly that you be not indifferent to I ; but neither my tongue nor my hand should have ever avow it , have not the lady of the family where you be lod give I such a character of you , and tell I such proof of you virtue and goodness , as convince I you be not only the most agreeable , but the most worthy of man . I have also the satisfaction to hear from they , that neither my person , understanding , or character , be disagreeable to you . I have a fortune sufficient to make we both happy , but which can not make I so without you . in thus disposing of myself , I know I shall incur the censure of the world ; but if I do not love you more than I fear the world , I should not be worthy of you . one only difficulty stop I : I be inform you be engage in a commerce of gallantry with a woman of fashion . if you think it worth while to sacrifice that to the possession of I , I be yours ; if not , forget my weakness , and let this remain a eternal secret between you and " . " at the reading of this , be put into a violent flutter . he fortune be then at a very low ebb , the source be stopt from which hitherto he have be supply . of all he have receive from , not above five guinea remain ; and that very morn he have be dun by a tradesman for twice that sum . he honourable mistress be in the hand of she father , and he have scarce any hope ever to get she out of they again . to be subsist at she expense , from that little fortune she have independent of she father , go much against the delicacy both of he pride and he love . this lady 's fortune would have be exceed convenient to he , and he could have no objection to she in any respect . on the contrary , he like she as well as he do any woman except . but to abandon , and marry another , that
that be impossible ; he could not think of it upon any account , yet why should he not , since it be plain she could not be he ? would it not be kinder to she , than to continue she longer engage in a hopeless passion for he ? ought he not to do so in friendship to she ? this notion prevail some moment , and he have almost determined to be false to she from a high point of honou : but that refinement be not able to stand very long against the voice of nature , which cry in he heart that such friendship be treason to love . at last he call for pen , ink , and paper , and writ as follow to :-- " madam , " it would be but a poor return to the favour you have do I to sacrifice any gallantry to the possession of you , and I would certainly do it , though I be not disengaged , as at present I be , from any affair of that kind . but I should not be the honest man you think I , if I do not tell you that my affections be engage to another , who be a woman of virtue , and one that I never can leave , though it be probable I shall never possess she . forbid that , in return of you kindness to I , I should do you such a injury as to give you my hand when I can not give my heart . no ; I have much rather starve than be guilty of that . even though my mistress be marry to another , I would not marry you unless my heart have entirely efface all impressions of she . be assure that you secret be not more safe in you own breast , than in that of you most oblige , and grateful humble servant , " . " when we heroe have finish and send this letter , he go to he scrutore , take out 's muff , kiss it several time , and then strut some turn about he room , with more satisfaction of mind than ever any felt in carry off a fortune of fifty thousand pound . chapter xii . a discovery make by . while be exult in the consciousness of he integrity , come cape into the room , as be he custom when he bring , or fancie he bring , any good tiding . he have be despatch that morning by he master , with order to endeaavor , by the servants of , or by any other means , to discover whither have be convey ; and he now return , and with a joyful countenance tell we heroe that he have find the lost bird . " I have see , sir , " say he , " , the gamekeeper , who be one of the servants whom the squire hath bring with he to town . I know he presently , though I have not see he these several year ; but you know , sir , he be a very remarkable man , or , to use a purer phrase , he hath a most remarkable beard , the largest and blackest I ever see . it be some time , however , before could recollect I . " " well , but what be you good news ? " cry ; " what do you know of my ? " " you shall know presently , sir , " answer , " I be come to it as fast as I can . you be so impatient , sir , you would come at the infinitive mood before you can get to the imperative . as I be say , sir , it be some time before he recollect my face . " -- " Confound you face ! " cry , " what of my ? " " Nay , sir , " answer , " I know nothing more of than what I be go to tell you ; and I should have tell you all before this if you have not interrupt I ; but if you look so angry at I you will frighten all of it out of my head , or , to use a purer phrase , out of my memory . I never see you look so angry since the day we leave , which I shall remember if I be to live a thousand year . " -- " well , pray go on you own way , " say : " you be resolve to make I mad I find . " " not for the world , " answer , " I have suffer enough for that already ; which , as I say , I shall bear in my remembrance the longest day I have to live . " " well , but ? " cry . " well , sir , as I be say , it be a long time before he could recollect I ; for , indeed , I be very much alte since I see he . non sum tqualis eram ._ I have have trouble in the world , and nothing alter a man so much as grief . I have hear it will change the colour of a man 's hair in a night . however , at last , know I he do , that be sure enough ; for we be both of a age , and be at the same charity school . be a great dunce , but no matter for that ; all man do not thrive in the world accord to they learning . I be sure I have reason to say so ; but it will be all one a thousand
thousand year hence . well , sir , where be I ?--o --well , we no sooner know each other , than , after many hearty shakes by the hand , we agree to go to a alehouse and take a pot , and by good luck the beer be some of the best I have meet with since I have be in town . now , sir , I be come to the point ; for no sooner do I name you , and tell he that you and I come to town together , and have liv together ever since , than he call for another pot , and swore he would drink to you health ; and indeed he drank you health so heartily that I be overjoyed to see there be so much gratitude leave in the world ; and after we have empty that pot I say I would buy my pot too , and so we drank another to you health ; and then I make haste home to tell you the news . " " what news ? " cry , " you have not mention a word of my ! " " bless I ! I have like to have forgot that . indeed , we mention a great deal about young Madam western , and tell I all ; that be come to town in order to be marry to she . he have best make haste then , say I , or somebody will have she before he come ; and , indeed , say I , , it be a thousand pity somebody should not have she ; for he certainly love she above all the woman in the world . I would have both you and she know , that it be not for she fortune he follow she ; for I can assure you , as to matter of that , there be another lady , one of much greater quality and fortune than she can pretend to , who be so fond of somebody that she come after he day and night . " here fall into a passion with , for have , as he say , betray he ; but the poor fellow answer , he have mention no name : " , sir , " say he , " I can assure you be sincerely you friend , and wish at the more than once ; nay , he say he would do anything in he power upon earth to serve you ; and so I be convince he will . Betray you , indeed ! why , I question whether you have a better friend than upon , except myself , or one that would go farther to serve you . " " well , " say , a little pacified , " you say this fellow , who , I believe , indeed , be enough inclin to be my friend , live in the same house with ? " " in the same house ! " answer ; " why , sir , he be one of the servants of the family , and very well drest I promise you he be ; if it be not for he black beard you would hardly know he . " " one service then at least he may do I , " say : " sure he can certainly convey a letter to my . " " you have hit the nail _ad unguem " cry Partridge ; " how come I not to think of it ? I will engage he shall do it upon the very first mentioning . " " well , then , " say , " do you leave I at present , and I will write a letter , which you shall deliver to he to - morrow morning ; for I suppose you know where to find he . " " o yes , sir , " answer , " I shall certainly find he again ; there be no fear of that . the liquor be too good for he to stay away long . I make no doubt but he will be there every day he stay in town . " " so you do not know the street then where my be lod ? " cry . " indeed , sir , I do , " say . " what be the name of the street ? " cry . " the name , sir ? why , here , sir , just by , " answer , " not above a street or two off . I do not , indeed , know the very name ; for , as he never tell I , if I have ask , you know , it might have put some suspicion into he head . no , no , sir , let I alone for that . I be too cunn for that , I promise you . " " thou be most wonderfully cunn , indeed , " reply ; " however , I will write to my charmer , since I believe you will be cunn enough to find he to - morrow at the alehouse . " and now , have dismiss the sagacious , sit himself down to write , in which employment we shall leave he for a time . and here we put a end to the fifteenth book . . contain the Space of . I . of prologue . I have hear of a dramatic writer who use to say , he would rather write a play than a prologue ; in like manner , I think , I can with less pain write one of the book of this history than the prefatory chapter to each of they . to say the truth , I believe many a hearty curse hath be devote on the
the head of that author who first institute the method of prefixing to he play that portion of matter which be call the prologue ; and which at first be part of the piece itself , but of latter year hath have usually so little connexion with the drama before which it stand , that the prologue to one play might as well serve for any other . those indeed of more modern date , seem all to be write on the same three topic , viz. , a abuse of the taste of the town , a condemnation of all contemporary author , and a eulogium on the performance just about to be represent . the sentiment in all these be very little varied , nor be it possible they should ; and indeed I have often wonder at the great invention of author , who have be capable of find such various phrasis to express the same thing . in like manner I apprehend , some future historian ( if any one shall do I the honour of imitat my manner ) will , after much scratch he pate , bestow some good wish on my memory , for have first establish these several initial chapter ; most of which , like modern prologue , may as properly be prefix to any other book in this history as to that which they introduce , or indeed to any other history as to this . but however author may suffer by either of these invention , the reader will find sufficient emolument in the one as the spectator hath long find in the other . first , it be well know that the prologue serve the critic for a opportunity to try he faculty of hissing , and to tune he cat - call to the best advantage ; by which mean , I have know those musical instrument so well prepare , that they have be able to play in full concert at the first rising of the curtain . the same advantage may be draw from these chapter , in which the critic will be always sure of meeting with something that may serve as a whetstone to he noble spirit ; so that he may fall with a more hungry appetite for censure on the history itself . and here he sagacity must make it needless to observe how artfully these chapter be calculate for that excellent purpose ; for in these we have always take care to intersperse somewhat of the sour or acid kind , in order to sharpen and stimulate the say spirit of criticism . again , the indolent reader , as well as spectator , find great advantage from both these ; for , as they be not oblige either to see the one or read the other , and both the play and the book be thus protract , by the former they have a quarter of a hour longer allow they to sit at dinner , and by the latter they have the advantage of begin to read at the fourth or fifth page instead of the first , a matter by no means of trivial consequence to person who read book with no other view than to say they have read they , a more general motive to read than be commonly imagine ; and from which not only law book , and good book , but the page of and , of and , have be often turn over . many other be the emolument which arise from both these , but they be for the most part so obvious , that we shall not at present stay to enumerate they ; especially since it occur to we that the principal merit of both the prologue and the preface be that they be short . . a whimsical adventure which befel the squire , with the distressed situation of . we must now convey the reader to 's lodging , which be in , where he be place by the recommendation of the landlord at the at ; for at the inn , which be the first he see on he arrival in town , he place he horse , and in those lodging , which be the first he hear of , he deposit himself . here , when alight from the hackney - coach , which bring she from the house of , she desire to retire to the apartment provide for she ; to which she father very readily agree , and whither he attend she himself . a short dialogue , neither very material nor pleasant to relate minutely , then pass between they , in which he press she vehemently to give she consent to the marriage with , who , as he acquaint she , be to be in town in a few day ; but , instead of complying , she give a more peremptory and resolute refusal than she have ever do before . this so incense she father , that after many bitter vow , that he would force she to have he whether she would or no , he depart from she with many hard word and curse , lock the door , and put the key into he pocket . while be leave with no other company than what attend the closest state prisoner , namely , fire and candle , the squire sit down to regale himself over a bottle of wine , with he parson and the landlord of the , who , as the squire say , would make a excellent third man , and could inform they of the news of the town , and how affairs go ; for to be sure , say he , he know a great deal , since the horse of many of the quality stand at he house . in this agreeable society western past that
that evening and great part of the succeed day , during which period nothing happen of sufficient consequence to find a place in this history . all this time past by herself ; for she father swore she should never come out of she chamber alive , unless she first consent to marry ; nor do he ever suffer the door to be unlocked , unless to convey she food , on which occasion he always attend himself . the second morning after he arrival , while he and the parson be at breakfast together on a toast and tankard , he be inform that a gentleman be below to wait on he . " a gentleman ! " quoth the squire , " who the can he be ? do , doctor , go down and see who ' tis . can hardly be come to town yet .-- go down , do , and know what he business be . " the doctor return with a account that it be a very well - drest man , and by the ribbon in he hat he take he for a officer of the army ; that he say he have some particular business , which he could deliver to none but Mr western himself . " a officer ! " cry the squire ; " what can any such fellow have to do with I ? if he want a order for baggage - waggon , I be no justice of peace here , nor can I grant a warrant .-- let un come up then , if he must speak to I . " a very genteel man now enter the room ; who , have make he compliment to the squire , and desire the favour of be alone with he , deliver himself as follow :-- " Sir , I come to wait upon you by the command of my ; but with a very different message from what I suppose you expect , after what past the other night . " " my lord who ? " cry the squire ; " I never hear the name of 'un . " " he lordship , " say the gentleman , " be willing to impute everything to the effect of liquor , and the most trifling acknowledgment of that kind will set everything right ; for as he hath the most violent attachment to you daughter , you , sir , be the last person upon earth from whom he would resent a affront ; and happy be it for you both that he hath give such public demonstration of he courage as to be able to put up a affair of this kind without danger of any imputation on he honour . all he desire , therefore , be , that you will before I make some acknowledgment ; the slightest in the world will be sufficient ; and he intend this afternoon to pay he respects to you , in order to obtain you leave of visit the young lady on the footing of a lover . " " I do not understand much of what you say , sir , " say the squire ; " but I suppose , by what you talk about my daughter , that this be the lord which my cousin , , mention to I , and say something about he court my daughter . if so be that how that be the case -- you may give my service to he lordship , and tell un the girl be dispose of already . " " perhaps , sir , " say the gentleman , " you be not sufficiently apprize of the greatness of this offer . I believe such a person , title , and fortune would be nowhere refuse . " " Lookee , sir , " answer the squire ; " to be very plain , my daughter be bespeak already ; but if she be not , I would not marry she to a lord upon any account ; I hate all lord ; they be a parcel of courtier and Hanoverians , and I will have nothing to do with they . " " well , sir , " say the gentleman , " if that be you resolution , the message I be to deliver to you be that my lord desire the favour of you company this morning in . " " you may tell my lord , " answer the squire , " that I be busy and can not come . I have enough to look after at home , and can not stir abroad on any account . " " I be sure , sir , " quoth the other , " you be too much a gentleman to send such a message ; you will not , I be convince , have it say of you , that , after have affront a noble peer , you refuse he satisfaction . he lordship would have be willing , from he great regard to the young lady , to have make up matter in another way ; but unless he be to look on you as a father , he honou will not suffer he put up such a indignity as you must be sensible you offer he . " " I offer he ! " cry the squire ; " it be a d -- and would lie ! I never offer he anything . " upon these word the gentleman return a very short verbal rebuke , and this he accompany at the same time with some manual remonstrance , which no sooner reach the ear of , than that worthy squire begin to caper very briskly about the room , bellow at the same time with all he might , as if desirous to summon a greater number of spectator to behold he
he agility . the parson , who have leave great part of the tankard unfinished , be not retire far ; he immediately attend therefore on the squire 's vociferation , cry , " bless I ! sir , what be the matter ? " --" ! " quoth the squire , " here be a highwayman , I believe , who want to rob and murder I -- for he hath fall upon I with that stick there in he hand , when I wish I may be d -- n' if I gid un the least provocation . " " how , sir , " say the captain , " do you not tell I I ly ? " " no , as I hope to be save , " answer the squire , " -- I believe I might say , ' Tbe a lie that I have offer any affront to my lord -- but I never say the word , ` you lie . ' -- I understand myself better , and you might have understand yourself better than to fall upon a naked man . if I have a stick in my hand , you would not have da strike I . I would have knock thy lantern jaw about thy ear . come down into yard this minute , and I will take a bout with thee at single stick for a broken head , that I will ; or I will go into naked room and box thee for a belly - full . at unt half a man , at unt , I be sure . " the captain , with some indignation , reply , " I see , sir , you be below my notice , and I shall inform he lordship you be below he . I be sorry I have dirtie my finger with you . " at which word he withdraw , the parson interpose to prevent the squire from stop he , in which he easily prevail , as the other , though he make some effort for the purpose , do not seem very violently bend on success . however , when the captain be depart , the squire send many curse and some menace after he ; but as these do not set out from he lip till the officer be at the bottom of the stair , and grow louder and louder as he be more and more remote , they do not reach he ear , or at least do not retard he departure . poor , however , who , in she prison , hear all she father 's outcry from first to last , begin now first to thunder with she foot , and afterwards to scream as loudly as the old gentleman himself have do before , though in a much sweeter voice . these scream soon silence the squire , and turn all he consideration towards he daughter , whom he love so tenderly , that the least apprehension of any harm happen to she , throw he presently into agony ; for , except in that single instance in which the whole future happiness of she life be concerned , she be sovereign mistress of he inclination . have end he rage against the captain , with swear he would take the law of he , the squire now mount upstairs to , whom , as soon as he have unlocked and open the door , he find all pale and breathless . the moment , however , that she see she father , she collect all she spirit , and , catch he hold by the hand , she cry passionately , " of my dear sir , I be almost frightene to death ! I hope to heave no harm hath happen to you . " " no , no , " cry the squire , " no great harm . the rascal hath not hurt I much , but rat I if I do not ha the la of ' un . " " pray , dear sir , " say she , " tell I what be the matter ; who be it that hath insulte you ? " " I do not know the name o' un , " answer western ; " some officer fellow , I suppose , that we be to pay for beat we ; but I will make he pay this bout , if the rascal hath get anything , which I suppose he hath not . for thor he be drest out so vine , I question whether he have get a voot of land in the world . " " but , dear sir , " cry she , " what be the occasion of you quarrel ? " " what should it be , , " answer the squire , " but about you , ? all my misfortune be about you ; you will be the death of you poor father at last . here be a varlet of a lord , the know who , forsooth ! who hath a taan can like to you , and because I would not gi in my consent , he send I a kallenge . come , do be a good girl , , and put a end to all you father 's trouble ; come , do consent to ha un ; he will be in town within this day or two ; do but promise I to marry un as soon as he come , and you will make I the happiest man in the world , and I will make you the happiest woman ; you shall have the finest cloath in , and the finest jewel , and a coach and six at you command . I promise already to give up half my estate -- od rabbet it ! I
I should hardly stick at give up the whole . " " will my papa be so kind , " say she , " as to hear I speak ? " --" why wout ask , ? " cry he , " when dost know I have rather hear thy voice than the musick of the best pack of dog in .-- hear thee , my dear little girl ! I hope I shall hear thee as long as I live ; for if I be ever to lose that pleasure , I would not gee a brass varden to live a moment longer . indeed , , you do not know how I love you , indeed you do not , or you never could have run away and leave you poor father , who hath no other joy , no other comfort upon earth , but he little . " at these word the tear stand in he eye ; and ( with the tear stream from hers ) answer , " indeed , my dear papa , I know you have love I tenderly , and heaven be my witness how sincerely I have return you affection ; nor could anything but a apprehension of be force into the arm of this man have drive I to run from a father whom I love so passionately , that I would , with pleasure , sacrifice my life to he happiness ; nay , I have endeavoure to reason myself into do more , and have almost work up a resolution to endure the most miserable of all life , to comply with you inclination . it be that resolution alone to which i could not force my mind ; nor can I ever . " here the squire begin to look wild , and the foam appear at he lip , which , observe , beg to be hear out , and then proceed : " if my father 's life , he health , or any real happiness of he be at stake , here stand you resolve daughter ; may heave blast I if there be a misery I would not suffer to preserve you !-- no , that most detest , most loathsome of all lots would I embrace . I would give my hand to Blifil for you sake . " --" I tell thee , it will preserve I , " answer the father ; " it will give I health , happiness , life , everything .-- upon my soul I shall die if dost refuse I ; I shall break my heart , I shall , upon my soul . " -- " be it possible , " say she , " you can have such a desire to make I miserable ? " --" I tell thee noa , " answer he loudly , " d -- and I if there be a thing upon earth I would not do to see thee happy . " --" and will not my dear papa allow I to have the least knowledge of what will make I so ? if it be true that happiness consist in opinion , what must be my condition , when I shall think myself the most miserable of all the wretch upon earth ? " " better think yourself so , " say he , " than know it by be marry to a poor bastardly vagabond . " " if it will contend you , sir , " say , " I will give you the most solemn promise never to marry he , nor any other , while my papa life , without he consent . let I dedicate my whole life to you service ; let I be again you poor Sophy , and my whole business and pleasure be , as it hath be , to please and divert you . " " , , " answer the squire , " I be not to be chouse in this manner . you aunt western would then have reason to think I the fool she doth . no , no , , I would have you to know I have a get more wisdom , and know more of the world , than to take the word of a woman in a matter where a man be concerned . " " how , sir , have I deserve this want of confidence ? " say she ; " have I ever break a single promise to you ? or have I ever be find guilty of a falsehood from my cradle ? " " , , " cry he ; " that be neither here nor there . I be determine upon this match , and have he you shall , -- and I if shat unt . d -- n I if shat unt , though dost hang thyself the next morning . " at repeat which word he clinch he fist , knit he brows , bit he lip , and thunder so loud , that the poor afflict , terrify sunk trembl into she chair , and , have not a flood of tear come immediately to she relief , perhaps worse have follow . western beheld the deplorable condition of he daughter with no more contrition or remorse than the turnkey of Newgate feel at view the agony of a tender wife , when take she last farewel of she condemn husband ; or rather he look down on she with the same emotion which arise in a honest fair tradesman , who see he debtor drag to prison for  10 , which , though a just debt , the wretch be wickedly unable to pay . or , to hit the case still more nearly , he feel the same compunction with a bawd , when some poor innocent , whom she hath ensnar into she hand
hand , fall into fit at the first proposal of what be call seeing company . indeed this resemblance would be exact , be it not that the bawd hath a interest in what she doth , and the father , though perhaps he may blindly think otherwise , can , in reality , have none in urging he daughter to almost a equal prostitution . in this condition he leave he poor , and , depart with a very vulgar observation on the effect of tear , he lock the room , and return to the parson , who say everything he durst in behalf of the young lady , which , though perhaps it be not quite so much as he duty require , yet be it sufficient to throw the squire into a violent rage , and into many indecent reflection on the whole body of the clergy , which we have too great a honour for that sacred function to commit to paper . chapter iii . what happen to during she confinement . the landlady of the house where the squire lod have begin very early to entertain a strange opinion of she guest . however , as she be inform that the squire be a man of vast fortune , and as she have take care to exact a very extraordinary price for she room , she do not think proper to give any offence ; for , though she be not without some concern for the confinement of poor , of whose great sweetness of temper and affability the maid of the house have make so favourable a report , which be confirm by all the squire 's servants , yet she have much more concern for she own interest than to provoke one , whom , as she say , she perceive to be a very hastish kind of a gentleman . though eat but little , yet she be regularly serve with she meal ; indeed , I believe , if she have like any one rarity , that the squire , however angry , would have spare neither pain nor cost to have procure it for she ; since , however strange it may appear to some of my reader , he really doate on he daughter , and to give she any kind of pleasure be the highest satisfaction of he life . the dinner - hour be arrive , carry she up a pullet , the squire himself ( for he have swear not to part with the key ) attend the door . as deposit the dish , some compliment pass between he and ( for he have not see she since she leave the country , and she treat every servant with more respect than some persons shew to those who be in a very slight degree they inferior ) . would have have he take the pullet back , say , she could not eat ; but beg she to try , and particularly recommend to she the egg , of which he say it be full . all this time the squire be wait at the door ; but be a great favourite with he master , as he employment be in concern of the highest nature , namely , about the game , and be accustom to take many liberty . he have officiously carry up the dinner , being , as he say , very desirous to see he young lady ; he make therefore no scruple of keep he master stand above ten minute , while civility be pass between he and , for which he receive only a good - humoured rebuke at the door when he return . the egg of pullet , partridge , pheasant , & c. , be , as well know , the most favourite dainty of . it be therefore no wonder that he , who be a very good - natured fellow , should take care to supply she with this kind of delicacy , at a time when all the servants in the house be afraid she would be starve ; for she have scarce swallow a single morsel in the last forty hour . though vexation hath not the same effect on all person as it usually hath on a widow , whose appetite it often render sharper than it can be render by the air on Bansted downs , or ; yet the sublimest grief , notwithstand what some people may say to the contrary , will eat at last . and , herself , after some little consideration , begin to dissect the fowl , which she find to be as full of egg as have report it . but , if she be pleased with these , it contain something which would have deligh the much more ; for if a fowl with three leg be so invaluable a curiosity , when perhaps time hath produce a thousand such , at what price shall we esteem a bird which so totally contradict all the law of animal oeconomy , as to contain a letter in it be belly ? Ovid tell we of a flower into which be metamorphose , that bear letter on its leave , which Virgil recommend as a miracle to the of he day ; but no age nor nation hath ever record a bird with a letter in its maw . but though a miracle of this kind might have engage all the _Acadmies des in , and perhaps in a fruitless enquiry ; yet the reader , by barely recollect the last dialogue which pass between and , will be very easily satisfied from whence this letter come , and how it find its passage into the fowl . , notwithstand she long fast , and notwithstand she favourite dish be there before she , no sooner see the letter than she immediately
immediately snatch it up , tore it open , and read as follow :-- " madam , " be I not sensible to whom I have the honour of writing , I should endeaavor , however difficult , to paint the horror of my mind at the account bring I by ; but as tenderness alone can have any true idea of the pang which tenderness be capable of feeling , so can this most amiable quality , which my possess in the most eminent degree , sufficiently inform she what she must have suffer on this melancholy occasion . be there a circumstance in the world which can heighten my agony , when I hear of any misfortune which hath befall you ? surely there be one only , and with that I be accurse . it be , my , the dreadful consideration that I be myself the wretch cause . perhaps I here do myself too much honour , but none will envy I a honour which cost I so extremely dear . pardon I this presumption , and pardon I a greater still , if I ask you , whether my advice , my assistance , my presence , my absence , my death , or my torture can bring you any relief ? can the most perfect admiration , the most watchful observance , the most ardent love , the most melt tenderness , the most resign submission to you will , make you amend for what you be to sacrifice to my happiness ? if they can , fly , my lovely angel , to those arm which be ever open to receive and protect you ; and to which , whether you bring yourself alone , or the riche of the world with you , be , in my opinion , a alternative not worth regard . if , on the contrary , wisdom shall predominate , and , on the most mature reflection , inform you , that the sacrifice be too great ; and if there be no way leave to reconcile you father , and restore the peace of you dear mind , but by abandon I , I conjure you drive I for ever from you thought , exert you resolution , and let no compassion for my suffering bear the least weight in that tender bosom . believe I , madam , I so sincerely love you better than myself , that my great and principal end be you happiness . my first wish ( why would not fortune indulge I in it ? ) be , and pardon I if I say , still be , to see you every moment the happiest of woman ; my second wish be , to hear you be so ; but no misery on earth can equal mine , while I think you owe a uneasy moment to he who be , Madam , in every sense , and to every purpose , you devote , . " what say , or do , or thought , upon this letter , how often she read it , or whether more than once , shall all be left to we reader 's imagination . the answer to it he may perhaps see hereafter , but not at present : for this reason , among other , that she do not now write any , and that for several good cause , one of which be this , she have no paper , pen , nor ink . in the evening , while be meditat on the letter she have receive , or on something else , a violent noise from below disturb she meditations . this noise be no other than a round bout at altercation between two person . one of the combatant , by he voice , she immediately distinguished to be she father ; but she do not so soon discover the shriller pipe to belong to the organ of she aunt western , who be just arrive in town , where have , by means of one of she servants , who stopt at the , learn where she brother lod , she drive directly to he lodging . we shall therefore take we leave at present of , and , with we usual good - breeding , attend she ladyship . chapter iv . in which be deliver from she confinement . the squire and the parson ( for the landlord be now otherwise engage ) be smoak they pipe together , when the arrival of the lady be first signify . the squire no sooner hear she name , than he immediately run down to usher she upstairs ; for he be a great observer of such ceremonial , especially to he sister , of whom he stand more in awe than of any other human creature , though he never would own this , nor do he perhaps know it himself . Mrs western , on she arrival in the dining - room , have fling herself into a chair , begin thus to harangue : " well , surely , no one ever have such a intolerable journey . I think the roads , since so many turnpike act , be grow worse than ever . , brother , how could you get into this odious place ? no person of condition , I dare swear , ever set foot here before . " " I do not know , " cry the squire , " I think they do well enough ; it be landlord recommend they . I think , as he know most of the quality , he could best show I where to get among um . " " well , and where be my niece ? " say the lady ; " have you be to wait upon yet ? " " ay , ay , " cry the
the squire , " you niece be safe enough ; she be upstairs in chamber . " " how ! " answer the lady , " be my niece in this house , and do she not know of my be here ? " " no , nobody can well get to she , " say the squire , " for she be under lock and key . I have she safe ; I vetch she from my lady cousin the first night I come to town , and I have take care o' she ever since ; she be as secure as a fox in a bag , I promise you . " " good heaven ! " return , " what do I hear ? I think what a fine piece of work would be the consequence of my consent to you come to tow yourself ; nay , it be indeed you own headstrong will , nor can I charge myself with have ever consent to it . do not you promise I , brother , that you would take none of these headstrong measure ? be it not by these headstrong measure that you force my niece to run away from you in the country ? have you a mind to oblige she to take such another step ? " " z -- ds and the devil ! " cry the squire , dash he pipe on the ground ; " do ever mortal hear the like ? when I expect you would have commend I for all I have do , to be fall upon in this manner ! " " how , brother ! " say the lady , " have I ever give you the least reason to imagine I should commend you for lock up you daughter ? have I not often tell you that woman in a free country be not to be treat with such arbitrary power ? we be as free as the man , and I heartily wish I could not say we deserve that freedom better . if you expect I should stay a moment longer in this wretched house , or that I should ever own you again as my relation , or that I should ever trouble myself again with the affair of you family , I insist upon it that my niece be set at liberty this instant . " this she speak with so commande a air , stand with she back to the fire , with one hand behind she , and a pinch of snuff in the other , that I question whether , at the head of she Amazon , ever make a more tremendous figure . it be no wonder , therefore , that the poor squire be not proof against the awe which she inspir . " there , " he cry , throw down the key , " there it be , do whatever you please . I intend only to have keep she up till come to town , which can not be long ; and now if any harm happen in the mean time , remember who be to be blame for it . " " I will answer it with my life , " cry , " but I shall not intermeddle at all , unless upon one condition , and that be , that you will commit the whole entirely to my care , without take any one measure yourself , unless I shall eventually appoint you to act . if you ratify these preliminary , brother , I yet will endeaavor to preserve the honour of you family ; if not , I shall continue in a neutral state . " " I pray you , good sir , " say the parson , " permit yourself this once to be admonish by she ladyship : peradventure , by communing with young , she will effect more than you have be able to perpetrate by more rigorous measure . " " what , dost thee open upon I ? " cry the squire : " if thee dost begin to babble , I shall whip thee in presently . " " Fie , brother , " answer the lady , " be this language to a clergyman ? be a man of sense , and give you the best advice ; and the whole world , I believe , will concur in he opinion ; but I must tell you I expect a immediate answer to my categorical proposal . either cede you daughter to my disposal , or take she wholly to you own surprizing discretion , and then I here , before , evacuate the garrison , and renounce you and you family for ever . " " I pray you let I be a mediator , " cry the parson , " let I supplicate you . " " why , there lie the key on the table , " cry the squire . " she may take un up , if she please : who hinder she ? " " no , brother , " answer the lady , " I insist on the formality of its be deliver I , with a full ratification of all the concession stipulate . " " why then I will deliver it to you .-- there ' tis , " cry the squire . " I be sure , sister , you can not accuse I of ever deny to trust my daughter to you . she hath a - live wi' you a whole year and muore to a time , without my ever zee she . " " and it would have be happy for she , " answer the lady , " if she have always live with I . nothing of this kind would have happen under my eye . " " ay , certainly , " cry
cry he , " I only be to blame . " " why , you be to blame , brother , " answer she . " I have be often oblige to tell you so , and shall always be obliged to tell you so . however , I hope you will now amend , and gather so much experience from past error , as not to defeat my wisest machination by you blunder . indeed , brother , you be not qualified for these negociation . all you whole scheme of politics be wrong . I once more , therefore , insist , that you do not intermeddle . remember only what be past ."---- " z -- ds and bl -- d , sister , " cry the squire , " what would you have I say ? you be enough to provoke the devil . " " there , now , " say she , " just accord to the old custom . I see , brother , there be no talking to you . I will appeal to , who be a man of sense , if I say anything which could put any human creature into a passion ; but you be so wrongheaded every way . " " let I beg you , madam , " say the parson , " not to irritate he worship . " " Irritate he ? " say the lady ; " sure , you be as great a fool as himself . well , brother , since you have promise not to interfere , I will once more undertake the management of my niece . have mercy upon all affair which be under the direction of man ! the head of one woman be worth a thousand of yours . " and now have summon a servant to show she to , she depart , bear the key with she . she be no sooner gone , than the squire ( have first shut the door ) ejaculate twenty bitch , and as many hearty curse against she , not spare himself for have ever think of she estate ; but add , " now one hath be a slave so long , it would be pity to lose it at last , for want of hold out a little longer . the bitch can not live for ever , and I know I be down for it upon the will . " the parson greatly commend this resolution : and now the squire have order in another bottle , which be he usual method when anything either pleas or vex he , do , by drinking plentifully of this medicinal julap , so totally wash away he choler , that he temper be become perfectly placid and serene , when return with into the room . the young lady have on she hat and capuching , and the aunt acquaint , " that she intend to take she niece with she to she own lodging ; for , indeed , brother , " say she , " these room be not fit to receive a soul in . " " very well , madam , " quoth western , " whatever you please . the girl can never be in better hand than yours ; and the parson here can do I the justice to say , that I have say fifty time behind you back , that you be one of the most sensible woman in the world . " " to this , " cry the parson , " I be ready to bear testimony . " " Nay , brother , " say , " I have always , I be sure , give you as favourable a character . you must own you have a little too much hastiness in you temper ; but when you will allow yourself time to reflect I never know a man more reasonable . " " why then , sister , if you think so , " say the squire , " here be you good health with all my heart . I be a little passionate sometimes , but I scorn to bear any malice . , do you be a good girl , and do everything you aunt order you . " " I have not the least doubt of she , " answer . " she hath have already a example before she eye in the behaviour of that wretch she cousin , who ruin herself by neglect my advice . of brother , what think you ? you be hardly go out of hearing , when you set out for , when who should arrive but that impudent fellow with the odious irish name -- that . he break in abruptly upon I without notice , or I would not have see he . he run on a long , unintelligible story about he wife , to which he force I to give he a hearing ; but I make he very little answer , and deliver he the letter from he wife , which I bid he answer himself . I suppose the wretch will endeaavor to find we out , but I beg you will not see she , for I be determined I will not . " " I zee she ! " answer the squire ; " you need not fear I . I will ge no encouragement to such undutiful wench . it be well for the fellow , she husband , I be not at huome . od rabbit it , he should have take a dance through the horse - pond , I promise un . you zee , , what undutifulness bring volk to . you have a example in you own family . " " brother , " cry the aunt , " you need not shock my niece by such odious repetition .
. why will you not leave everything entirely to I ? " " well , well , I wull , I wull , " say the squire . and now Mrs western , luckily for , put a end to the conversation by order chair to be call . I say luckily , for have it continue much longer , fresh matter of dissension would , most probably , have arisen between the brother and sister ; between whom education and sex make the only difference ; for both be equally violent and equally positive : they have both a vast affection for , and both a sovereign contempt for each other . chapter v. in which receive a letter from , and go to a play with and . the arrival of in town , and the good office which that grateful fellow have promise to do for he old benefactor , greatly comfort in the midst of all the anxiety and uneasiness which he have suffer on the account of ; from whom , by the means of the say , he receive the follow answer to he letter , which , to whom the use of pen , ink , and paper be restore with she liberty , write the very evening when she depart from she confinement : " , " as I do not doubt you sincerity in what you write , you will be pleased to hear that some of my affliction be at a end , by the arrival of my aunt western , with whom I be at present , and with whom I enjoy all the liberty I can desire . one promise my aunt hath insist on my making , which be , that I will not see or converse with any person without she knowledge and consent . this promise I have most solemnly give , and shall most inviolably keep : and though she hath not expressly forbide I write , yet that must be a omission from forgetfulness ; or this , perhaps , be include in the word converse . however , as I can not but consider this as a breach of she generous confidence in my honour , you can not expect that I shall , after this , continue to write myself or to receive letter , without she knowledge . a promise be with I a very sacred thing , and to be extend to everything understood from it , as well as to what be express by it ; and this consideration may , perhaps , on reflection , afford you some comfort . but why should I mention a comfort to you of this kind ; for though there be one thing in which I can never comply with the best of fathers , yet be I firmly resolve never to act in defiance of he , or to take any step of consequence without he consent . a firm persuasion of this must teach you to divert you thought from what fortune hath ( perhaps ) make impossible . this you own interest persuade you . this may reconcile , I hope , to you ; and if it will , you have my injunction to pursue it . accident have lay some obligation on I , and you good intention probably more . , perhaps , be some time kinder to we both than at present . believe this , that I shall always think of you as I think you deserve , and am , , you oblige humble servant , . " I charge you write to I no more -- at present at least ; and accept this , which be now of no service to I , which I know you must want , and think you owe the trifle only to that fortune by which you find it . " [ * ] [ *] , perhaps , the bank - bill for  100 . a child who hath just lear not he letter would have spelt this letter out in less time than take in read it . the sensation it occasion be a mixture of joy and grief ; somewhat like what divide the mind of a good man when he peruse the will of he deceased friend , in which a large legacy , which he distress make the more welcome , be bequeath to he . upon the whole , however , he be more pleased than displease ; and , indeed , the reader may probably wonder that he be displease at all ; but the reader be not quite so much in love as be poor Jones ; and love be a disease which , though it may , in some instance , resemble a consumption ( which it sometimes cause ) , in other proceed in direct opposition to it , and particularly in this , that it never flatter itself , or see any one symptom in a favourable light . one thing give he complete satisfaction , which be , that he mistress have regain she liberty , and be now with a lady where she might at least assure herself of a decent treatment . another comfortable circumstance be the reference which she make to she promise of never marry any other man ; for however disinterest he might imagine he passion , and notwithstand all the generous overture make in he letter , I very much question whether he could have hear a more afflicting piece of news than that be marry to another , though the match have be never so great , and never so likely to end in make she completely happy . that refin degree of Platonic affection which be absolutely detach from the flesh , and be , indeed , entirely and purely spiritual , be a gift confin to the female part of the creation ;
; many of whom I have hear declare ( and , doubtless , with great truth ) , that they would , with the utmost readiness , resign a lover to a rival , when such resignation be prove to be necessary for the temporal interest of such lover . hence , therefore , I conclude that this affection be in nature , though I can not pretend to say I have ever see a instance of it . have spend three hour in reading and kiss the aforesaid letter , and be , at last , in a state of good spirit , from the last - mention consideration , he agree to carry a appointment , which he have before make , into execution . this be , to attend , and she younger daughter , into the gallery at the play - house , and to admit as one of the company . for as have really that taste for humwe which many affect , he expect to enjoy much entertainment in the criticisms of , from whom he expect the simple dictate of nature , unimproved , indeed , but likewise unadulterated , by art . in the first row then of the first gallery do , , she youngest daughter , and , take they place . immediately declare it be the finest place he have ever be in . when the first music be play , he say , " it be a wonder how so many fiddler could play at one time , without put one another out . " while the fellow be ligh the upper candle , he cry out to , " look , look , madam , the very picture of the man in the end of the common - prayer book before the gunpowder - treason service . " could he help observe , with a sigh , when all the candle be light , " that here be candle enough burnt in one night , to keep a honest poor family for a whole twelvemonth . " as soon as the play , which be Hamlet , Prince of , , be all attention , nor do he break silence till the entrance of the ghost ; upon which he ask , " what man that be in the strange dress ; something , " say he , " like what I have see in a picture . sure it be not armour , be it ? " answer , " that be the ghost . " to which reply with a smile , " persuade I to that , sir , if you can . though I can not say I ever actually see a ghost in my life , yet I be certain I should know one , if I see he , better than that come to . no , no , sir , ghost do not appear in such dress as that , neither . " in this mistake , which cause much laughter in the neighbourhood of , he be suffer to continue , till the scene between the ghost and Hamlet , when give that credit to , which he have deny to , and fall into so violent a trembling , that he knee knock against each other . ask he what be the matter , and whether he be afraid of the warrior upon the stage ? " of la ! sir , " say he , " I perceive now it be what you tell I . I be not afraid of anything ; for I know it be but a play . and if it be really a ghost , it could do one no harm at such a distance , and in so much company ; and yet if I be frightened , I be not the only person . " " why , who , " cry , " dost thou take to be such a coward here besides thyself ? " " Nay , you may call I coward if you will ; but if that little man there upon the stage be not frightene , I never see any man frightene in my life . ay , ay : go along with you : ay , to be sure ! who be fool then ? will you ? have mercy upon such fool -hardiness !-- whatever happen , it be good enough for you .----Follow you ? I would follow the devil as soon . Nay , perhaps it be the devil ---- for they say he can put on what likeness he please .-- oh ! here he be again .---- no farther ! no , you have go far enough already ; farther than I would have go for all the king 's dominion . " offer to speak , but cry " Hush , hush ! dear sir , do not you hear he ? " and during the whole speech of the ghost , he sit with he eye fix partly on the ghost and partly on , and with he mouth open ; the same passion which succeed each other in , succeed likewise in he . when the scene be over say , " why , , you exceed my expectation . you enjoy the play more than I conceive possible . " " Nay , sir , " answer , " if you be not afraid of the devil , I can not help it ; but to be sure , it be natural to be surprize at such thing , though I know there be nothing in they : not that it be the ghost that surprize I , neither ; for I should have know that to have be only a man in a strange dress ; but when I see the little man so frightene himself , it be that which take hold of
of I . " " and dost thou imagine , then , , " cry , " that he be really frightened ? " " Nay , sir , " say , " do not you yourself observe afterwards , when he find it be he own father 's spirit , and how he be murder in the garden , how he fear forsook he by degree , and he be strike dumb with sorrow , as it be , just as I should have be , have it be my own case ?-- but hush ! of la ! what noise be that ? there he be again .---- well , to be certain , though I know there be nothing at all in it , I be glad I be not down yonder , where those man be . " then turn he eye again upon , " ay , you may draw you sword ; what signify a sword against the power of the devil ? " during the second act , Partridge make very few remark . he greatly admire the fineness of the dress ; nor could he help observe upon the king 's countenance . " well , " say he , " how people may be deceive by face ! fide fronti_ be , I find , a true say . who would think , by look in the king 's face , that he have ever commit a murder ? " he then enquire after the ghost ; but , who intend he should be surprize , give he no other satisfaction , than , " that he might possibly see he again soon , and in a flash of fire . " sit in a fearful expectation of this ; and now , when the ghost make he next appearance , Partridge cry out , " there , sir , now ; what say you now ? be he frightene now or no ? as much frightene as you think I , and , to be sure , nobody can help some fear . I would not be in so bad a condition as what be he name , squire Hamlet , be there , for all the world . bless I ! what be become of the spirit ? as I be a live soul , I think I see he sink into the earth . " " indeed , you see right , " answer . " well , well , " cry , " I know it be only a play : and besides , if there be anything in all this , would not laugh so ; for as to you , sir , you would not be afraid , I believe , if the be here in person .-- there , there -- ay , no wonder you be in such a passion , shake the vile wick wretch to piece . if she be my own mother , I would serve she so . to be sure all duty to a mother be forfeit by such wicked doings .---- ay , go about you business , I hate the sight of you . " we critic be now pretty silent till the play , which Hamlet introduce before the king . this he do not at first understand , till explain it to he ; but he no sooner enter into the spirit of it , than he begin to bless himself that he have never commit murder . then turn to , he ask she , " if she do not imagine the king look as if he be touch ; though he be , " say he , " a good actor , and doth all he can to hide it . well , I would not have so much to answer for , as that wick man there hath , to sit upon a much higher chair than he sit upon . no wonder he run away ; for you sake I will never trust a innocent face again . " the grave -digge scene next engage the attention of , who express much surprize at the number of skull throw upon the stage . to which answer , " that it be one of the most famous burial - place about town . " " no wonder then , " cry , " that the place be haunt . but I never see in my life a worse grave - digger . I have a sexton , when I be clerk , that should have dug three grave while he be digge one . the fellow handle a spade as if it be the first time he have ever have one in he hand . ay , ay , you may se . you have rather sing than work , I believe . " -- upon 's take up the skull , he cry out , " well ! it be strange to see how fearless some man be : I never could bring myself to touch anything belong to a dead man , on any account .-- he seem frightened enough too at the ghost , I think . _Nemo omnibus horis sapit._ " little more worth remembere occur during the play , at the end of which ask he , " of the player he have like best ? " to this he answer , with some appearance of indignation at the question , " the king , without doubt . " " indeed , , " say , " you be not of the same opinion with the town ; for they be all agreed , that be act by the best player who ever be on the stage . " " he the best player ! " cry , with a contemptuous sneer , " why , I could act as well as he myself . I be
be sure , if I have see a ghost , I should have look in the very same manner , and do just as he do . and then , to be sure , in that scene , as you call it , between he and he mother , where you tell I he act so fine , why , help I , any man , that be , any good man , that have such a mother , would have do exactly the same . I know you be only joke with I ; but indeed , madam , though I be never at a play in , yet I have see act before in the country ; and the king for my money ; he speak all he word distinctly , half as loud again as the other .-- anybody may see he be a actor . " while be thus engage in conversation with , a lady come up to , whom he immediately know to be . she say , she have see he from the other part of the gallery , and have take that opportunity of speak to he , as she have something to say , which might be of great service to himself . she then acquaint he with she lodging , and make he a appointment the next day in the morning ; which , upon recollection , she presently change to the afternoon ; at which time promise to attend she . thus end the adventure at the playhouse ; where have afforde great mirth , not only to and , but to all who sit within hearing , who be more attentive to what he say , than to anything that pass on the stage . he durst not go to be all that night , for fear of the ghost ; and for many night after sweate two or three hour before he go to sleep , with the same apprehension , and wake several time in great horror , cry out , " have mercy upon we ! there it be . " chapter vi . in which the history be oblige to look back . it be almost impossible for the best parent to observe a exact impartiality to he child , even though no superior merit should bia he affection ; but sure a parent can hardly be blame , when that superiority determine he preference . as I regard all the personage of this history in the light of my child ; so I must confess the same inclination of partiality to ; and for that I hope the reader will allow I the same excuse , from the superiority of she character . this extraordinary tenderness which I have for my heroine never suffer I to quit she any long time without the utmost reluctance . I could now , therefore , return impatiently to enquire what hath happen to this lovely creature since she departure from she father 's , but that I be oblige first to pay a short visit to . Mr western , in the first confusion into which he mind be cast upon the sudden news he receive of he daughter , and in the first hurry to go after she , have not once think of send any account of the discovery to . he have not go far , however , before he recollect himself , and accordingly stopt at the very first inn he come to , and dispatch away a messenger to acquaint Blifil with he have find , and with he firm resolution to marry she to he immediately , if he would come up after he to town . as the love which have for be of that violent kind , which nothing but the loss of she fortune , or some such accident , could lessen , he inclination to the match be not at all alte by she have run away , though he be oblige to lay this to he own account . he very readily , therefore , embrace this offer . indeed , he now propose the gratification of a very strong passion besides avarice , by marry this young lady , and this be hatre ; for he conclude that matrimony afforde a equal opportunity of satisfye either hatre or love ; and this opinion be very probably verifie by much experience . to say the truth , if we be to judge by the ordinary behaviour of married persons to each other , we shall perhaps be apt to conclude that the generality seek the indulgence of the former passion only , in they union of everything but of heart . there be one difficulty , however , in he way , and this arise from . that good man , when he find by the departure of ( for neither that , nor the cause of it , could be conceal from he ) , the great aversion which she have for he nephew , begin to be seriously concerned that he have be deceive into carry matter so far . he by no means concur with the opinion of those parent , who think it as immaterial to consult the inclination of they child in the affair of marriage , as to solicit the good pleasure of they servants when they intend to take a journey ; and who be by law , or decency at least , withheld often from use absolute force . on the contrary , as he esteem the institution to be of the most sacred kind , he think every preparatory caution necessary to preserve it holy and inviolate ; and very wisely conclude , that the surest way to effect this be by lay the foundation in previous affection . Blifil indeed soon cure he uncle of all anger on the score of deceit , by many vow
vow and protestation that he have be deceive himself , with which the many declaration of western very well tally ; but now to persuade to consent to the renew he address be a matter of such apparent difficulty , that the very appearance be sufficient to have deter a less enterprizing genius ; but this young gentleman so well know he own talents , that nothing within the province of cunning see to he hard to be achieve . here then he represent the violence of he own affection , and the hope of subduing aversion in the lady by perseverance . he beg that , in a affair on which depend all he future repose , he might at least be at liberty to try all fair means for success . heaven forbid , he say , that he should ever think of prevail by any other than the most gentle method ! " besides , sir , " say he , " if they fail , you may then ( which will be surely time enough ) deny you consent . " he urge the great and eager desire which have for the match ; and lastly , he make great use of the name of , to whom he impute all that have happen ; and from whom , he say , to preserve so valuable a young lady be even a act of charity . all these argument be well seconde by , who dwelt a little stronger on the authority of parent than himself have do . he ascribe the measure which be desirous to take to motive ; " and though , " say he , " the good young gentleman hath mention charity last , I be almost convince it be he first and principal consideration . " , possibly , have he be present , would have sung to the same tune , though in a different key , and would have discover much moral fitness in the proceeding : but he be now go to for the recovery of he health . Allworthy , though not without reluctance , at last yield to the desire of he nephew . he say he would accompany he to , where he might be at liberty to use every honest endeavour to gain the lady : " but I declare , " say he , " I will never give my consent to any absolute force be put on she inclination , nor shall you ever have she , unless she can be bring freely to compliance . " thus do the affection of for he nephew betray the superior understanding to be triumph over by the inferior ; and thus be the prudence of the best of head often defeat by the tenderness of the best of heart . , have obtain this unhoped - for acquiescence in he uncle , rest not till he carry he purpose into execution . and as no immediate business require 's presence in the country , and little preparation be necessary to man for a journey , they set out the very next day , and arrive in town that even , when , as we have see , be divert himself with Partridge at the play . the morning after he arrival wait on , by whom he be most kindly and graciously receive , and from whom he have every possible assurance ( perhaps more than be possible ) that he should very shortly be as happy as could make he ; nor would the squire suffer the young gentleman to return to he uncle till he have , almost against he will , carry he to he sister . chapter vii . in which pay a visit to he sister , in company with . be read a lecture on prudence , and matrimonial politics , to she niece , when she brother and break in with less ceremony than the law of visit require . no sooner see than she turn pale , and almost lose the use of all she faculty ; but she aunt , on the contrary , wax red , and , have all she faculty at command , begin to exert she tongue on the squire . " brother , " say she , " I be astonished at you behaviour ; will you never learn any regard to decorum ? will you still look upon every apartment as you own , or as belong to one of you country tenant ? do you think yourself at liberty to invade the privacy of woman of condition , without the least decency or notice ? " ----" why , what a pox be the matter now ? " quoth the squire ; " one would think I have catch you at --" -- " none of you brutality , sir , I beseech you , " answer she .----" you have surprize my poor niece so , that she can hardly , I see , support herself .---- go , my dear , retire , and endeavou to recruit you spirits ; for I see you have occasion . " at which word , who never receive a more welcome command , hastily withdrew . " to be sure , sister , " cry the squire , " you be mad , when I have bring here to court she , to force she away . " " sure , brother , " say she , " you be worse than mad , when you know in what situation affair be , to ---- I be sure I ask 's pardon , but he know very well to whom to impute so disagreeable a reception . for my own part , I be sure I shall always be very glad to see ; but he own good sense would not have suffer he to proceed so abruptly ,
, have you not compelle he to it . " bow and stammer , and look like a fool ; but western , without give he time to form a speech for the purpose , answer , " well , well , I be to blame , if you will , I always be , certainly ; but come , let the girl be fetch back again , or let go to she .---- he be come up on purpose , and there be no time to be lose . " " brother , " cry Mrs western , " , I be confident , understand himself better than to think of see my niece any more this morning , after what hath happen . woman be of a nice contexture ; and we spirit , when disorder , be not to be recompose in a moment . have you suffer to have send he compliment to my niece , and to have desire the favour of wait on she in the afternoon , I should possibly have prevail on she to have see he ; but now I despair of bring about any such matter . " " I be very sorry , madam , " cry , " that 's extraordinary kindness to I , which I can never enough acknowledge , should have occasion -- " " indeed , sir , " say she , interrupt he , " you need make no apology , we all know my brother so well . " " I do not care what anybody know of I , " answer the squire ;----" but when must he come to see she ? for , consider , I tell you , he be come up on purpose , and so be . " --" , " say she , " whatever message think proper to send to my niece shall be deliver to she ; and I suppose she will want no instruction to make a proper answer . I be convince she will not refuse to see at a proper time . " --" the devil she will not ! " answer the squire .-- " !-- do not we know -- I say nothing , but some volk be wiser than all the world .---- if I might have have my will , she have not run away before : and now I expect to hear every moment she be guone again . for as great a fool as some volk think I , I know very well she hate ---- " " no matter , brother , " reply , " I will not hear my niece abuse . it be a reflection on my family . she be a honour to it ; and she will be a honour to it , I promise you . I will pawn my whole reputation in the world on she conduct .---- I shall be glad to see you , brother , in the afternoon ; for I have somewhat of importance to mention to you .-- at present , , as well as you , must excuse I ; for I be in haste to dress . " " well , but , " say the squire , " do appoint a time . " " indeed , " say she , " I can appoint no time . I tell you I will see you in the afternoon . " --" what the would you have I do ? " cry the squire , turn to ; " I can no more turn she , than a beagle can turn a old hare . perhaps she will be in a better humour in the afternoon . " --" I be condemne , I see , sir , to misfortune , " answer ; " but I shall always own my obligation to you . " he then take a ceremonious leave of , who be altogether as ceremonious on she part ; and then they depart , the squire mutter to himself with a oath , that should see he daughter in the afternoon . if be little pleased with this interview , be less . as to the former , he impute the whole behaviour of he sister to she humour only , and to she dissatisfaction at the omission of ceremony in the visit ; but see a little deeper into thing . he suspect somewhat of more consequence , from two or three word which dropt from the lady ; and , to say the truth , he suspect right , as will appear when I have unfold the several matters which will be contain in the follow chapter . chapter viii . scheme of for the ruin of . love have take too deep a root in the mind of to be pluck up by the rude hand of . in the heat of resentment he have , indeed , give a commission to , which the captain have far exceed in the execution ; nor have it be execute at all , have he lordship be able to find the captain after he have see , which be in the afternoon of the day after he have receive the affront ; but so industrious be the captain in the discharge of he duty , that , have after long enquiry find out the squire 's lodging very late in the evening , he sit up all night at a tavern , that he might not miss the squire in the morning , and by that mean miss the revocation which my lord have send to he lodging . in the afternoon then next after the intend rape of , he lordship , as we have say , make a visit to , who laid open so much of the character of the squire , that he lordship plainly see the absurdity he have be
be guilty of in take any offence at he word , especially as he have those honourable design on he daughter . he then unbosom the violence of he passion to , who readily undertake the cause , and encourage he with certain assurance of a most favourable reception from all the elder of the family , and from the father himself when he should be sober , and should be make acquainted with the nature of the offer make to he daughter . the only danger , she say , lay in the fellow she have formerly mention , who , though a beggar and a vagabond , have , by some means or other , she know not what , procure himself tolerable cloath , and past for a gentleman . " now , " say she , " as I have , for the sake of my cousin , make it my business to enquire after this fellow , I have luckily find out he lodging ; " with which she then acquaint he lordship . " I be think , my lord , " add she " ( for this fellow be too mean for you personal resentment ) , whether it would not be possible for you lordship to contrive some method of have he press and send on board a ship . neither law nor conscience forbid this project : for the fellow , I promise you , however well drest , be but a vagabond , and as proper as any fellow in the street to be press into the service ; and as for the conscientious part , surely the preservation of a young lady from such ruin be a most meritorious act ; nay , with regard to the fellow himself , unless he could succeed ( which forbid ) with my cousin , it may probably be the means of preserve he from the gallow , and perhaps may make he fortune in a honest way . " very heartily thank she ladyship for the part which she be pleased to take in the affair , upon the success of which he whole future happiness entirely depend . he say , he see at present no objection to the pressing scheme , and would consider of put it in execution . he then most earnestly recommend to she ladyship to do he the honour of immediately mention he proposal to the family ; to whom he say he offer a _carte blanco , and would settle he fortune in almost any manner they should require . and after utter many ecstasy and rapture concern , he take he leave and depart , but not before he have receive the strongest charge to beware of , and to lose no time in secure he person , where he should no longer be in a capacity of make any attempt to the ruin of the young lady . the moment be arrive at she lodging , a card be despatch with she compliment to ; who no sooner receive it than , with the impatience of a lover , she fly to she cousin , rejoice at this fair opportunity , which beyond she hope offer itself , for she be much better pleas with the prospect of make the proposal to a woman of sense , and who know the world , than to a gentleman whom she honoure with the appellation of ; though , indeed , from he she apprehend no danger of a refusal . the two lady be meet , after very short previous ceremonial , fall to business , which be indeed almost as soon conclude as begun ; for western no sooner hear the name of than she cheek glow with pleasure ; but when she be acquaint with the eagerness of he passion , the earnestness of he proposal , and the generosity of he offer , she declare she full satisfaction in the most explicit term . in the progress of they conversation they discourse turn to , and both cousin very pathetically lament the unfortunate attachment which both agree have to that young fellow ; and entirely attribute it to the folly of she brother 's management . she conclude , however , at last , with declare she confidence in the good understanding of she niece , who , though she would not give up she affection in favour of , will , I doubt not , say she , soon be prevail upon to sacrifice a simple inclination to the address of a fine gentleman , who bring she both a title and a large estate : " for , indeed , " add she , " I must do Sophy the justice to confess this Blifil be but a hideous kind of fellow , as you know , , all country gentleman be , and hath nothing but he fortune to recommend he . " " , " say , " I do not then so much wonder at my cousin ; for I promise you this be a very agreeable fellow , and hath one virtue , which the man say be a great recommendation to we . what do you think , -- I shall certainly make you laugh ; nay , I can hardly tell you myself for laugh -- will you believe that the fellow hath have the assurance to make love to I ? but if you should be inclin to disbelieve it , here be evidence enough , he own handwriting , I assure you . " she then deliver she cousin the letter with the proposal of marriage , which , if the reader hath a desire to see , he will find already on record in the XVth book of this history . " upon my word I be astonish , " say ; " this be , indeed , a masterpiece
masterpiece of assurance . with you leave I may possibly make some use of this letter . " " you have my full liberty , " cry , " to apply it to what purpose you please . however , I would not have it shewn to any but , nor to she unless you find occasion . " " well , and how do you use the fellow ? " return . " not as a husband , " say the lady ; " I be not marry , I promise you , my dear . you know , , I have try the comfort once already ; and once , I think , be enough for any reasonable woman . " this letter thought would certainly turn the balance against in the mind of , and she be embolden to give it up , partly by she hope of have he instantly dispatch out of the way , and partly by have secure the evidence of , who , upon sound she , she see sufficient reason to imagine be prepare to testify whatever she please . but perhaps the reader may wonder why , who in she heart hate , should be so desirous of promote a match which be so much to the interest of the young lady . now , I would desire such reader to look carefully into human nature , page almost the last , and there he will find , in scarce legible character , that woman , notwithstand the preposterous behaviour of mother , aunt , & c. , in matrimonial matter , do in reality think it so great a misfortune to have they inclination in love thwart , that they imagine they ought never to carry enmity higher than upon these disappointment ; again , he will find it write much about the same place , that a woman who hath once be pleased with the possession of a man , will go above halfway to the devil , to prevent any other woman from enjoy the same . if he will not be contente with these reason , I freely confess I see no other motive to the action of that lady , unless we will conceive she be bribe by , which for my own part I see no cause to suspect . now this be the affair which be prepare to introduce to , by some prefatory discourse on the folly of love , and on the wisdom of legal prostitution for hire , when she brother and break abruptly in upon she ; and hence arise all that coldness in she behaviour to , which , though the squire , as be usual with he , impute to a wrong cause , infus into himself ( he be a much more cunning man ) a suspicion of the real truth . chapter ix . in which pay a visit to . the reader may now , perhaps , be pleased to return with we to , who , at the appointed hour , attend on ; but before we relate the conversation which now past it may be proper , accord to we method , to return a little back , and to account for so great a alteration of behaviour in this lady , that from change she lod principally to avoid , she have now industriously , as hath be see , seek this interview . and here we shall need only to resort to what happen the preceding day , when , hear from that be arrive in town , she go to pay she duty to he , at he lodging at , where she be receive with many scurvy compellation too coarse to be repeat , and be even threaten to be kick out of door . from hence , a old servant of she aunt western , with whom she be well acquaint , conduct she to the lodging of that lady , who treat she not more kindly , but more politely ; or , to say the truth , with rudeness in another way . in short , she return from both , plainly convinced , not only that she scheme of reconciliation have prove abortive , but that she must for ever give over all thought of bring it about by any mean whatever . from this moment desire of revenge only fill she mind ; and in this temper meeting Jones at the play , a opportunity seem to she to occur of effect this purpose . the reader must remember that he be acquaint by , in the account she give of she own story , with the fondness have formerly shewn for at , from the disappointment of which derive the great bitterness she aunt have express toward she . she have , therefore , no doubt but that the good lady would as easily listen to the address of as she have before do to the other ; for the superiority of charms be clearly on the side of ; and the advance which she aunt have since make in age , she conclude ( how justly I will not say ) , be a argument rather in favour of she project than against it . therefore , when attend , after a previous declaration of she desire of serve he , arise , as she say , from a firm assurance how much she should by so do oblige ; and after some excuse for she former disappointment , and after acquaint in whose custody he mistress be , of which she think he ignorant ; she very explicitly mention she scheme to he , and advise he to make sham address to the older lady , in order to procure a easy access to the younger , inform he at the same time of the success which have formerly owed to
to the very same stratagem . express great gratitude to the lady for the kind intention towards he which she have express , and indeed testify , by this proposal ; but , besides intimat some diffidence of success from the lady 's knowledge of he love to she niece , which have not be she case in regard to , he say , he be afraid would never agree to a imposition of this kind , as well from she utter detestation of all fallacy as from she avow duty to she aunt . be a little nettle at this ; and indeed , if it may not be call a lapse of the tongue , it be a small deviation from politeness in , and into which he scarce would have fall , have not the delight he feel in praise hurrie he out of all reflection ; for this commendation of one cousin be more than a tacit rebuke on the other . " indeed , sir , " answer the lady , with some warmth , " I can not think there be anything easier than to cheat a old woman with a profession of love , when she complexion be amorous ; and , though she be my aunt , I must say there never be a more liquorish one than she ladyship . can not you pretend that the despair of possesse she niece , from she be promise to , have make you turn you thought towards she ? as to my cousin , I can not imagine she to be such a simpleton as to have the least scruple on such a account , or to conceive any harm in punish one of these hagg for the many mischief they bring upon family by they tragi-comic passion ; for which I think it be a pity they be not punishable by law . I have no such scruple myself ; and yet I hope my cousin will not think it a affront when I say she can not detest every real species of falsehood more than she cousin . to my aunt , indeed , I pretend no duty , nor doth she deserve any . however , sir , I have give you my advice ; and if you decline pursue it , I shall have the less opinion of you understanding -- that be all . " now clearly see the error he have commit , and exert he utmost power to rectify it ; but he only faulter and stutter into nonsense and contradiction . to say the truth , it be often safer to abide by the consequence of the first blunder than to endeavou to rectify it ; for by such endeavour we generally plunge deeper instead of extricat ourselves ; and few person will on such occasion have the good - nature which display to , by say , with a smile , " you need attempt no more excuse ; for I can easily forgive a real lover , whatever be the effect of fondness for he mistress . " she then renew she proposal , and very fervently recommend it , omitt no argument which she invention could suggest on the subject ; for she be so violently incense against she aunt , that scarce anything be capable of afforde she equal pleasure with expose she ; and , like a true woman , she would see no difficulty in the execution of a favourite scheme . , however , persist in decline the undertaking , which have not , indeed , the least probability of success . he easily perceive the motives which induce to be so eager in press she advice . he say he would not deny the tender and passionate regard he have for ; but be so conscious of the inequality of they situation , that he could never flatter himself so far as to hope that so divine a young lady would condescmend to think on so unworthy a man ; nay , he protest , he could scarce bring himself to wish she should . he conclude with a profession of generous sentiment , which we have not at present leisure to insert . there be some fine woman ( for I dare not here speak in too general term ) with whom self be so predominant , that they never detach it from any subject ; and , as vanity be with they a ruling principle , they be apt to lay hold of whatever praise they meet with ; and , though the property of other , convey it to they own use . in the company of these ladie it be impossible to say anything handsome of another woman which they will not apply to themselves ; nay , they often improve the praise they seize ; as , for instance , if she beauty , she wit , she gentility , she good humour deserve so much commendation , what do I deserve , who possess those qualitie in so much more eminent a degree ? to these ladie a man often recommend himself while he be commend another woman ; and , while he be expressing ardour and generous sentiment for he mistress , they be consider what a charme lover this man would make to they , who can feel all this tenderness for a inferior degree of merit . of this , strange as it may seem , I have see many instance besides , to whom all this really happen , and who now begin to feel a somewhat for , the symptom of which she much sooner understand than poor have formerly do . to say the truth , perfect beauty in both sex be a more irresistible object than it be generally think ; for , notwithstand some of we be contente with more homely lot , and
and learn by rote ( as child to repeat what give they no idea ) to despise outside , and to value more solid charms ; yet I have always observe , at the approach of consummate beauty , that these more solid charms only shine with that kind of lustre which the star have after the rising of the sun . when have finish he exclamation , many of which would have become the mouth of himself , heav a deep sigh , and , take she eye off from , on whom they have be some time fix , and drop they on the ground , she cry , " indeed , , I pity you ; but it be the curse of such tenderness to be throw away on those who be insensible of it . I know my cousin better than you , , and I must say , any woman who make no return to such a passion , and such a person , be unworthy of both . " " sure , madam , " say , " you can not mean ---- " " ! " cry , " I know not what I mean ; there be something , I think , in true tenderness bewitch ; few woman ever meet with it in man , and fewer still know how to value it when they do . I never hear such truly noble sentiment , and I can not tell how it be , but you force one to believe you . sure she must be the most contemptible of woman who can overlook such merit . " the manner and look with which all this be spoke infus a suspicion into which we do not care to convey in direct word to the reader . instead of make any answer , he say , " I be afraid , madam , I have make too tiresome a visit ; " and offer to take he leave . " not at all , sir , " answer .-- " indeed I pity you , ; indeed I do : but if you be go , consider of the scheme I have mention -- I be convince you will approve it -- and let I see you again as soon as you can .-- to -morrow morning if you will , or at least some time to - morrow . I shall be at home all day . " , then , after many expressions of thanks , very respectfully retired ; nor could forbear make he a present of a look at parting , by which if he have understand nothing , he must have have no understanding in the language of the eyes . in reality , it confirm he resolution of return to she no more ; for , faulty as he hath hithertoo appear in this history , he whole thought be now so confin to he , that I believe no woman upon earth could have now draw he into a act of inconstancy . , however , who be not he friend , resolve , as he intend to give she no second opportunity , to make the best of this ; and accordingly produce the tragical incident which we be now in sorrowful note to record . chapter x . the consequence of the precede visit . have receive the letter before mention from , and be by that mean acquaint with the place to which he wife be retire , return directly to , and thence the day after set forward to . the reader hath be already often inform of the jealous temper of this gentleman . he may likewise be pleased to remember the suspicion which he have conceive of at , upon he find he in the room with Waters ; and , though sufficient reason have afterwards appear entirely to clear up that suspicion , yet now the reading so handsome a character of from he wife , cause he to reflect that she likewise be in the inn at the same time , and jumble together such a confusion of circumstance in a head which be naturally none of the clearest , that the whole produce that green - eyed monster mention by in he tragedy of . and now , as he be enquir in the street after he wife , and have just receive direction to the door , unfortunately be issue from it . do not yet recollect the face of ; however , see a young well -dress fellow come from he wife , he make directly up to he , and ask he what he have be do in that house ? " for I be sure , " say he , " you must have be in it , as I see you come out of it . " answer very modestly , " that he have be visit a lady there . " to which reply , " what business have you with the lady ? " upon which , who now perfectly remembe the voice , feature , and indeed coat , of the gentleman , cry out ---- " ha , my good friend ! give I you hand ; I hope there be no ill blood remain between we , upon a small mistake which happen so long ago . " " upon my soul , sir , " say , " I do not know you name nor you face . " " indeed , sir , " say , " neither have I the pleasure of know you name , but you face I very well remember to have see before at , where a foolish quarrel happen between we , which , if it be not make up yet , we will now make up over a bottle . " " at ! " cry the other
other ;----" ! upon my soul , I believe you name be ? " " indeed , " answer he , " it be . " -- " o ! upon my soul , " cry , " you be the very man I want to meet .-- upon my soul I will drink a bottle with you presently ; but first I will give you a great knock over the pate . there be for you , you rascal . upon my soul , if you do not give I satisfaction for that blow , I will give you another . " and then , draw he sword , put himself in a posture of defence , which be the only science he understand . be a little stagger by the blow , which come somewhat unexpectedly ; but presently recover himself he also draw , and though he understand nothing of fencing , prest on so boldly upon , that he beat down he guard , and sheath one half of he sword in the body of the say gentleman , who have no sooner receive it than he steep backward , drop the point of he sword , and lean upon it , cry , " I have satisfaction enough : I be a dead man . " " I hope not , " cry , " but whatever be the consequence , you must be sensible you have draw it upon yourself . " at this instant a number of fellow rush in and seize , who tell they he should make no resistance , and beg some of they at least would take care of the wounded gentleman . " ay , " cry one of the fellows , " the wounded gentleman will be take care enough of ; for I suppose he hath not many hour to live . as for you , sir , you have a month at least good yet . " " d -- and I , , " say another , " he hath prevent he voyage ; he be bound to another port now ; " and many other such jest be we poor Jone make the subject of by these fellows , who be indeed the gang employ by , and have dog he into the house of , wait for he at the corner of the street when this unfortunate accident happen . the officer who command this gang very wisely conclude that he business be now to deliver he prisoner into the hand of the civil magistrate . he order he , therefore , to be carry to a public - house , where , have send for a constable , he deliver he to he custody . the constable , see very well drest , and hear that the accident have happene in a duel , treat he prisoner with great civility , and at he request dispatch a messenger to enquire after the wounded gentleman , who be now at a tavern under the surgeon 's hand . the report bring back be , that the wound be certainly mortal , and there be no hope of life . upon which the constable inform Jones that he must go before a justice . he answer , " wherever you please ; I be indifferent as to what happen to I ; for though I be convince I be not guilty of murder in the eye of the law , yet the weight of blood I find intolerable upon my mind . " be now conduct before the justice , where the surgeon who dress appear , and depose that he believe the wound to be mortal ; upon which the prisoner be commit to the Gatehouse . it be very late at night , so that would not send for till the next morning ; and , as he never shut he eye till seven , so it be near twelve before the poor fellow , who be greatly frightened at not hear from he master so long , receive a message which almost deprive he of he be when he hear it . he go to the Gatehouse with trembling knee and a beat heart , and be no sooner arrive in the presence of than he lament the misfortune that have befall he with many tear , look all the while frequently about he in great terror ; for as the news now arrive that be dead , the poor fellow apprehend every minute that he ghost would enter the room . at last he deliver he a letter , which he have like to have forgot , and which come from by the hand of . presently dispatch every one out of the room , and , have eagerly break open the letter , read as follow :-- " you owe the hearing from I again to a accident which I own surprize I . my aunt hath just now show I a letter from you to , which contain a proposal of marriage . I be convince it be you own hand ; and what more surprize I be , that it be date at the very time when you would have I imagine you be under such concern on my account .-- I leave you to comment on this fact . all I desire be , that you name may never more be mention to " . W . " of the present situation of 's mind , and of the pang with which he be now torment , we can not give the reader a better idea than by say , he misery be such that even would almost have pitie he . but , bad as it be , we shall at present leave he in it , as he good genius ( if he really have any ) seem to have do . and here
here we put a end to the sixteenth book of we history . . contain three Day . I . contain a portion of introductory writing . when a comic writer hath make he principal character as happy as he can , or when a tragic writer hath bring they to the highest pitch of human misery , they both conclude they business to be do , and that they work be come to a period . have we be of the tragic complexion , the reader must now allow we be very nearly arrive at this period , since it would be difficult for the devil , or any of he representative on earth , to have contrive much greater torment for poor than those in which we leave he in the last chapter ; and as for , a good - natured woman would hardly wish more uneasiness to a rival than what she must at present be suppose to feel . what then remain to complete the tragedy but a murder or two and a few moral sentence ! but to bring we favourite out of they present anguish and distress , and to land they at last on the shore of happiness , seem a much harder task ; a task indeed so hard that we do not undertake to execute it . in regard to , it be more than probable that we shall somewhere or other provide a good husband for she in the end --either , or my lord , or somebody else ; but as to poor , such be the calamity in which he be at present involved , owe to he imprudence , by which if a man doth not become felon to the world , he be at least a _felo de se_; so destitute be he now of friend , and so persecute by enemy , that we almost despair of bring he to any good ; and if we reader delight in see execution , I think he ought not to lose any time in take a first row at . this I faithfully promise , that , notwithstand any affection which we may be suppose to have for this rogue , whom we have unfortunately make we heroe , we will lend he none of that supernatural assistance with which we be entrust , upon condition that we use it only on very important occasion . if he doth not therefore find some natural means of fairly extricat himself from all he distress , we will do no violence to the truth and dignity of history for he sake ; for we have rather relate that he be hang at ( which may very probably be the case ) than forfeit we integrity , or shock the faith of we reader . in this the antient have a great advantage over the modern . they mythology , which be at that time more firmly believe by the vulgar than any religion be at present , give they always a opportunity of deliver a favourite heroe . they deity be always ready at the writer 's elbow , to execute any of he purpose ; and the more extraordinary the invention be , the greater be the surprize and delight of the credulous reader . those writer could with greater ease have convey a heroe from one country to another , nay from one world to another , and have bring he back again , than a poor circumscribed modern can deliver he from a jail . the and have a equal advantage in write they tale from the genii and fairy , which they believe in as a article of they faith , upon the authority of the itself . but we have none of these help . to natural means alone we be confine ; let we try therefore what , by these means , may be do for poor ; though to confess the truth , something whisper I in the ear that he doth not yet know the worst of he fortune ; and that a more shocking piece of news than any he hath yet heard remain for he in the unopened leave of fate . . the generous and grateful behaviour of . and be just sit down to breakfast , when , who have go out very early that morning , return to make one of the company . he have not be long seat before he begin as follow : " ! my dear uncle , what do you think hath happen ? I vow I be afraid of tell it you , for fear of shock you with the remembrance of ever have shew any kindness to such a villain . " " what be the matter , child ? " say the uncle . " I fear I have shew kindness in my life to the unworthy more than once . but charity doth not adopt the vice of its object . " " o , sir ! " return , " it be not without the secret direction of Providence that you mention the word adoption . you adopt son , sir , that , that wretch whom you nourished in you bosom , hath prove one of the greatest villain upon earth . " " by all that be sacr ' tis false , " cry . " be no villain . he be one of the worthiest creature breathing ; and if any other person have call he villain , I would have throw all this boiling water in he face . " look very much amaze at this behaviour . but she do not give he leave to speak , before , turn to he , she cry , " I hope you will not be angry with I ; I would not offend you , sir , for the world ; but ,
, indeed , I could not bear to hear he call so . " " I must own , madam , " say , very gravely , " I be a little surprized to hear you so warmly defend a fellow you do not know . " " o ! I do know he , , " say she , " indeed I do ; I should be the most ungrateful of all wretch if I deny it . o ! he hath preserve I and my little family ; we have all reason to bless he while we live . -- and I pray heaven to bless he , and turn the heart of he malicious enemie . I know , I find , I see , he hath such . " " you surprize I , madam , still more , " say ; " sure you must mean some other . it be impossible you should have any such obligation to the man my nephew mention . " " too surely , " answer she , " I have obligation to he of the greatest and tenderest kind . he hath be the preserver of I and mine . believe I , sir , he hath be abuse , grossly abuse to you ; I know he hath , or you , whom I know to be all goodness and honour , would not , after the many kind and tender thing I have hear you say of this poor helpless child , have so disdainfully call he fellow .-- indeed , my best of friend , he deserve a kinder appellation from you , have you hear the good , the kind , the grateful thing which I have hear he utter of you . he never mention you name but with a sort of adoration . in this very room I have see he on he knee , implor all the blessing of heaven upon you head . I do not love that child there better than he love you . " " I see , sir , now , " say , with one of those grinn sneer with which the devil mark he best belove , " really doth know he . I suppose you will find she be not the only one of you acquaintance to whom he hath expose you . as for my character , I perceive , by some hints she hath throw out , he hath be very free with it , but I forgive he . " " and the forgive you , sir ! " say ; " we have all sins enough to stand in need of he forgiveness . " " upon my word , , " say , " I do not take this behaviour of yours to my nephew kindly ; and I do assure you , as any reflection which you cast upon he must come only from that wickedest of man , they would only serve , if that be possible , to heighten my resentment against he : for I must tell you , , the young man who now stand before you hath ever be the warmest advocate for the ungrateful wretch whose cause you espouse . this , I think , when you hear it from my own mouth , will make you wonder at so much baseness and ingratitude . " " you be deceive , sir , " answer ; " if they be the last word which be to issue from my lip , I would say you be deceive ; and I once more repeat it , the forgive those who have deceive you ! I do not pretend to say the young man be without fault ; but they be all the fault of wildness and of youth ; fault which he may , nay , which I be certain he will , relinquish , and , if he should not , they be vastly overbalance by one of the most humane , tender , honest heart that ever man be blest with . " " indeed , , " say , " have this be related of you , I should not have believe it . " " indeed , sir , " answer she , " you will believe everything I have say , I be sure you will : and when you have hear the story which I shall tell you ( for I will tell you all ) , you will be so far from be offend , that you will own ( I know you justice so well ) , that I must have be the most despicable and most ungrateful of wretch if I have act any other part than I have . " " well , madam , " say , " I shall be very glad to hear any good excuse for a behaviour which , I must confess , I think want a excuse . and now , madam , will you be pleased to let my nephew proceed in he story without interruption . he would not have introduce a matter of slight consequence with such a preface . perhaps even this story will cure you of you mistake . " give token of submission , and then begin thus : " I be sure , sir , if you do not think proper to resent the ill - usage of , I shall easily forgive what affect I only . I think you goodness hath not deserve this indignity at she hand . " " well , child , " say , " but what be this new instance ? what hath he do of late ? " " what , " cry , " notwithstand all hath say , I be very sorry to relate , and what you should never have hear from I , have it not be a
a matter impossible to conceal from the whole world . in short he hath kill a man ; I will not say murder -- for perhaps it may not be so construe in law , and I hope the best for he sake . " look shocked , and bless himself ; and then , turn to , he cry , " well , madam , what say you now ? " " why , I say , sir , " answer she , " that I never be more concerned at anything in my life ; but , if the fact be true , I be convince the man , whoever he be , be in fault . know there be many villain in this town who make it they business to provoke young gentleman . nothing but the greatest provocation could have tempt he ; for of all the gentleman I ever have in my house , I never see one so gentle or so sweet - tempered . he be belove by every one in the house , and every one who come near it . " while she be thus run on , a violent knocking at the door interrupt they conversation , and prevent she from proceeding further , or from receive any answer ; for , as she conclude this be a visitor to , she hastily retire , take with she she little girl , whose eye be all over blubber at the melancholy news she hear of , who use to call she he little wife , and not only give she many plaything , but spend whole hour in play with she himself . some reader may , perhaps , be pleased with these minute circumstance , in relating of which we follow the example of Plutarch , one of the best of we brother historian ; and other , to whom they may appear trivial , will , we hope , at least pardon they , as we be never prolix on such occasion . chapter iii . the arrival of , with some matter concern the paternal authority . have not long leave the room when enter ; but not before a small wrangling bout have pass between he and he chairmen ; for the fellows , who have take up they burden at the , have conceive no hope of have any future good customer in the squire ; and they be moreover farther encourage by he generosity ( for he have give they of he own accord sixpence more than they fare ) ; they therefore very boldly demand another shilling , which so provoke the squire , that he not only bestow many hearty curse on they at the door , but retain he anger after he come into the room ; swear that all the Londoner be like the court , and think of nothing but plunder country gentleman . " d -- and I , " say he , " if I will not walk in the rain rather than get into one of they hand - barrow again . they have jolt I more in a mile than would in a long fox - chase . " when he wrath on this occasion be a little appease , he resume the same passionate tone on another . " there , " say he , " there be fine business forwards now . the hound have change at last ; and when we imagine we have a fox to deal with , od - rat it , it turn out to be a badger at last ! " " pray , my good neighbour , " say , " drop you metaphor , and speak a little plainer . " " why , then , " say the squire , " to tell you plainly , we have be all this time afraid of a son of a whore of a bastard of somebody 's , I do not know whose , not I . and now here be a confounded son of a whore of a lord , who may be a bastard too for what I know or care , for he shall never have a daughter of mine by my consent . they have beggar the nation , but they shall never beggar I . my land shall never be send over to . " " you surprize I much , my good friend , " say . " why , zound ! I be surprize myself , " answer the squire . " I go to zee sister western last night , accord to she own appointment , and there I be have into a whole room full of woman . there be my lady cousin , and my , and my Lady Catherine , and my lady I do not know who ; -- and I , if ever you catch I among such a kennel of hoop - petticoat b -- ! d -- and I , I would rather be run by my own dog , as one be , that the story - book say be turn into a hare , and he own dog kill un and eat un . od - rabbit it , no mortal be ever run in such a manner ; if I dodge one way , one have I ; if I offer to clap back , another snap I . `o ! certainly one of the greatest matches in , ' say one cousin ( here he attempt to mimic they ) ; ` a very advantageous offer indeed , ' cry another cousin ( for you must know they be all my cousin , thor I never zeed half of ' um before ) . ` surely , ' say that fat a -- se b --, my , ` cousin , you must be out of you wit
wit to think of refuse such a offer . ' " " now I begin to understand , " say ; " some person hath make proposal to , which the lady of the family approve , but be not to you liking . " " my like ! " say western , " how the should it ? I tell you it be a lord , and those be always volk whom you know I always resolve to have nothing to do with . do unt I refuse a matter of vorty year 's purchase now for a bit of land , which one of ' um have a mind to put into a park , only because I would have no dealings with lord , and dost think I would marry my daughter zu ? besides , be not I engage to you , and do I ever go off any bargain when I have promise ? " " as to that point , neighbour , " say , " I entirely release you from any engagement . no contract can be bind between party who have not a full power to make it at the time , nor ever afterwards acquire the power of fulfil it . " " ! then , " answer western , " I tell you I have power , and I will fulfil it . come along with I directly to 's Commons , I will get a licence ; and I will go to sister and take away the wench by force , and she shall ha un , or I will lock she up , and keep she upon bread and water as long as she life . " " , " say , " shall I beg you will hear my full sentiment on this matter ? " --" hear thee ; ay , to be sure I will , " answer he . " why , then , sir , " cry , " I can truly say , without a compliment either to you or the young lady , that when this match be propose , I embrace it very readily and heartily , from my regard to you both . a alliance between two family so nearly neighbour , and between whom there have always exist so mutual a intercourse and good harmony , I think a most desirable event ; and with regard to the young lady , not only the concurrent opinion of all who know she , but my own observation assure I that she would be a inestimable treasure to a good husband . I shall say nothing of she personal qualifications , which certainly be admirable ; she good nature , she charitable disposition , she modesty , be too well know to need any panegyric : but she hath one quality which exist in a high degree in that best of woman , who be now one of the first of angel , which , as it be not of a glaring kind , more commonly escape observation ; so little indeed be it remark , that I want a word to express it . I must use negative on this occasion . I never hear anything of pertness , or what be call repartee , out of she mouth ; no pretence to wit , much less to that kind of wisdom which be the result only of great learning and experience , the affectation of which , in a young woman , be as absurd as any of the affectation of a ape . no dictatorial sentiment , no judicial opinion , no profound criticism . whenever I have see she in the company of man , she hath be all attention , with the modesty of a learner , not the forwardness of a teacher . you will pardon I for it , but I once , to try she only , desire she opinion on a point which be controvert between and . to which she answer , with much sweetness , ` you will pardon I , good ; I be sure you can not in earnest think I capable of decide any point in which two such gentleman disagree . ' and , who both alike thought themselves sure of a favourable decision , seconde my request . she answer with the same good humour , ` I must absolutely be excuse : for I will affro not neither so much as to give my judgment on he side . ' indeed , she always shew the highest deference to the understanding of man ; a quality absolutely essential to the make a good wife . I shall only add , that as she be most apparently void of all affectation , this deference must be certainly real . " here sigh bitterly ; upon which western , whose eye be full of tear at the praise of , blubber out , " do not be chicken - hear , for shat ha she , -- and I , shat ha she , if she be twenty time as good . " " remember you promise , sir , " cry , " I be not to be interrupt . " " well , shat unt , " answer the squire ; " I will not speak another word . " " now , my good friend , " continue , " I have dwelt so long on the merit of this young lady , partly as I really be in love with she character , and partly that fortune ( for the match in that light be really advantageous on my nephew 's side ) might not be imagine to be my principal view in have so eagerly embrace the proposal . indeed , I heartily wish to receive so great a jewel into my family ; but though I may wish for many
many good thing , I would not , therefore , steal they , or be guilty of any violence or injustice to possess myself of they . now to force a woman into a marriage contrary to she consent or approbation , be a act of such injustice and oppression , that I wish the law of we country could restrain it ; but a good conscience be never lawless in the worst regulate state , and will provide those law for itself , which the neglect of legislator hath forget to supply . this be surely a case of that kind ; for , be it not cruel , nay , impious , to force a woman into that state against she will ; for she behaviour in which she be to be accountable to the highest and most dreadful court of judicature , and to answer at the peril of she soul ? to discharge the matrimonial duty in a adequate manner be no easy task ; and shall we lay this burthan upon a woman , while we at the same time deprive she of all that assistance which may enable she to undergo it ? shall we tear she very heart from she , while we enjoin she duty to which a whole heart be scarce equal ? I must speak very plainly here . I think parent who act in this manner be accessory to all the guilt which they child afterwards incur , and of course must , before a just judge , expect to partake of they punishment ; but if they could avoid this , good heaven ! be there a soul who can bear the thought of have contribute to the damnation of he child ? " for these reason , my best neighbour , as I see the inclination of this young lady be most unhappily averse to my nephew , I must decline any further thought of the honour you intend he , though I assure you I shall always retain the most grateful sense of it . " " well , sir , " say western ( the froth burst forth from he lip the moment they be uncorked ) , " you can not say but I have hear you out , and now I expect you will hear I ; and if I do not answer every word of n't , why then I will consent to gee the matter up . first then , I desire you to answer I one question -- do not I beget she ? do not I beget she ? answer I that . they say , indeed , it be a wise father that know he own child ; but I be sure I have the best title to she , for I breed she up . but I believe you will allow I to be she father , and if I be , be I not to govern my own child ? I ask you that , be I not to govern my own child ? and if I be to govern she in other matter , surely I be to govern she in this , which concern she most . and what be I desire all this while ? be I desire she to do anything for I ? to give I anything ?-- much on t'other side , that I be only desire she to take away half my estate now , and t'other half when I die . well , and what be it all vor ? why , be unt it to make she happy ? it be enough to make one mad to hear volk talk ; if I be go to marry myself , then she would ha reason to cry and to blubber ; but , on the contrary , ha not I offer to bind down my land in such a manner , that I could not marry if I would , see as narro ' woman upon earth would ha I . what the devil in hell can I do more ? I contribute to she damnation !-- Zound ! I would zee all the world -- and would bevore she little vinger should be hurt . indeed , , you must excuse I , but I be surprize to hear you talk in zuch a manner , and I must say , take it how you will , that I think you have more sense . " resent this reflection only with a smile ; nor could he , if he would have endeavoure it , have convey into that smile any mixture of malice or contempt . he smile at folly be indeed such as we may suppose the angels bestow on the absurdity of mankind . Blifil now desire to be permit to speak a few word . " as to use any violence on the young lady , I be sure I shall never consent to it . my conscience will not permit I to use violence on any one , much less on a lady for whom , however cruel she be to I , I shall always preserve the purest and sincerest affection ; but yet I have read that woman be seldom proof against perseverance . why may I not hope then by such perseverance at last to gain those inclination , in which for the future I shall , perhaps , have no rival ; for as for this lord , be so kind to prefer I to he ; and sure , sir , you will not deny but that a parent hath at least a negative voice in these matters ; nay , I have hear this very young lady herself say so more than once , and declare that she think child inexcusable who marry in direct opposition to the will of they parent . besides , though the
the other lady of the family seem to favour the pretension of my lord , I do not find the lady herself be inclin to give he any countenance ; alas ! I be too well assure she be not ; I be too sensible that wickedest of man remain uppermost in she heart . " " ay , ay , so he do , " cry western . " but surely , " say , " when she hear of this murder which he hath commit , if the law should spare he life ---- " " what be that ? " cry western . " murder ! hath he commit a murder , and be there any hope of see he hang ?-- rol , tol lol . " here he fall a singing and cape about the room . " child , " say , " this unhappy passion of yours distress I beyond measure . I heartily pity you , and would do every fair thing to promote you success . " " I desire no more , " cry ; " I be convince my dear uncle hath a better opinion of I than to think that I myself would accept of more . " " Lookee , " say , " you have my leave to write , to visit , if she will permit it -- but I insist on no thought of violence . I will have no confinement , nothing of that kind attempt . " " well , well , " cry the squire , " nothing of that kind shall be attempt ; we will try a little longer what fair means will effect ; and if this fellow be but hang out of the way -- lol ! I never hear better news in my life -- I warrant everything go to my mind .-- do , prithee , dear Allworthy , come and dine with I at the Hercule pillars : I have bespeak a shoulder of mutton roast , and a spare - rib of pork , and a fowl and egg - sauce . there will be nobody but ourselves , unless we have a mind to have the landlord ; for I have send down to Basingstoke after my tobacco - box , which I leave at a inn there , and I would not lose it for the world ; for it be a old acquaintance of above twenty year ' standing . I can tell you landlord be a vast comical bitch , you will like un hugely . " at last agree to this invitation , and soon after the squire go off , singe and cape at the hope of see the speedy tragical end of poor . when he be gone , resume the aforesaid subject with much gravity . he tell he nephew , " he wish with all he heart he would endeaavor to conquer a passion , in which I can not , " say he , " flatter you with any hope of succeeding . it be certainly a vulgar error , that aversion in a woman may be conquer by perseverance . Indifference may , perhaps , sometimes yield to it ; but the usual triumph gain by perseverance in a lover be over caprice , prudence , affectation , and often a exorbitant degree of levity , which excite woman not over -warm in they constitution to indulge they vanity by prolonge the time of courtship , even when they be well enough pleased with the object , and resolve ( if they ever resolve at all ) to make he a very pitiful amend in the end . but a fix dislike , as I be afraid this be , will rather gather strength than be conquer by time . besides , my dear , I have another apprehension which you must excuse . I be afraid this passion which you have for this fine young creature hath she beautiful person too much for its object , and be unworthy of the name of that love which be the only foundation of matrimonial felicity . to admire , to like , and to long for the possession of a beautiful woman , without any regard to she sentiment towards we , be , I be afraid , too natural ; but love , I believe , be the child of love only ; at least , I be pretty confident that to love the creature who we be assure hate we be not in human nature . examine you heart , therefore , thoroughly , my good boy , and if , upon examination , you have but the least suspicion of this kind , I be sure you own virtue and religion will impel you to drive so vicious a passion from you heart , and you good sense will soon enable you to do it without pain . " the reader may pretty well guess 's answer ; but , if he should be at a loss , we be not at present at leisure to satisfy he , as we history now hasten on to matter of higher importance , and we can no longer bear to be absent from . chapter iv . a extraordinary scene between and she aunt . the low heifer and the bleat ewe , in herd and flock , may ramble safe and unregarded through the pasture . these be , indeed , hereafter doom to be the prey of man ; yet many year be they suffer to enjoy they liberty undistur . but if a plump doe be discover to have escape from the forest , and to repose herself in some field or grove , the whole parish be presently alarmed , every man be ready to set he dog after she ; and , if she be preserve from the
the rest by the good squire , it be only that he may secure she for he own eating . I have often consider a very fine young woman of fortune and fashion , when first find stray from the pale of she nursery , to be in pretty much the same situation with this doe . the town be immediately in a uproar ; she be hunt from park to play , from court to assembly , from assembly to she own chamber , and rarely escape a single season from the jaw of some devourer or other ; for , if she friend protect she from some , it be only to deliver she over to one of they own chusing , often more disagreeable to she than any of the rest ; while whole herd or flock of other woman securely , and scarce regard , traverse the park , the play , the opera , and the assembly ; and though , for the most part at least , they be at last devoured , yet for a long time do they wanton in liberty , without disturbance or controul . of all these paragon none ever taste more of this persecution than poor . she ill star be not contente with all that she have suffer on account of , they now raise she another pursuer , who seem likely to torment she no less than the other have do . for though she aunt be less violent , she be no less assiduous in teize she , than she father have be before . the servant be no sooner depart after dinner than , who have open the matter to , inform she , " that she expect he lordship that very afternoon , and intend to take the first opportunity of leave she alone with he . " " if you do , madam , " answer , with some spirit , " I shall take the first opportunity of leave he by himself . " " how ! madam ! " cry the aunt ; " be this the return you make I for my kindness in relieive you from you confinement at you father 's ? " " you know , madam , " say , " the cause of that confinement be a refusal to comply with my father in accept a man I detest ; and will my dear aunt , who hath relieve I from that distress , involve I in another equally bad ? " " and do you think then , madam , " answer , " that there be no difference between my and ? " " very little , in my opinion , " cry ; " and , if I must be condemn to one , I would certainly have the merit of sacrificing myself to my father 's pleasure . " " then my pleasure , I find , " say the aunt , " hath very little weight with you ; but that consideration shall not move I . I act from nobler motive . the view of aggrandize my family , of ennobl yourself , be what I proceed upon . have you no sense of ambition ? be there no charms in the thought of have a coronet on you coach ? " " none , upon my honour , " say . " a pincushion upon my coach would please I just as well . " " never mention honour , " cry the aunt . " it become not the mouth of such a wretch . I be sorry , niece , you force I to use these word , but I can not bear you groveling temper ; you have none of the blood of the Western in you . but , however mean and base you own idea be , you shall bring no imputation on mine . I will never suffer the world to say of I that I encourage you in refuse one of the best match in ; a match which , besides its advantage in , would do honour to almost any family , and hath , indeed , in title , the advantage of ours . " " surely , " say , " I be bear deficient , and have not the sense with which other people be bless ; there must be certainly some sense which can relish the delight of sound and show , which I have not ; for surely mankind would not labour so much , nor sacrifice so much for the obtaining , nor would they be so elate and proud with possessing , what appear to they , as it doth to I , the most insignificant of all trifle . " " no , no , miss , " cry the aunt ; " you be bear with as many sense as other people ; but I assure you you be not bear with a sufficient understanding to make a fool of I , or to expose my conduct to the world ; so I declare this to you , upon my word , and you know , I believe , how fix my resolution be , unless you agree to see he lordship this afternoon , I will , with my own hand , deliver you to - morrow morning to my brother , and will never henceforth interfere with you , nor see you face again . " stand a few moment silent after this speech , which be utter in a most angry and peremptory tone ; and then , burst into tear , she cry , " do with I , madam , whatever you please ; I be the most miserable undone wretch upon earth ; if my dear aunt forsake I where shall I look for a protector ? " " my dear niece , " cry
cry she , " you will have a very good protector in he lordship ; a protector whom nothing but a hankering after that vile fellow Jones can make you decline . " " indeed , madam , " say , " you wrong I . how can you imagine , after what you have shew I , if I have ever any such thought , that I should not banish they for ever ? if it will satisfy you , I will receive the sacrament upon it never to see he face again . " " but , child , dear child , " say the aunt , " be reasonable ; can you invent a single objection ? " " I have already , I think , tell you a sufficient objection , " answer . " what ? " cry the aunt ; " I remember none . " " sure , madam , " say , " I tell you he have use I in the rudest and vilest manner . " " indeed , child , " answer she , " I never hear you , or do not understand you :-- but what do you mean by this rude , vile manner ? " " indeed , madam , " say , " I be almost asham to tell you . he catch I in he arm , pull I down upon the settee , and thrust he hand into my bosom , and kiss it with such violence that I have the mark upon my left breast at this moment . " " indeed ! " say . " yes , indeed , madam , " answer ; " my father luckily come in at that instant , or know what rudeness he intend to have proceed to . " " I be astonish and confound , " cry the aunt . " no woman of the name of western hath be ever treat so since we be a family . I would have tear the eye of a prince out , if he have attempt such freedom with I . it be impossible ! sure , , you must invent this to raise my indignation against he . " " I hope , madam , " say , " you have too good a opinion of I to imagine I capable of tell a untruth . upon my soul it be true . " " I should have stab he to the heart , have I be present , " return the aunt . " yet surely he could have no dishonourable design ; it be impossible ! he durst not : beside , he proposal show he hath not ; for they be not only honourable , but generous . I do not know ; the age allow too great freedom . a distant salute be all I would have allow before the ceremony . I have have lover formerly , not so long ago neither ; several lover , though I never would consent to marriage , and I never encourage the least freedom . it be a foolish custom , and what I never would agree to . no man kiss more of I than my cheek . it be as much as one can bring oneself to give lip up to a husband ; and , indeed , could I ever have be persuade to marry , I believe I should not have soon be bring to endure so much . " " you will pardon I , dear madam , " say , " if I make one observation : you own you have have many lover , and the world know it , even if you should deny it . you refuse they all , and , I be convince , one coronet at least among they . " " you say true , dear , " answer she ; " I have once the offer of a title . " " why , then , " say , " will you not suffer I to refuse this once ? " " it be true , child , " say she , " I have refuse the offer of a title ; but it be not so good a offer ; that be , not so very , very good a offer ." --" yes , madam , " say ; " but you have have very great proposal from man of vast fortune . it be not the first , nor the second , nor the third advantageous match that offer itself . " " I own it be not , " say she . " well , madam , " continue , " and why may not I expect to have a second , perhaps , better than this ? you be now but a young woman , and I be convinced would not promise to yield to the first lover of fortune , nay , or of title too . I be a very young woman , and sure I need not despair . " " well , my dear , dear , " cry the aunt , " what would you have I say ? " " why , I only beg that I may not be leave alone , at least this evening ; grant I that , and I will submit , if you think , after what be past , I ought to see he in you company . " " well , I will grant it , " cry the aunt . " , you know I love you , and can deny you nothing . you know the easiness of my nature ; I have not always be so easy . I have be formerly think cruel ; by the man , I mean . I be call the cruel . I have break many a window that
that have have verse to the cruel in it . , I be never so handsome as you , and yet I have something of you formerly . I be a little altered . Kingdoms and state , as say in he epistle , undergo alteration , and so must the human form . " thus run she on for near half a hour upon herself , and she conquest , and she cruelty , till the arrival of my lord , who , after a most tedious visit , during which never once offer to leave the room , retire , not much more satisfied with the aunt than with the niece ; for have bring she aunt into so excellent a temper , that she consent to almost everything she niece say ; and agree that a little distant behaviour might not be improper to so forward a lover . thus , by a little well - direct flattery , for which surely none will blame she , obtain a little ease for herself , and , at least , put off the evil day . and now we have see we heroine in a better situation than she hath be for a long time before , we will look a little after , whom we leave in the most deplorable situation that can be well imagine . v. and visit in the prison . when and he nephew go to meet , set forwards to she son - in - law 's lodging , in order to acquaint he with the accident which have befall he friend ; but he have know it long before from ( for , when he leave , have be furnish with a room in the same house with ) . the good woman find she daughter under great affliction on account of , whom have comforte as well as she could , she set forwards to the Gatehouse , where she hear he be , and where be arrive before she . the firmness and constancy of a true friend be a circumstance so extremely delightful to person in any kind of distress , that the distress itself , if it be only temporary , and admit of relief , be more than compensate by bring this comfort with it . nor be instance of this kind so rare as some superficial and inaccurate observer have report . to say the truth , want of compassion be not to be number among we general fault . the black ingredient which foul we disposition be envy . hence we eye be seldom , I be afraid , turn upward to those who be manifestly greater , better , wiser , or happier than ourselves , without some degree of malignity ; while we commonly look downward on the mean and miserable with sufficient benevolence and pity . in fact , I have remark , that most of the defects which have discover themselves in the friendship within my observation have arisen from envy only : a hellish vice ; and yet one from which I have know very few absolutely exempt . but enough of a subject which , if pursue , would lead I too far . whether it be that be apprehensive lest Jones should sink under the weight of he adversity , and that she might thus lose any future opportunity of torment he , or whether she really abate somewhat of she severity towards he , she seem a little to relax she persecution , by send he the company of two such faithful friend , and what be perhaps more rare , a faithful servant . for , though he have many imperfection , want not fidelity ; and though fear would not suffer he to be hang for he master , yet the world , I believe , could not have bribe he to desert he cause . while be express great satisfaction in the presence of he friend , bring a account that be still alive , though the surgeon declare that he have very little hope . upon which , fetch a deep sigh , say to he , " my dear Tom , why should you afflict yourself so upon a accident , which , whatever be the consequence , can be attend with no danger to you , and in which you conscience can not accuse you of have be the least to blame ? if the fellow should die , what have you do more than take away the life of a ruffian in you own defence ? so will the coroner 's inquest certainly find it ; and then you will be easily admit to bail ; and , though you must undergo the form of a trial , yet it be a trial which many man would stand for you for a shilling . " " come , come , , " say , " chear yourself up . I know you could not be the aggressor , and so I tell , and so he shall acknowledge too , before I have do with he . " gravely answer , " that whatever might be he fate , he should always lament the having she the blood of one of he fellow - creature , as one of the highest misfortune which could have befall he . but I have another misfortune of the tenderest kind ---- o ! , I have lose what I hold most dear upon earth . " " that must be a mistress , " say ; " but come , come ; I know more than you imagine " ( for indeed have blab all ) ; " and I have hear more than you know . matter go better , I promise you , than you think ; and I would not give sixpence for all the chance which he hath of
of the lady . " " indeed , my dear friend , indeed , " answer , " you be a entire stranger to the cause of my grief . if you be acquaint with the story , you would allow my case admit of no comfort . I apprehend no danger from . I have undone myself . " " do not despair , " reply ; " you know not what a woman can do ; and if anything be in my power , I promise you I will do it to serve you . it be my duty . my son , my dear , who be so kind to tell I he hath obligation to you on the same account , know it be my duty . shall I go to the lady myself ? I will say anything to she you would have I say . " " thou best of woman , " cry , take she by the hand , " talk not of obligation to I ;-- but as you have be so kind to mention it , there be a favour which , perhaps , may be in you power . I see you be acquaint with the lady ( how you come by you information I know not ) , who sit , indeed , very near my heart . if you could contrive to deliver this ( give she a paper from he pocket ) , I shall for ever acknowledge you goodness . " " give it I , " say . " if I see it not in she own possession before I sleep , may my next sleep be my last ! Comfort yourself , my good young man ! be wise enough to take warning from past folly , and I warrant all shall be well , and I shall yet see you happy with the most charme young lady in the world ; for I so hear from every one she be . " " believe I , madam , " say he , " I do not speak the common cant of one in my unhappy situation . before this dreadful accident happen , I have resolve to quit a life of which I be become sensible of the wickedness as well as folly . I do assure you , notwithstand the disturbance I have unfortunately occasion in you house , for which I heartily ask you pardon , I be not a abandon profligate . though I have be hurry into vex , I do not approve a vicious character , nor will I ever , from this moment , deserve it . " express great satisfaction in these declaration , in the sincerity of which she averr she have a entire faith ; and now the remainder of the conversation past in the joint attempt of that good woman and to cheer the deject spirit of , in which they so far succeed as to leave he much better comfort and satisfy than they find he ; to which happy alteration nothing so much contribute as the kind undertaking of to deliver he letter to , which he despair of find any means to accomplish ; for when produce the last from , he inform that she have strictly charge he , on pain of have it communicate to she father , not to bring she any answer . he be , moreover , not a little pleased to find he have so warm a advocate to himself in this good woman , who be , in reality , one of the worthiest creature in the world . after about a hour 's visit from the lady ( for have be with he much longer ) , they both take they leave , promise to return to he soon ; during which say she hope to bring he some good news from he mistress , and promise to enquire into the state of 's wound , and likewise to find out some of the persons who be present at the rencounter . the former of these go directly in quest of , whither we likewise shall now attend she . chapter vi . in which pay a visit to . access to the young lady be by no means difficult ; for , as she live now on a perfect friendly footing with she aunt , she be at full liberty to receive what visitant she please . be dress when she be acquaint that there be a gentlewoman below to wait on she . as she be neither afraid , nor asham , to see any of she own sex , be immediately admit . Curtsy and the usual ceremonial between woman who be stranger to each other , be past , say , " I have not the pleasure to know you , madam . " " no , madam , " answer , " and I must beg pardon for intruding upon you . but when you know what have induce I to give you this trouble , I hope ---- " " pray , what be you business , madam ? " say , with a little emotion . " madam , we be not alone , " reply , in a low voice . " go out , , " say . when be depart , say , " I be desire , madam , by a very unhappy young gentleman , to deliver you this letter . " change colour when she see the direction , well know the hand , and after some hesitation , say -- " I could not conceive , madam , from you appearance , that you business have be of such a nature .-- whomever you bring this letter from , I shall not open it . I should be sorry to entertain a unjust suspicion of any one ;
; but you be a utter stranger to I . " " if you will have patience , madam , " answer , " I will acquaint you who I be , and how I come by that letter . " " I have no curiosity , madam , to know anything , " cry ; " but I must insist on you deliver that letter back to the person who give it you . " then fall upon she knee , and in the most passionate term implor she compassion ; to which answer : " sure , madam , it be surprize you should be so very strongly interested in the behalf of this person . I would not think , madam " -- " no , madam , " say , " you shall not think anything but the truth . I will tell you all , and you will not wonder that I be interested . he be the best - nature creature that ever be bear . " -- she then begin and relate the story of .-- after this she cry , " this , madam , this be he goodness ; but I have much more tender obligation to he . he hath preserve my child . " -- here , after shed some tear , she relate everything concern that fact , suppresse only those circumstance which would have most reflecte on she daughter , and conclude with say , " now , madam , you shall judge whether I can ever do enough for so kind , so good , so generous a young man ; and sure he be the best and worthiest of all human being . " the alteration in the countenance of have hitherto be chiefly to she disadvantage , and have inclin she complexion to too great paleness ; but she now wax redder , if possible , than vermilion , and cry , " I know not what to say ; certainly what arise from gratitude can not be blame -- but what service can my read this letter do you friend , since I be resolve never ---- " fall again to she entreaty , and beg to be forgive , but she could not , she say , carry it back . " well , madam , " say , " I can not help it , if you will force it upon I .-- certainly you may leave it whether I will or no . " what mean , or whether she mean anything , I will not presume to determine ; but actually understand this as a hint , and presently lay the letter down on the table , take she leave , have first beg permission to wait again on ; which request have neither assent nor denial . the letter lay upon the table no longer than till be out of sight ; for then open and read it . this letter do very little service to he cause ; for it consist of little more than confessions of he own unworthiness , and bitter lamentation of despair , together with the most solemn protestation of he unalterable fidelity to , of which , he say , he hope to convince she , if he have ever more the honour of be admit to she presence ; and that he could account for the letter to in such a manner , that , though it would not entitle he to she forgiveness , he hope at least to obtain it from she mercy . and conclude with vowing that nothing be ever less in he thought than to . though read the letter twice over with great attention , he mean still remain a riddle to she ; nor could she invention suggest to she any means to excuse . she certainly remain very angry with he , though indeed take up so much of she resentment , that she gentle mind have but little leave to bestow on any other person . that lady be most unluckily to dine this very day with she aunt western , and in the afternoon they be all three , by appointment , to go together to the opera , and thence to 's drum . would have gladly be excuse from all , but would not disoblige she aunt ; and as to the art of counterfeiting illness , she be so entirely a stranger to they , that it never once enter into she head . when she be drest , therefore , down she go , resolve to encounter all the horror of the day , and a most disagreeable one it prove ; for take every opportunity very civilly and slily to insult she ; to all which she dejection of spirit disable she from make any return ; and , indeed , to confess the truth , she be at the very best but a indifferent mistress of repartee . another misfortune which befel poor be the company of , whom she meet at the opera , and who attend she to the drum . and though both place be too publick to admit of any particularity , and she be farther relieve by the musick at the one place , and by the card at the other , she could not , however , enjoy herself in he company ; for there be something of delicacy in woman , which will not suffer they to be even easy in the presence of a man whom they know to have pretension to they which they be disinclin to favou . have in this chapter twice mention a drum , a word which we posterity , it be hope , will not understand in the sense it be here apply , we shall , notwithstand we present haste , stop a moment to describe the entertainment here mean ,
, and the rather as we can in a moment describe it . a drum , then , be a assembly of well - dress person of both sex , most of whom play at card , and the rest do nothing at all ; while the mistress of the house perform the part of the landlady at a inn , and like the landlady of a inn pride herself in the number of she guest , though she doth not always , like she , get anything by it . no wonder then , as so much spirit must be require to support any vivacity in these scene of dulness , that we hear person of fashion eternally complain of the want of they ; a complaint confin entirely to upper life . how insupportable must we imagine this round of impertinence to have be to at this time ; how difficult must she have find it to force the appearance of gaiety into she look , when she mind dictat nothing but the tenderest sorrow , and when every thought be charge with torment idea ! night , however , at last restore she to she pillow , where we will leave she to soothe she melancholy at least , though incapable we fear of rest , and shall pursue we history , which , something whisper we , be now arrive at the eve of some great event . chapter vii . a pathetic scene between and . have a long discourse with , at he return from dinner , in which she acquaint he with 's have unfortunately lose all which he be pleased to bestow on he at they separation ; and with the distress to which that loss have subject he ; of all which she have receive a full account from the faithful retailer Partridge . she then explain the obligation she have to ; not that she be entirely explicit with regard to she daughter ; for though she have the utmost confidence in , and though there could be no hope of keep a affair secret which be unhappily known to more than half a dozen , yet she could not prevail with herself to mention those circumstance which reflect most on the chastity of poor , but smother that part of she evidence as cautiously as if she have be before a judge , and the girl be now on she trial for the murder of a bastard . say , there be few character so absolutely vicious as not to have the least mixture of good in they . " however , " say he , " I can not deny but that you have some obligation to the fellow , bad as he be , and I shall therefore excuse what hath past already , but must insist you never mention he name to I more ; for , I promise you , it be upon the fullest and plainest evidence that I resolve to take the measure I have take . " " well , sir , " say she , " I make not the least doubt but time will show all matters in they true and natural colour , and that you will be convince this poor young man deserve better of you than some other folk that shall be nameless . " " madam , " cry , a little ruffle , " I will not hear any reflection on my nephew ; and if ever you say a word more of that kind , I will depart from you house that instant . he be the worthiest and best of man ; and I once more repeat it to you , he hath carry he friendship to this man to a blameable length , by too long concealing fact of the blackest die . the ingratitude of the wretch to this good young man be what I must resent ; for , madam , I have the greatest reason to imagine he have lay a plot to supplant my nephew in my favour , and to have disinherit he . " " I be sure , sir , " answer , a little frightened ( for , though have the utmost sweetness and benevolence in he smile , he have great terror in he frown ) , " I shall never speak against any gentleman you be pleased to think well of . I be sure , sir , such behaviour would very little become I , especially when the gentleman be you nearest relation ; but , sir , you must not be angry with I , you must not indeed , for my good wish to this poor wretch . sure I may call he so now , though once you would have be angry with I if I have speak of he with the least disrespect . how often have I hear you call he you son ? how often have you prattle to I of he with all the fondness of a parent ? Nay , sir , I can not forget the many tender expression , the many good thing you have tell I of he beauty , and he part , and he virtue ; of he good - nature and generosity . I be sure , sir , I can not forget they , for I find they all true . I have experience they in my own cause . they have preserve my family . you must pardon my tear , sir , indeed you must . when I consider the cruel reverse of fortune which this poor youth , to whom I be so much obliged , hath suffer ; when I consider the loss of you favour , which I know he value more than he life , I must , I must lament he . if you have a dagger in you hand
hand , ready to plunge into my heart , I must lament the misery of one whom you have love , and I shall ever love . " be pretty much move with this speech , but it seem not to be with anger ; for , after a short silence , take by the hand , he say very affectionately to she , " come , madam , let we consider a little about you daughter . I can not blame you for rejoicing in a match which promise to be advantageous to she , but you know this advantage , in a great measure , depend on the father 's reconciliation . I know very well , and have formerly have concern with he ; I will make he a visit , and endeavou to serve you in this matter . I believe he be a worldly man ; but as this be a only son , and the thing be now irretrievable , perhaps he may in time be bring to reason . I promise you I will do all I can for you . " many be the acknowledgment which the poor woman make to for this kind and generous offer , nor could she refrain from take this occasion again to express she gratitude towards , " to whom , " say she , " I owe the opportunity of give you , sir , this present trouble . " gently stop she ; but he be too good a man to be really offended with the effect of so noble a principle as now actuate ; and indeed , have not this new affair inflam he former anger against , it be possible he might have be a little soften towards he , by the report of a action which malice itself could not have derive from a evil motive . and have be above a hour together , when they conversation be put a end to by the arrival of and another person , which other person be no less than , the attorney , who be now become a great favourite with , and whom , at the desire of he nephew , have make he steward ; and have likewise recommend he to , from whom the attorney receive a promise of be promote to the same office upon the first vacancy ; and , in the meantime , be employ in transact some affair which the squire then have in in relation to a mortgage . this be the principal affair which then bring Dowling to tow ; therefore he take the same opportunity to charge himself with some money for , and to make a report to he of some other business ; in all which , as it be of much too dull a nature to find any place in this history , we will leave the uncle , nephew , and they lawyer concerned , and resort to other matters . chapter viii . contain various matters . before we return to , we will take one more view of . though that young lady have bring she aunt into great good humour by those soothing method which we have before related , she have not bring she in the least to abate of she zeal for the match with . this zeal be now inflam by , who have tell she the preceding evening , that she be well satisfi from the conduct of , and from she carriage to he lordship , that all delay would be dangerous , and that the only way to succeed be to press the match forward with such rapidity that the young lady should have no time to reflect , and be oblige to consent while she scarce know what she do ; in which manner , she say , one - half of the marriage among people of condition be bring about . a fact very probably true , and to which , I suppose , be owe the mutual tenderness which afterwards exist among so many happy couple . a hint of the same kind be give by the same lady to ; and both these so readily embrace the advice that the very next day be , at he lordship 's request , appoint by for a private interview between the young party . this be communicate to by she aunt , and insist upon in such high term , that , after have urge everything she possibly could invent against it without the least effect , she at last agree to give the highest instance of complacence which any young lady can give , and consent to see he lordship . as conversation of this kind afford no great entertainment , we shall be excuse from recit the whole that past at this interview ; in which , after he lordship have make many declaration of the most pure and ardent passion to the silent blushing , she at last collect all the spirit she could raise , and with a trembling low voice say , " my lord , you must be yourself conscious whether you former behaviour to I hath be consistent with the profession you now make . " " be there , " answer he , " no way by which I can ato for madness ? what I do I be afraid must have too plainly convince you , that the violence of love have deprive I of my sense . " " indeed , my lord , " say she , " it be in you power to give I a proof of a affection which I much rather wish to encourage , and to which I should think myself more beholden . " " name it , madam , " say my lord , very warmly . " my lord , " say she , look down upon she
she fan , " I know you must be sensible how uneasy this pretend passion of yours hath make I . " " can you be so cruel to call it pretend ? " say he . " yes , my lord , " answer , " all profession of love to those whom we persecute be most insulting pretence . this pursuit of yours be to I a most cruel persecution : nay , it be take a most ungenerous advantage of my unhappy situation . " " most lovly , most adorable charmer , do not accuse I , " cry he , " of take a ungenerous advantage , while I have no thought but what be direct to you honour and interest , and while I have no view , no hope , no ambition , but to throw myself , honour , fortune , everything at you foot . " " my lord , " say she , " it be that fortune and those honour which give you the advantage of which I complain . these be the charms which have seduce my relation , but to I they be thing indifferent . if you lordship will merit my gratitude , there be but one way . " " pardon I , divine creature , " say he , " there can be none . all I can do for you be so much you due , and will give I so much pleasure , that there be no room for you gratitude . " " indeed , my lord , " answer she , " you may obtain my gratitude , my good opinion , every kind think and wish which it be in my power to bestow ; nay , you may obtain they with ease , for sure to a generous mind it must be easy to grant my request . let I beseech you , then , to cease a pursuit in which you can never have any success . for you own sake as well as mine I entreat this favour ; for sure you be too noble to have any pleasure in torment a unhappy creature . what can you lordship propose but uneasiness to yourself , by a perseverance , which , upon my honour , upon my soul , can not , shall not prevail with I , whatever distress you may drive I to . " here my lord fetch a deep sigh , and then say -- " be it then , madam , that I be so unhappy to be the object of you dislike and scorn ; or will you pardon I if I suspect there be some other ? " here he hesitate , and answer with some spirit , " my lord , I shall not be accountable to you for the reason of my conduct . I be oblige to you lordship for the generous offer you have make ; I own it be beyond either my desert or expectation ; yet I hope , my lord , you will not insist on my reason , when I declare I can not accept it . " return much to this , which we do not perfectly understand , and perhaps it could not all be strictly reconcile either to sense or grammar ; but he conclude he ranting speech with say , " that if she have pre-engage herself to any gentleman , however unhappy it would make he , he should think himself bound in honou to desist . " perhaps my lord lay too much emphasis on the word gentleman ; for we can not else well account for the indignation with which he inspire , who , in she answer , see greatly to resent some affront he have give she . while she be speak , with she voice more raise than usual , western come into the room , the fire glar in she cheek , and the flame burst from she eyes . " I be asham , " say she , " my lord , of the reception which you have meet with . I assure you lordship we be all sensible of the honour do we ; and I must tell you , miss western , the family expect a different behaviour from you . " here my lord interfere on behalf of the young lady , but to no purpose ; the aunt proceed till pull out she handkerchief , throw herself into a chair , and burst into a violent fit of tear . the remainder of the conversation between western and he lordship , till the latter withdrew , consist of bitter lamentation on he side , and on hers of the strongest assurance that she niece should and would consent to all he wish . " indeed , my lord , " say she , " the girl hath have a foolish education , neither adapt to she fortune nor she family . she father , I be sorry to say it , be to blame for everything . the girl hath silly country notions of bashfulness . nothing else , my lord , upon my honour ; I be convince she hath a good understanding at the bottom , and will be bring to reason . " this last speech be make in the absence of ; for she have some time before leave the room , with more appearance of passion than she have ever show on any occasion ; and now he lordship , after many expression of thanks to , many ardent profession of passion which nothing could conquer , and many assurance of perseverance , which highly encourage , take he leave for this time . before we relate what now pass between and , it may be proper to mention a unfortunate accident which have happen , and which have occasion the
the return of Mrs Western with so much fury , as we have see . the reader then must know that the maid who at present attend on be recommend by , with whom she have liv for some time in the capacity of a comb -brush : she be a very sensible girl , and have receive the strictest instruction to watch she young lady very carefully . these instruction , we be sorry to say , be communicate to she by , into whose favour have now so ingratiate herself , that the violent affection which the good waiting - woman have formerly borne to be entirely obliterate by that great attachment which she have to she new mistress . now , when be depart , ( for that be the name of the girl ) , return to she young lady , find she very attentively engage in read a long letter , and the visible emotion which she betraye on that occasion might have well accounted for some suspicions which the girl entertaine ; but indeed they have yet a stronger foundation , for she have overhear the whole scene which pass between and . be acquaint with all this matter by , who , after receive many commendation and some reward for she fidelity , be order , that , if the woman who bring the letter come again , she should introduce she to Mrs Western herself . Unluckily , return at the very time when be engage with he lordship . Betty , accord to order , send she directly to the aunt ; who , be mistress of so many circumstance relate to what have past the day before , easily impos upon the poor woman to believe that have communicate the whole affair ; and so pump everything out of she which she know relate to the letter and relate to . this poor creature might , indeed , be call simplicity itself . she be one of that order of mortal who be apt to believe everything which be say to they ; to whom nature hath neither indulge the offensive nor defensive weapon of deceit , and who be consequently liable to be impos upon by any one who will only be at the expense of a little falshood for that purpose . Mrs western , have drain of all she know , which , indeed , be but little , but which be sufficient to make the aunt suspect a great deal , dismiss she with assurance that would not see she , that she would send no answer to the letter , nor ever receive another ; nor do she suffer she to depart without a handsome lecture on the merit of a office to which she could afford no better name than that of procuress .-- this discovery have greatly discompose she temper , when , come into the apartment next to that in which the lover were , she overhear very warmly protest against he lordship 's address . at which the rage already kind burst forth , and she rush in upon she niece in a most furious manner , as we have already describe , together with what past at that time till he lordship 's departure . no sooner be gone than return to , whom she upbraide in the most bitter term for the ill use she have make of the confidence repose in she ; and for she treachery in conversing with a man with whom she have offer but the day before to bind herself in the most solemn oath never more to have any conversation . protest she have maintain no such conversation . " how , how ! miss western , " say the aunt ; " will you deny you receive a letter from he yesterday ? " " a letter , madam ! " answer , somewhat surprize . " it be not very well breed , miss , " reply the aunt , " to repeat my word . I say a letter , and I insist upon you show it I immediately . " " I scorn a lie , madam , " say ; " I do receive a letter , but it be without my desire , and , indeed , I may say , against my consent . " " indeed , indeed , miss , " cry the aunt , " you ought to be asham of own you have receive it at all ; but where be the letter ? for I will see it . " to this peremptory demand , pause some time before she return a answer ; and at last only excuse herself by declaring she have not the letter in she pocket , which be , indeed , true ; upon which she aunt , lose all manner of patience , ask she niece this short question , whether she would resolve to marry , or no ? to which she receive the strongest negative . Mrs western then reply with a oath , or something very like one , that she would early the next morning deliver she back into she father 's hand . then begin to reason with she aunt in the follow manner :--" why , madam , must I of necessity be force to marry at all ? consider how cruel you would have think it in you own case , and how much kinder you parent be in leave you to you liberty . what have I do to forfeit this liberty ? I will never marry contrary to my father 's consent , nor without ask yours ---- and when I ask the consent of either improperly , it will be then time enough to force some other marriage upon I . " " can I bear to hear this , " cry Mrs western , "
" from a girl who hath now a letter from a murderer in she pocket ? " " I have no such letter , I promise you , " answer ; " and , if he be a murderer , he will soon be in no condition to give you any further disturbance . " " how , western ! " say the aunt , " have you the assurance to speak of he in this manner ; to own you affection for such a villain to my face ? " " sure , madam , " say , " you put a very strange construction on my word . " " indeed , , " cry the lady , " I shall not bear this usage ; you have learnt of you father this manner of treat I ; he hath teach you to give I the lie . he hath totally ruin you by this false system of education ; and , please heave , he shall have the comfort of its fruit ; for once more I declare to you , that to - morrow morning I will carry you back . I will withdraw all my force from the field , and remain henceforth , like the wise king of , in a state of perfect neutrality . you be both too wise to be regulate by my measure ; so prepare yourself , for to - morrow morning you shall evacuate this house . " remonstrate all she could ; but she aunt be deaf to all she say . in this resolution therefore we must at present leave she , as there seem to be no hope of bring she to change it . chapter ix . what happen to in the prison . pass about twenty - four melancholy hour by himself , unless when relieve by the company of , before return ; not that this worthy young man have desert or forgot he friend ; for , indeed , he have be much the greatest part of the time employ in he service . he have hear , upon enquiry , that the only person who have see the beginning of the unfortunate rencounter be a crew belong to a man - of - war which then lay at . to therefore he go in search of this crew , where he be inform that the man he seek after be all go ashore . he then trace they from place to place , till at last he find two of they drink together , with a third person , at a hedge - tavern near . desire to speak with by himself ( for be in the room when he come in ) . as soon as they be alone , Nightingale , take by the hand , cry , " come , my brave friend , be not too much deject at what I be go to tell you ---- I be sorry I be the messenger of bad news ; but I think it my duty to tell you . " " I guess already what that bad news be , " cry . " the poor gentleman then be dead . " --" I hope not , " answer . " he be alive this morning ; though I will not flatter you ; I fear , from the account I could get , that he wound be mortal . but if the affair be exactely as you tell it , you own remorse would be all you would have reason to apprehend , let what would happen ; but forgive I , my dear Tom , if I entreat you to make the worst of you story to you friend . if you disguise anything to we , you will only be a enemy to yourself . " " what reason , my dear , have I ever give you , " say , " to stab I with so cruel a suspicion ? " " have patience , " cry , " and I will tell you all . after the most diligent enquiry I could make , I at last met with two of the fellows who be present at this unhappy accident , and I be sorry to say , they do not relate the story so much in you favour as you yourself have tell it . " " why , what do they say ? " cry . " indeed what I be sorry to repeat , as I be afraid of the consequence of it to you . they say that they be at too great a distance to overhear any word that pass between you : but they both agree that the first blow be give by you . " " then , upon my soul , " answer , " they injure I . he not only struck I first , but strike I without the least provocation . what should induce those villain to accuse I falsely ? " " Nay , that I can not guess , " say , " and if you yourself , and I , who be so heartily you friend , can not conceive a reason why they should belie you , what reason will a indifferent court of justice be able to assign why they should not believe they ? I repeat the question to they several time , and so do another gentleman who be present , who , I believe , be a seafaring man , and who really act a very friendly part by you ; for he beg they often to consider that there be the life of a man in the case ; and ask they over and over , if they be certain ; to which they both answer , that they be , and would abide by they evidence upon oath . for heaven
heaven 's sake , my dear friend , recollect yourself ; for , if this should appear to be the fact , it will be you business to think in time of make the best of you interest . I would not shock you ; but you know , I believe , the severity of the law , whatever verbal provocation may have be give you . " " ! my friend , " cry , " what interest hath such a wretch as I ? besides , do you think I would even wish to live with the reputation of a murderer ? if I have any friend ( as , alas ! I have none ) , could I have the confidence to solicit they to speak in the behalf of a man condemn for the blackest crime in human nature ? believe I , I have no such hope ; but I have some reliance on a throne still greatly superior ; which will , I be certain , afford I all the protection I merit . " he then conclude with many solemn and vehement protestation of the truth of what he have at first assert . the faith of be now again stagger , and begin to incline to credit he friend , when appear , and make a sorrowful report of the success of she embassy ; which when have hear , he cry out most heroically , " well , my friend , I be now indifferent as to what shall happen , at least with regard to my life ; and if it be the will of that I shall make a atonement with that for the blood I have spilt , I hope the will one day suffer my honour to be clear , and that the word of a die man , at least , will be believe , so far as to justify he character . " a very mournful scene now past between the prisoner and he friend , at which , as few reader would have be pleased to be present , so few , I believe , will desire to hear it particularly relate . we will , therefore , pass on to the entrance of the turnkey , who acquaint that there be a lady without who desire to speak with he when he be at leisure . declare he surprize at this message . he say , " he know no lady in the world whom he could possibly expect to see there . " however , as he see no reason to decline see any person , and presently take they leave , and he give order to have the lady admit . if be surprize at the news of a visit from a lady , how greatly be he astonished when he discover this lady to be no other than ! in this astonishment then we shall leave he awhile , in order to cure the surprize of the reader , who will likewise , probably , not a little wonder at the arrival of this lady . who this be , the reader pretty well know ; what she be , he must be perfectly satisfied . he will therefore be pleased to remember that this lady depart from in the same coach with and the other irish gentleman , and in they company travel to . now there be a certain office in the gift of at that time vacant , namely that of a wife : for the lady who have lately fill that office have resign , or at least desert she duty . therefore , have thoroughly examine Waters on the road , find she extremely fit for the place , which , on they arrival at , he presently confer upon she , and she without any scruple accept . as husband and wife this gentleman and lady continue together all the time they stay at , and as husband and wife they arrive together in town . whether be so wise a man as not to part with one good thing till he have secure another , which he have at present only a prospect of regaining ; or whether have so well discharge she office , that he intend still to retain she as principal , and to make he wife ( as be often the case ) only she deputy , I will not say ; but certain it be , he never mention he wife to she , never communicate to she the letter give he by , nor ever once hint he purpose of repossesse he wife ; much less do he ever mention the name of . for , though he intend to fight with he wherever he meet he , he do not imitate those prudent person who think a wife , a mother , a sister , or sometimes a whole family , the safest seconds on these occasion . the first account therefore which she have of all this be deliver to she from he lip , after he be bring home from the tavern where he wound have be drest . as , however , have not the clearest way of tell a story at any time , and be now , perhaps , a little more confused than usual , it be some time before she discover that the gentleman who have give he this wound be the very same person from whom she heart have receive a wound , which , though not of a mortal kind , be yet so deep that it have leave a considerable scar behind it . but no sooner be she acquaint that himself be the man who have be commit to the Gatehouse for this suppose murder , than she take the first opportunity of commit to the care of he nurse , and hasten away to visit
visit the conqueror . she now enter the room with a air of gaiety , which receive a immediate check from the melancholy aspect of poor , who start and bless himself when he see she . upon which she say , " Nay , I do not wonder at you surprize ; I believe you do not expect to see I ; for few gentleman be trouble here with visit from any lady , unless a wife . you see the power you have over I , . indeed , I little think , when we part at , that we next meeting would have be in such a place . " " indeed , madam , " say , " I must look upon this visit as kind ; few will follow the miserable , especially to such dismal habitation . " " I protest , , " say she , " I can hardly persuade myself you be the same agreeable fellow I see at . why , you face be more miserable than any dungeon in the universe . what can be the matter with you ? " " I think , madam , " say , " as you know of my be here , you know the unhappy reason . " " Pugh ! " say she , " you have pink a man in a duel , that be all . " exprest some indignation at this levity , and speak with the utmost contrition for what have happen . to which she answer , " well , then , sir , if you take it so much to heart , I will relieve you ; the gentleman be not dead , and , I be pretty confident , be in no danger of dying . the surgeon , indeed , who first dress he be a young fellow , and seem desirous of represent he case to be as bad as possible , that he might have the more honour from cure he : but the king 's surgeon hath see he since , and say , unless from a fever , of which there be at present no symptom , he apprehend not the least danger of life . " shew great satisfaction in he countenance at this report ; upon which she affir the truth of it , add , " by the most extraordinary accident in the world I lodge at the same house ; and have see the gentleman , and I promise you he doth you justice , and say , whatever be the consequence , that he be entirely the aggressor , and that you be not in the least to blame . " express the utmost satisfaction at the account which bring he . he then inform she of many thing which she well know before , as who be , the occasion of he resentment , &c . he likewise tell she several fact of which she be ignorant , as the adventure of the muff , and other particular , conceal only the name of . he then lament the folly and vex of which he have be guilty ; every one of which , he say , have be attend with such ill consequence , that he should be unpardonable if he do not take warning , and quit those vicious course for the future . he lastly conclude with assure she of he resolution to sin no more , lest a worse thing should happen to he . Waters with great pleasantry ridicule all this , as the effect of low spirit and confinement . she repeat some witticism about the devil when he be sick , and tell he , " she doubt not but shortly to see he at liberty , and as lively a fellow as ever ; and then , " say she , " I do not question but you conscience will be safely deliver of all these qualm that it be now so sick in breeding . " many more thing of this kind she uttere , some of which it would do she no great honour , in the opinion of some reader , to remember ; nor be we quite certain but that the answer make by would be treat with ridicule by other . we shall therefore suppress the rest of this conversation , and only observe that it end at last with perfect innocence , and much more to the satisfaction of than of the lady ; for the former be greatly transport with the news she have bring he ; but the latter be not altogether so pleased with the penitential behaviour of a man whom she have , at she first interview , conceive a very different opinion of from what she now entertaine of he . thus the melancholy occasion by the report of be pretty well efface ; but the dejection into which have throw he still continue . the account she give so well tally with the word of herself in she letter , that he make not the least doubt but that she have disclose he letter to she aunt , and have take a fix resolution to abandon he . the torment this think gave he be to be equall only by a piece of news which fortune have yet in store for he , and which we shall communicate in the second chapter of the ensue book . . contain about . I . a farewel to the reader . we be now , reader , arrive at the last stage of we long journey . as we have , therefore , travel together through so many page , let we behave to one another like fellow -traveller in a stage coach , who have pass several day in the company of each other ; and who , notwithstand any bickering or little animosity
animosity which may have occur on the road , generally make all up at last , and mount , for the last time , into they vehicle with chearfulness and good humour ; since after this one stage , it may possibly happen to we , as it commonly happen to they , never to meet more . as I have here take up this simile , give I leave to carry it a little farther . I intend , then , in this last book , to imitate the good company I have mention in they last journey . now , it be well know that all joke and raillery be at this time lay aside ; whatever character any of the passenger have for the jest - sake personate on the road be now throw off , and the conversation be usually plain and serious . in the same manner , if I have now and then , in the course of this work , indulge any pleasantry for thy entertainment , I shall here lay it down . the variety of matter , indeed , which I shall be oblige to crbe into this book , will afford no room for any of those ludicrous observation which I have elsewhere make , and which may sometimes , perhaps , have prevent thee from take a nap when it be begin to steal upon thee . in this last book thou will find nothing ( or at most very little ) of that nature . all will be plain narrative only ; and , indeed , when thou hast peruse the many great event which this book will produce , thou will think the number of page contain in it scarce sufficient to tell the story . and now , my friend , I take this opportunity ( as I shall have no other ) of heartily wishing thee well . if I have be a entertain companion to thee , I promise thee it be what I have desire . if in anything I have offend , it be really without any intention . some thing , perhaps , here say , may have hit thee or thy friend ; but I do most solemnly declare they be not point at thee or they . I question not but thou hast be tell , among other story of I , that thou wast to travel with a very scurrilous fellow ; but whoever tell thee so do I a injury . no man detest and despise scurrility more than myself ; nor hath any man more reason ; for none hath ever be treat with more ; and what be a very severe fate , I have have some of the abusive writing of those very man fathere upon I , who , in other of they work , have abuse I themselves with the utmost virulence . all these work , however , I be well convince , will be dead long before this page shall offer itself to thy perusal ; for however short the period may be of my own performance , they will most probably outlive they own infirm author , and the weakly productions of he abusive contemporary . . contain a very tragical incident . while be employ in those unpleasant meditation , with which we leave he torment himself , come stumbl into the room with he face paler than ash , he eye fix in he head , he hair stand a end , and every limb trembl . in short , he look as he would have do have he see a spectre , or have he , indeed , be a spectre himself . , who be little subject to fear , could not avoid be somewhat shock at this sudden appearance . he do , indeed , himself change colour , and he voice a little faultered while he ask he , what be the matter ? " I hope , sir , " say , " you will not be angry with I . indeed I do not listen , but I be oblige to stay in the outward room . I be sure I wish I have be a hundr mile off , rather than have hear what I have hear . " " why , what be the matter ? " say . " the matter , sir ? of good ! " answer , " be that woman who be just go out the woman who be with you at ? " " she be , , " cry . " and do you really , sir , go to be with that woman ? " say he , trembl .--" I be afraid what past between we be no secret , " say .-- " , but pray , sir , for 's sake , sir , answer I , " cry . " you know I do , " cry . " why then , the have mercy upon you soul , and forgive you , " cry ; " but as sure as I stand here alive , you have be a - bed with you own mother . " upon these word become in a moment a greater picture of horror than himself . he be , indeed , for some time struck dumb with amazement , and both stood star wildly at each other . at last he word find way , and in a interrupted voice he say , " how ! how ! what be this you tell I ? " " Nay , sir , " cry , " I have not breath enough leave to tell you now , but what I have say be most certainly true .-- that woman who now go out be you own mother . how unlucky be it for you , sir , that I do not happen
happen to see she at that time , to have prevent it ! sure the himself must have contrive to bring about this wickedness . " " sure , " cry , " Fortune will never have do with I till she hath drive I to distraction . but why do I blame ? I be myself the cause of all my misery . all the dreadful mischief which have befall I be the consequence only of my own folly and vice . what thou hast tell I , Partridge , hath almost deprive I of my sense ! and be , then -- but why do I ask ? for thou must certainly know she -- if thou hast any affection for I , nay , if thou hast any pity , let I beseech thee to fetch this miserable woman back again to I . of good Heaven ! incest ---- with a mother ! to what be I reserve ! " he then fall into the most violent and frantic agony of grief and despair , in which declare he would not leave he ; but at last , have vent the first torrent of passion , he come a little to himself ; and then , have acquaint Partridge that he would find this wretched woman in the same house where the wounded gentleman be lod , he despatch he in quest of she . if the reader will please to refresh he memory , by turn to the scene at , in the ninth book , he will be apt to admire the many strange accident which unfortunately prevent any interview between and , when she spend a whole day there with . instance of this kind we may frequently observe in life , where the greatest event be produce by a nice train of little circumstance ; and more than one example of this may be discover by the accurate eye , in this we history . after a fruitless search of two or three hour , return back to he master , without have see Waters . , who be in a state of desperation at he delay , be almost rave mad when he bring he he account . he be not long , however , in this condition before he receive the follow letter : " , " Since i leave you I have see a gentleman , from whom I have learn something concern you which greatly surprize and affect I ; but as I have not at present leisure to communicate a matter of such high importance , you must suspend you curiosity till we next meeting , which shall be the first moment I be able to see you . o , , little do I think , when I past that happy day at , the reflection upon which be like to embitter all my future life , who it be to whom I owed such perfect happiness . believe I to be ever sincerely you unfortunate " . " " p.s. I would have you comfort yourself as much as possible , for be in no manner of danger ; so that whatever other grievous crime you may have to repent of , the guilt of blood be not among the number . " have read the letter , let it drop ( for he be unable to hold it , and indeed have scarce the use of any one of he faculty ) . take it up , and have receive consent by silence , read it likewise ; nor have it upon he a less sensible effect . the pencil , and not the pen , should describe the horror which appear in both they countenance . while they both remain speechless the turnkey enter the room , and , without take any notice of what sufficiently discover itself in the face of they both , acquaint that a man without desire to speak with he . this person be presently introduce , and be no other than . as sight of horror be not so usual to as they be to the turnkey , he instantly see the great disorder which appear in the face of . this he impute to the accident that have happen , which be report in the very worst light in 's family ; he conclude , therefore , that the gentleman be dead , and that be in a fair way of come to a shameful end . a thought which give he much uneasiness ; for be of a compassionate disposition , and notwithstand a small breach of friendship which he have be over -tempt to commit , be , in the main , not insensible of the obligation he have formerly receive from . the poor fellow , therefore , scarce refrain from a tear at the present sight . he tell he be heartily sorry for he misfortune , and beg he to consider if he could be of any manner of service . " perhaps , sir , " say he , " you may want a little matter of money upon this occasion ; if you do , sir , what little I have be heartily at you service . " shook he very heartily by the hand , and give he many thanks for the kind offer he have make ; but answer , " he have not the least want of that kind . " upon which begin to press he service more eagerly than before . again thank he , with assurance that he want nothing which be in the power of any man live to give . " come , come , my good master , " answer , " do not take the matter so much to heart . thing may end better than you imagine ; to be sure you can not the first gentleman who hath
hath kill a man , and yet come off . " " you be wide of the matter , , " say , " the gentleman be not dead , nor like to die . do not disturb my master , at present , for he be trouble about a matter in which it be not in you power to do he any good . " " you do not know what I may be able to do , , " answer ; " if he concern be about my young lady , I have some news to tell my master . " " what do you say , ? " cry . " Hath anything lately happen in which my be concerned ? my ! how dare such a wretch as I mention she so profanely . " " I hope she will be yours yet , " answer . " why yes , sir , I have something to tell you about she . Madam western hath just bring home , and there hath be a terrible to do . I could not possibly learn the very right of it ; but my master he hath be in a vast big passion , and so be Madam western , and I hear she say , as she go out of door into she chair , that she would never set she foot in master 's house again . I do not know what be the matter , not I , but everything be very quiet when I come out ; but , who wait at , say he have never see the squire for a long while in such good humour with young madam ; that he kiss she several time , and swore she should be she own mistress , and he never would think of confin she any more . I think this news would please you , and so I slipp out , though it be so late , to inform you of it . " assure that it do greatly please he ; for though he should never more presume to lift he eye toward that incomparable creature , nothing could so much relieve he misery as the satisfaction he should always have in hearing of she welfare . the rest of the conversation which pass at the visit be not important enough to be here related . the reader will , therefore , forgive we this abrupt break off , and be pleased to hear how this great good - will of the squire towards he daughter be bring about . Mrs western , on she first arrival at she brother 's lodging , begin to set forth the great honour and advantage which would accrue to the family by the match with , which she niece have absolutely refuse ; in which refusal , when the squire take the part of he daughter , she fall immediately into the most violent passion , and so irritate and provoke the squire , that neither he patience nor he prudence could bear it any longer ; upon which there ensue between they both so warm a bout at altercation , that perhaps the region of never equall it . in the heat of this scolding depart , and have consequently no leisure to acquaint she brother with the letter which receive , which might have possibly produce ill effect ; but , to say truth , I believe it never once occur to she memory at this time . when be gone , , who have be hithertoo silent , as well indeed from necessity as inclination , begin to return the compliment which she father have make she , in take she part against she aunt , by take he likewise against the lady . this be the first time of she so do , and it be in the highest degree acceptable to the squire . again , he remember that have insist on a entire relinquishment of all violent means ; and , indeed , as he make no doubt but that would be hang , he do not in the least question succeed with he daughter by fair means ; he now , therefore , once more give a loose to he natural fondness for she , which have such a effect on the dutiful , grateful , tender , and affectionate heart of , that have she honour , give to , and something else , perhaps , in which he be concerned , be remove , I much doubt whether she would not have sacrifice herself to a man she do not like , to have oblige she father . she promise he she would make it the whole business of she life to oblige he , and would never marry any man against he consent ; which bring the old man so near to he highest happiness , that he be resolve to take the other step , and go to be completely drunk . chapter iii . Allworthy visit old Nightingale ; with a strange discovery that he make on that occasion . the morning after these thing have happen , go , accord to he promise , to visit old , with whom he authority be so great , that , after have sit with he three hour , he at last prevaile with he to consent to see he son . here a accident happen of a very extraordinary kind ; one indeed of those strange chance whence very good and grave man have conclude that Providence often interpose in the discovery of the most secret villany , in order to caution man from quit the path of honesty , however warily they tread in those of vice . , at he entrance into 's , see ; he take no notice of he , nor do imagine he have perceive he . however ,
, when they conversation on the principal point be over , ask , whether he know one , and upon what business he come to he house ? " yes , " answer , " I know he very well , and a most extraordinary fellow he be , who , in these day , hath be able to hoard up  500 from rent a very small estate of  30 a year . " " and be this the story which he hath tell you ? " cry . " Nay , it be true , I promise you , " say , " for I have the money now in my own hand , in five bank - bill , which I be to lay out either in a mortgage , or in some purchase in the north of . " the bank - bills be no sooner produce at 's desire than he bless himself at the strangeness of the discovery . he presently tell Nightingale that these bank - bill be formerly he , and then acquaint he with the whole affair . as there be no man who complain more of the fraud of business than highwayman , gamester , and other thief of that kind , so there be none who so bitterly exclai m against the fraud of gamester , & c. , as usurer , broker , and other thief of this kind ; whether it be that the one way of cheating be a discountenance or reflection upon the other , or that money , which be the common mistress of all cheat , make they regard each other in the light of rival ; but no sooner hear the story than he exclaim against the fellow in term much severer than the justice and honesty of have bestow on he . desire to retain both the money and the secret till he should hear farther from he ; and , if he should in the meantime see the fellow , that he would not take the least notice to he of the discovery which he have make . he then return to he lodging , where he find in a very dejected condition , on account of the information she have receive from she son - in - law . , with great chearfulness , tell she that he have much good news to communicate ; and , with little further preface , acquaint she that he have bring to consent to see he son , and do not in the least doubt to effect a perfect reconciliation between they ; though he find the father more sower by another accident of the same kind which have happene in he family . he then mention the run away of the uncle 's daughter , which he have be tell by the old gentleman , and which and she son - in - law do not yet know . the reader may suppose receive this account with great thankfulness , and no less pleasure ; but so uncommon be she friendship to , that I be not certain whether the uneasiness she suffer for he sake do not overbalance she satisfaction at hear a piece of news tending so much to the happiness of she own family ; nor whether even this very news , as it remind she of the obligation she have to , do not hurt as well as please she ; when she grateful heart say to she , " while my own family be happy , how miserable be the poor creature to whose generosity we owe the beginning of all this happiness ! " , have leave she a little while to chew the cud ( if I may use that expression ) on these first tiding , tell she he have still something more to impart , which he believe would give she pleasure . " I think , " say he , " I have discover a pretty considerable treasure belong to the young gentleman , you friend ; but perhaps , indeed , he present situation may be such that it will be of no service to he . " the latter part of the speech give to understand who be mean , and she answer with a sigh , " I hope not , sir . " " I hope so too , " cry , " with all my heart ; but my nephew tell I this morning he have hear a very bad account of the affair ." ----" good Heaven ! sir , " say she -- " well , I must not speak , and yet it be certainly very hard to be oblige to hold one 's tongue when one hear . " -- " madam , " say , " you may say whatever you please , you know I too well to think I have a prejudice against any one ; and as for that young man , I assure you I should be heartily pleased to find he could acquit himself of everything , and particularly of this sad affair . you can testify the affection I have formerly borne he . the world , I know , censure I for love he so much . I do not withdraw that affection from he without think I have the justest cause . believe I , , I should be glad to find I have be mistaken . " be go eagerly to reply , when a servant acquaint she that a gentleman without desire to speak with she immediately . then enquire for he nephew , and be tell that he have be for some time in he room with the gentleman who use to come to he , and whom guess rightly to be , he desire presently to speak with he . when Dowling attend , put the case of the
the bank - note to he , without mention any name , and ask in what manner such a person might be punish . to which Dowling answer , " he think he might be indict on the Black Act ; but say , as it be a matter of some nicety , it would be proper to go to counsel . he say he be to attend counsel presently upon a affair of 's , and if please he would lay the case before they . " this be agree to ; and then , open the door , cry , " I ask pardon , I do not know you have company ; " but desire she to come in , say he have finish he business . upon which Dowling withdraw , and introduce Nightingale the younger , to return thanks for the great kindness do he by : but she have scarce patience to let the young gentleman finish he speech before she interrupt he , say , " o sir ! Nightingale bring great news about poor : he hath be to see the wounded gentleman , who be out of all danger of death , and , what be more , declare he fall upon poor himself , and beat he . I be sure , sir , you would not have be a coward . if I be a man myself , I be sure , if any man be to strike I , I should draw my sword . do pray , my dear , tell , tell he all yourself . " then confirm what have say ; and conclude with many handsome thing of , who be , he say , one of the best - natured fellow in the world , and not in the least inclin to be quarrelsome . here be go to cease , when again beg he to relate all the many dutiful expression he have hear he make use of towards . " to say the utmost good of , " cry , " be do no more than strict justice , and can have no merit in it : but indeed , I must say , no man can be more sensible of the obligation he hath to so good a man than be poor . indeed , sir , I be convince the weight of you displeasure be the heaviest burthan he lie under . he hath often lament it to I , and hath as often protest in the most solemn manner he hath never be intentionally guilty of any offence towards you ; nay , he hath swear he would rather die a thousand death than he would have he conscience upbraid he with one disrespectful , ungrateful , or undutiful think towards you . but I ask pardon , sir , I be afraid I presume to intermeddle too far in so tender a point . " " you have speak no more than what a ought , " cry . " indeed , , " answer , " I applaud you generous friendship , and I wish he may merit it of you . I confess I be glad to hear the report you bring from this unfortunate gentleman ; and , if that matter should turn out to be as you represent it ( and , indeed , I doubt nothing of what you say ) , I may , perhaps , in time , be bring to think better than lately I have of this young man ; for this good gentlewoman here , nay , all who know I , can witness that I love he as dearly as if he have be my own son . indeed , I have consider he as a child send by fortune to my care . I still remember the innocent , the helpless situation in which I find he . I feel the tender pressure of he little hand at this moment . he be my darling , indeed he be . " at which word he cease , and the tear stood in he eye . as the answer which make may lead we into fresh matter , we will here stop to account for the visible alteration in 's mind , and the abatement of he anger to . revolution of this kind , it be true , do frequently occur in histories and dramatic writer , for no other reason than because the history or play draw to a conclusion , and be justifi by authority of author ; yet , though we insist upon as much authority as any author whatever , we shall use this power very sparingly , and never but when we be drive to it by necessity , which we do not at present foresee will happen in this work . this alteration then in the mind of be occasion by a letter he have just receive from , and which we shall give the reader in the beginning of the next chapter . iv. contain two letter in very different stile . " my ,-- I inform you in my last that I be forbide the use of the water , as they be find by experience rather to increase than lessen the symptom of my distemper . I must now acquaint you with a piece of news , which , I believe , will afflict my friend more than it hath afflict I . and have inform I that there be no hope of my recovery . " I have somewhere read , that the great use of philosophy be to learn to die . I will not therefore so far disgrace mine as to show any surprize at receive a lesson which I must be think to have so long study . yet , to say the truth , one page of the teach this lesson better
better than all the volume of antient or modern philosopher . the assurance it give we of another life be a much stronger support to a good mind than all the consolation that be draw from the necessity of nature , the emptiness or satiety of we enjoyment here , or any other topic of those declamation which be sometimes capable of arm we mind with a stubborn patience in bear the thought of death , but never of raise they to a real contempt of it , and much less of make we think it be a real good . I would not here be understand to throw the horrid censure of atheism , or even the absolute denial of immortality , on all who be call philosopher . many of that sect , as well antient as modern , have , from the light of reason , discover some hope of a future state ; but in reality , that light be so faint and glimmer , and the hope be so incertain and precarious , that it may be justly doubt on which side they belief turn . himself conclude he Phaedon with declaring that he best argument amount only to raise a probability ; and himself seem rather to profess a inclination to believe , than any actual belief in the doctrine of immortality . as to myself , to be very sincere with you , I never be much in earnest in this faith till I be in earnest a . " you will perhaps wonder at the latter expression ; but I assure you it hath not be till very lately that I could , with truth , call myself so . the pride of philosophy have intoxicate my reason , and the sublimest of all wisdom appear to I , as it do to the Greek of old , to be foolishness . hath , however , be so gracious to show I my error in time , and to bring I into the way of truth , before I sink into utter darkness forever . " I find myself begin to grow weak , I shall therefore hasten to the main purpose of this letter . " when I reflect on the action of my past life , I know of nothing which sit heavier upon my conscience than the injustice I have be guilty of to that poor wretch you adopt son . I have , indeed , not only connive at the villany of other , but be myself active in injustice towards he . believe I , my dear friend , when I tell you , on the word of a die man , he hath be basely injured . as to the principal fact , upon the misrepresentation of which you discard he , I solemnly assure you he be innocent . when you lay upon you suppose deathbed , he be the only person in the house who testify any real concern ; and what happen afterwards arise from the wildness of he joy on you recovery ; and , I be sorry to say it , from the baseness of another person ( but it be my desire to justify the innocent , and to accuse none ) . believe I , my friend , this young man hath the noblest generosity of heart , the most perfect capacity for friendship , the highest integrity , and indeed every virtue which can ennoble a man . he hath some fault , but among they be not to be numbe the least want of duty or gratitude towards you . on the contrary , I be satisfied , when you dismiss he from you house , he heart b for you more than for himself . " worldly motive be the wicked and base reason of my conceal this from you so long ; to reveal it now I can have no inducement but the desire of serve the cause of truth , of do right to the innocent , and of make all the amend in my power for a past offence . I hope this declaration , therefore , will have the effect desire , and will restore this deserive young man to you favour ; the hearing of which , while I be yet alive , will afford the utmost consolation to , , you most obliged , obedient humble servant , . " the reader will , after this , scarce wonder at the revolution so visibly appear in , notwithstand he receive from , by the same post , another letter of a very different kind , which we shall here add , as it may possibly be the last time we shall have occasion to mention the name of that gentleman . " sir , " I be not at all surprize at hearing from you worthy nephew a fresh instance of the villany of the atheist 's young pupil . I shall not wonder at any murder he may commit ; and I heartily pray that you own blood may not seal up he final commitment to the place of wailing and gnashing of tooth . " though you can not want sufficient call to repentance for the many unwarrantable weakness exemplify in you behaviour to this wretch , so much to the prejudice of you own lawful family , and of you character ; I say , though these may sufficiently be suppose to prick and goad you conscience at this season , I should yet be want to my duty , if I spare to give you some admonition in order to bring you to a due sense of you error . I therefore pray you seriously to consider the judgment which be likely to overtake this wick villain ; and let it serve at least as a warning to you , that you may not for the future
future despise the advice of one who be so indefatigable in he prayer for you welfare . " have not my hand be withheld from due correction , I have scour much of this diabolical spirit out of a boy , of whom from he infancy I discover the have take such entire possession . but reflection of this kind now come too late . " I be sorry you have give away the living of so hastily . I should have apply on that occasion earlier , have I think you would not have acquaint I previous to the disposition .---- you objection to plurality be be righteous over-much . if there be any crime in the practice , so many godly man would not agree to it . if the vicar of should die ( as we hear he be in a declining way ) , I hope you will think of I , since I be certain you must be convinced of my most sincere attachment to you highest welfare -- a welfare to which all worldly consideration be as trifl as the small tithes mention in Scripture be , when compare to the weighty matter of the law . I be , sir , you faithful humble servant , . " this be the first time ever write in this authoritative stile to , and of this he have afterwards sufficient reason to repent , as in the case of those who mistake the highest degree of goodness for the lowest degree of weakness . have indeed never like this man . he know he to be proud and ill - natured ; he also know that he divinity itself be tincture with he temper , and such as in many respects he himself do by no means approve ; but he be at the same time a excellent scholar , and most indefatigable in teach the two lad . add to this , the strict severity of he life and manners , a unimpeached honesty , and a most devout attachment to religion . so that , upon the whole , though do not esteem nor love the man , yet he could never bring himself to part with a tutor to the boy , who be , both by learning and industry , extremely well qualified for he office ; and he hope , that as they be breed up in he own house , and under he own eye , he should be able to correct whatever be wrong in 's instruction . v. in which the history be continue . , in he last speech , have recollect some tender idea concern , which have bring tear into the good man 's eye . this , say , " yes , yes , sir , you goodness to this poor young man be know , notwithstand all you care to conceal it ; but there be not a single syllable of truth in what those villain say . Nightingale hath now discover the whole matter . it seem these fellow be employ by a lord , who be a rival of poor , to have press he on board a ship .-- I assure they I do not know who they will press next . here hath see the officer himself , who be a very pretty gentleman , and hath tell he all , and be very sorry for what he undertake , which he would never have do , have he know to have be a gentleman ; but he be tell that he be a common strolling vagabond . " star at all this , and declare he be a stranger to every word she say . " yes , sir , " answer she , " I believe you be .---- it be a very different story , I believe , from what those fellow tell this lawyer . " " what lawyer , madam ? what be it you mean ? " say . " Nay , nay , " say she , " this be so like you to deny you own goodness : but here see he . " " see whom , madam ? " answer he . " why , you lawyer , sir , " say she , " that you so kindly send to enquire into the affair . " " I be still in the dark , upon my honour , " say . " why then do you tell he , my dear sir , " cry she . " indeed , sir , " say , " I do see that very lawyer who go from you when I come into the room , at a alehouse in , in company with two of the fellows who be employ by to press , and who be by that mean present at the unhappy rencounter between he and . " " I own , sir , " say , " when I see this gentleman come into the room to you , I tell Nightingale that I apprehend you have send he thither to inquire into the affair . " Allworthy shew mark of astonishment in he countenance at this news , and be indeed for two or three minute struck dumb by it . at last , address himself to , he say , " I must confess myself , sir , more surprized at what you tell I than I have ever be before at anything in my whole life . be you certain this be the gentleman ? " " I be most certain , " answer . " at ? " cry . " and be you in company with this lawyer and the two fellow ? " --" I be , sir , " say the other , " very near half a hour . " " well , sir , " say , "
" and in what manner do the lawyer behave ? do you hear all that past between he and the fellow ? " " no , sir , " answer , " they have be together before I come .-- in my presence the lawyer say little ; but , after I have several time examine the fellow , who persist in a story directly contrary to what I have hear from , and which I find by be a rank falshood , the lawyer then desire the fellow to say nothing but what be the truth , and seem to speak so much in favour of , that , when I see the same person with you , I conclude you goodness have prompt you to send he thither . " -- " and do you not send he thither ? " say .-- " indeed I do not , " answer ; " nor do I know he have go on such a errand till this moment . " --" I see it all ! " say , " upon my soul , I see it all ! no wonder they have be close so close lately . , let I beg you run for these fellows immediately ---- find they out if they be above - ground . I will go myself " -- " dear madam , " say , " be patient , and do I the favour to send a servant upstairs to call hither , if he be in the house , or , if not , . " go out mutter something to herself , and presently return with a answer , " that be gone ; but that the t'other , " as she call he , " be come . " be of a cooler disposition than the good woman , whose spirit be all up in arm in the cause of she friend . he be not however without some suspicions which be near akin to hers . when come into the room , he ask he with a very serious countenance , and with a less friendly look than he have ever before give he , " whether he know anything of 's have see any of the persons who be present at the duel between and another gentleman ? " there be nothing so dangerous as a question which come by surprize on a man whose business it be to conceal truth , or to defend falshood . for which reason those worthy personage , whose noble office it be to save the life of they fellow - creature at the , take the utmost care , by frequent previous examination , to divine every question which may be ask they client on the day of tryal , that they may be supply with proper and ready answer , which the most fertile invention can not supply in a instant . besides , the sudden and violent impulse on the blood , occasion by these surprize , cause frequently such a alteration in the countenance , that the man be oblige to give evidence against himself . and such indeed be the alteration which the countenance of underwent from this sudden question , that we can scarce blame the eagerness of , who immediately cry out , " , upon my honour ! guilty , upon my soul ! " sharply rebuk she for this impetuosity ; and then turn to , who seem sinke into the earth , he say , " why do you hesitate , sir , at give I a answer ? you certainly must have employ he ; for he would not , of he own accord , I believe , have undertaken such a errand , and especially without acquaint I . " then answer , " I own , sir , I have be guilty of a offence , yet may I hope you pardon ? " --" my pardon , " say , very angrily .-- " Nay , sir , " answer , " I know you would be offend ; yet surely my dear uncle will forgive the effect of the most amiable of human weakness . compassion for those who do not deserve it , I own be a crime ; and yet it be a crime from which you yourself be not entirely free . I know I have be guilty of it in more than one instance to this very person ; and I will own I do send , not on a vain and fruitless enquiry , but to discover the witness , and to endeaavor to soften they evidence . this , sir , be the truth ; which , though I intend to conceal from you , I will not deny . " " I confess , " say , " this be the light in which it appear to I from the gentleman 's behaviour . " " now , madam , " say , " I believe you will once in you life own you have entertain a wrong suspicion , and be not so angry with my nephew as you be . " be silent ; for , though she could not so hastily be pleased with , whom she look upon to have be the ruin of , yet in this particular instance he have impos upon she as well as upon the rest ; so entirely have the devil stood he friend . and , indeed , I look upon the vulgar observation , " that the often desert he friend , and leave they in the lurch , " to be a great abuse on that gentleman 's character . perhaps he may sometimes desert those who be only he cup acquaintance ; or who , at most , be but half he ; but he generally stand by those who be thoroughly he servants ,
, and help they off in all extremity , till they bargain expire . as a conquer rebellion strengthen a government , or as health be more perfectly establish by recovery from some disease ; so anger , when remove , often give new life to affection . this be the case of ; for Blifil have wip off the greater suspicion , the lesser , which have be raise by 's letter , sunk of course , and be forgotten ; and , with whom he be greatly offended , bear alone all the reflection which have cast on the enemy of . as for that young man , the resentment of begin more and more to abate towards he . he tell , " he do not only forgive the extraordinary effort of he good - nature , but would give he the pleasure of follow he example . " then , turn to with a smile which would have become a angel , he cry , " what say you , madam ? shall we take a hackney - coach , and all of we together pay a visit to you friend ? I promise you it be not the first visit I have make in a prison . " every reader , I believe , will be able to answer for the worthy woman ; but they must have a great deal of good - nature , and be well acquaint with friendship , who can feel what she feel on this occasion . , I hope , be capable of feel what now pass in the mind of ; but those who be will acknowledge that it be impossible for he to raise any objection to this visit . , however , or the gentleman lately mention above , stand he friend , and prevent he undergoing so great a shock ; for at the very instant when the coach be send for , arrive , and , have call from the company , acquaint she with the dreadful accident lately come to light ; and hear 's intention , beg she to find some means of stop he : " , " say he , " the matter must at all hazard be keep a secret from he ; and if he should now go , he will find and he mother , who arrive just as I leave he , lament over one another the horrid crime they have ignorantly commit . " the poor woman , who be almost deprive of she sense at he dreadful news , be never less capable of invention than at present . however , as woman be much readier at this than man , she bethotch herself of a excuse , and , return to , say , " I be sure , sir , you will be surprize at hear any objection from I to the kind proposal you just now make ; and yet I be afraid of the consequence of it , if carry immediately into execution . you must imagine , sir , that all the calamity which have lately befall this poor young fellow must have throw he into the lowest dejection of spirit ; and now , sir , should we all on a sudden fl he into such a violent fit of joy , as I know you presence will occasion , it may , I be afraid , produce some fatal mischief , especially as he servant , who be without , tell I he be very far from be well . " " be he servant without ? " cry ; " pray call he hither . I will ask he some question concern he master . " be at first afraid to appear before ; but be at length persuade , after , who have often hear he whole story from he own mouth , have promise to introduce he . recollect the moment he come into the room , though many year have pass since he have see he . , therefore , might have spare here a formal oration , in which , indeed , she be something prolix ; for the reader , I believe , may have observe already that the good woman , among other thing , have a tongue always ready for the service of she friend . " and be you , " say to , " the servant of ? " " I can not say , sir , " answer he , " that I be regularly a servant , but I live with he , a not please you honour , at present . non sum qualis eram , as you honour very well know . " then ask he many question concern , as to he health , and other matter ; to all which Partridge answer , without have the least regard to what be , but consider only what he would have thing appear ; for a strict adherence to truth be not among the article of this honest fellow 's morality or he religion . during this dialogue take he leave , and presently after leave the room , when likewise despatch ; for he imagine that when alone with he would be more explicit than before company . they be no sooner leave in private together than , as in the follow chapter . chapter vi . in which the history be farther continue " sure , friend , " say the good man , " you be the strangest of all human being . not only to have suffer as you have formerly for obstinately persist in a falshood , but to persist in it thus to the last , and to pass thus upon the world for a servant of you own son ! what interest can you have in all this ? what can be you motive ? "
" " I see , sir , " say , fall down upon he knee , " that you honour be prepossess against I , and resolve not to believe anything I say , and , therefore , what signify my protestation ? but yet there be one above who know that I be not the father of this young man . " " how ! " say , " will you yet deny what you be formerly convict of upon such unanswerable , such manifest evidence ? Nay , what a confirmation be you be now find with this very man , of all which twenty year ago appear against you ! I think you have leave the country ! nay , I think you have be long since dead .-- in what manner do you know anything of this young man ? where do you meet with he , unless you have keep some correspondence together ? do not deny this ; for I promise you it will greatly raise you son in my opinion , to find that he hath such a sense of filial duty as privately to support he father for so many year . " " if you honou will have patience to hear I , " say , " I will tell you all . " -- be bid go on , he proceed thus : " when you honou conceive that displeasure against I , it end in my ruin soon after ; for I lose my little school ; and the minister , think I suppose it would be agreeable to you honour , turn I out from the office of clerk ; so that I have nothing to trust to but the barber 's shop , which , in a country place like that , be a poor livelihood ; and when my wife di ( for till that time I receive a pension of  12 a year from a unknown hand , which indeed I believe be you honour 's own , for nobody that ever I hear of doth these thing besides ) -- but , as I be say , when she die , this pension forsook I ; so that now , as I owe two or three small debt , which begin to be troublesome to I , particularly one [ * ] which a attorney bring up by law - charge from 15s. to near  30 , and as I find all my usual means of living have forsook I , I pack up my little all as well as I could , and go off . [ *] this be a fact which I know happen to a poor clergyman in , by the villany of a attorney who , not contente with the exorbitant cost to which the poor man be put by a single action , bring afterwards another action on the judgment , as it be call . a method frequently use to oppress the poor , and bring money into the pocket of attorney , to the great scandal of the law , of the nation , of , and even of human nature itself . " the first place I come to be , where I get into the service of a gentleman belong to the law , and one of the best gentlemen that ever I know , for he be not only good to I , but I know a thousand good and charitable act which he do while I stay with he ; and I have know he often refuse business because it be paultry and oppressive . " " you need not be so particular , " say ; " I know this gentleman , and a very worthy man he be , and a honour to he profession . " -- " well , sir , " continue , " from hence I remove to , where I be above three year in the service of another lawyer , who be likewise a very good sort of a man , and to be sure one of the merriest gentleman in . well , sir , at the end of the three year I set up a little school , and be likely to do well again , have it not be for a most unlucky accident . here I keep a pig ; and one day , as ill fortune would have it , this pig break out , and do a trespass , I think they call it , in a garden belong to one of my neighbour , who be a proud , revengeful man , and employ a lawyer , one -- one -- I can not think of he name ; but he send for a writ against I , and have I to size . when I come there , have mercy upon I -- to hear what the counsellor say ! there be one that tell my lord a parcel of the confoundedest lie about I ; he say that I use to drive my hog into other folk 's garden , and a great deal more ; and at last he say , he hope I have at last bring my hog to a fair market . to be sure , one would have think that , instead of be owner only of one poor little pig , I have be the greatest hog - merchant in . well -- " " pray , " say , " do not be so particular , I have hear nothing of you son yet . " " o it be a great many year , " answer , " before I see my son , as you be pleased to call he .---- I go over to after this , and teach school at ( for that one suit ruin I again , and I lay seven
seven year in Winchester jail ) . " -- " well , " say , " pass that over till you return to . " --" then , sir , " say he , " it be about half a year ago that I land at , where I stay some time , and not find it do there , and hearing of a place between that and where the barber be just dead , I go thither , and there I have be about two month when come thither . " he then give Allworthy a very particular account of they first meeting , and of everything , as well as he could remember , which have happene from that day to this ; frequently interlard he story with panegyric on , and not forget to insinuate the great love and respect which he have for . he conclude with say , " now , sir , I have tell you honour the whole truth . " and then repeat a most solemn protestation , " that he be no more the father of than of the of ; " and imprecate the most bitter curse on he head , if he do not speak truth . " what be I to think of this matter ? " cry . " for what purpose should you so strongly deny a fact which I think it would be rather you interest to own ? " " Nay , sir , " answer ( for he could hold no longer ) , " if you honour will not believe I , you be like soon to have satisfaction enough . I wish you have mistake the mother of this young man , as well as you have he father . " -- and now be ask what he mean , with all the symptom of horror , both in he voice and countenance , he tell Allworthy the whole story , which he have a little before express such desire to to conceal from he . be almost as much shock at this discovery as himself have be while he relate it . " good heaven ! " say he , " in what miserable distress do vice and imprudence involve man ! how much beyond we designs be the effect of wickedness sometimes carry ! " he have scarce utter these word , when come hastily and abruptly into the room . Partridge no sooner see she than he cry , " here , sir , here be the very woman herself . this be the unfortunate mother of . I be sure she will acquit I before you honour . pray , madam ---- " , without pay any regard to what say , and almost without take any notice of he , advanc to . " I believe , sir , it be so long since I have the honour of see you , that you do not recollect I . " " indeed , " answer , " you be so very much alte , on many account , that have not this man already acquaint I who you be , I should not have immediately call you to my remembrance . have you , madam , any particular business which bring you to I ? " speak this with great reserve ; for the reader may easily believe he be not well pleas with the conduct of this lady ; neither with what he have formerly heard , nor with what have now deliver . Waters answer -- " indeed , sir , I have very particular business with you ; and it be such as I can impart only to yourself . I must desire , therefore , the favour of a word with you alone : for I assure you what I have to tell you be of the utmost importance . " be then order to withdraw , but before he go , he beg the lady to satisfy that he be perfectly innocent . to which she answer , " you need be under no apprehension , sir ; I shall satisfy very perfectly of that matter . " then withdrew , and that past between and which be write in the next chapter . chapter vii . Continuation of the history . remain a few moment silent , could not refrain from say , " I be sorry , madam , to perceive , by what I have since hear , that you have make so very ill a use ---- " " , " say she , interrupt he , " I know I have fault , but ingratitude to you be not one of they . I never can nor shall forget you goodness , which I own I have very little deserve ; but be pleased to wave all upbraid I at present , as I have so important a affair to communicate to you concern this young man , to whom you have give my maiden name of . " " have I then , " say , " ignorantly punish a innocent man , in the person of he who hath just leave we ? be he not the father of the child ? " " indeed he be not , " say . " you may be pleased to remember , sir , I formerly tell you , you should one day know ; and I acknowledge myself to have be guilty of a cruel neglect , in not have discover it to you before . indeed , I little know how necessary it be . " " well , madam , " say , " be pleased to proceed . " " you must remember , sir , " say she , " a young fellow , whose name be summer . " " very well , " cry , " he be the son
son of a clergyman of great learning and virtue , for whom I have the highest friendship . " " so it appear , sir , " answer she ; " for I believe you breed the young man up , and maintain he at the university ; where , I think , he have finish he study , when he come to reside at you house ; a finer man , I must say , the sun never shine upon ; for , besides the handsomest person I ever see , he be so genteel , and have so much wit and good breeding . " " poor gentleman , " say , " he be indeed untimely snatch away ; and little do I think he have any sins of this kind to answer for ; for I plainly perceive you be go to tell I he be the father of you child . " " indeed , sir , " answer she , " he be not . " " how ! " say , " to what then tend all this preface ? " " to a story , " say she , " which I be concerned fall to my lot to unfold to you . o , sir ! prepare to hear something which will surprize you , will grieve you . " " , " say , " I be conscious of no crime , and can not be afraid to hear . " " , " say she , " that , the son of you friend , educate at you expense , who , after live a year in the house as if he have be you own son , die there of the small - pox , be tenderly lament by you , and bury as if he have be you own ; that summer , sir , be the father of this child . " " how ! " say ; " you contradict yourself . " " that I do not , " answer she ; " he be indeed the father of this child , but not by I . " " take care , madam , " say , " do not , to shin the imputation of any crime , be guilty of falshood . remember there be one from whom you can conceal nothing , and before whose tribunal falshood will only aggravate you guilt . " " indeed , sir , " say she , " I be not he mother ; nor would I now think myself so for the world . " " I know you reason , " say , " and shall rejoice as much as you to find it otherwise ; yet you must remember , you yourself confest it before I . " " so far what I confest , " say she , " be true , that these hand convey the infant to you bed ; convey it thither at the command of its mother ; at she command I afterwards own it , and think myself , by she generosity , nobly reward , both for my secrecy and my shame . " " who could this woman be ? " say . " indeed , I tremble to name she , " answer . " by all this preparation I be to guess that she be a relation of mine , " cry he . " indeed she be a near one . " at which word start , and she continue -- " you have a sister , sir . " " a sister ! " repeat he , look aghast .-- " as there be truth in heaven , " cry she , " you sister be the mother of that child you find between you sheet . " " can it be possible ? " cry he , " good heaven ! " " have patience , sir , " say , " and I will unfold to you the whole story . just after you departure for , come one day to the house of my mother . she be pleased to say she have hear a extraordinary character of I , for my learning and superior understanding to all the young woman there , so she be pleased to say . she then bid I come to she to the great house ; where , when I attend , she employ I to read to she . she express great satisfaction in my reading , shew great kindness to I , and make I many present . at last she begin to catechise I on the subject of secrecy , to which I give she such satisfactory answer , that , at last , have lock the door of she room , she take I into she closet , and then lock that door likewise , she say she should convince I of the vast reliance she have on my integrity , by communicate a secret in which she honour , and consequently she life , be concerned . she then stopt , and after a silence of a few minute , during which she often wip she eye , she enquire of I if I think my mother might safely be confide in . I answer , I would stake my life on she fidelity . she then impart to I the great secret which laboure in she breast , and which , I believe , be deliver with more pain than she afterwards suffer in child - birth . it be then contrive that my mother and myself only should attend at the time , and that should be send out of the way , as she accordingly be , to the very furthest part of , to enquire the character of a servant ; for the lady have turn away she own maid near three month
month before ; during all which time I officiate about she person upon trial , as she say , though , as she afterwards declare , I be not sufficiently handy for the place . this , and many other such thing which she use to say of I , be all throw out to prevent any suspicion which Wilkins might hereafter have , when I be to own the child ; for she think it could never be believe she would venture to hurt a young woman with whom she have intrust such a secret . you may be assure , sir , I be well pay for all these affront , which , together with be inform with the occasion of they , very well contente I . indeed , the lady have a greater suspicion of than of any other person ; not that she have the least aversion to the gentlewoman , but she think she incapable of keep a secret , especially from you , sir ; for I have often hear say , that , if have commit a murder , she believe she would acquaint you with it . at last the expect day come , and , who have be keep a week in readiness , and put off from time to time , upon some pretence or other , that she might not return too soon , be dispatch . then the child be bear , in the presence only of myself and my mother , and be by my mother convey to she own house , where it be privately keep by she till the evening of you return , when I , by the command of , convey it into the bed where you find it . and all suspicion be afterwards laid asleep by the artful conduct of you sister , in pretend ill - will to the boy , and that any regard she shew he be out of meer complacence to you . " then make many protestation of the truth of this story , and conclude by say , " thus , sir , you have at last discover you nephew ; for so I be sure you will hereafter think he , and I question not but he will be both a honour and a comfort to you under that appellation . " " I need not , madam , " say , " express my astonishment at what you have tell I ; and yet surely you would not , and could not , have put together so many circumstance to evidence a untruth . I confess I recollect some passage relate to that summer , which formerly give I a conceit that my sister have some liking to he . I mention it to she ; for I have such a regard to the young man , as well on he own account as on he father 's , that I should willingly have consent to a match between they ; but she exprest the highest disdain of my unkind suspicion , as she call it ; so that I never speak more on the subject . good heaven ! well ! the disposeth all thing .-- yet sure it be a most unjustifiable conduct in my sister to carry this secret with she out of the world . " " I promise you , sir , " say , " she always profest a contrary intention , and frequently tell I she intend one day to communicate it to you . she say , indeed , she be highly rejoice that she plot have succeed so well , and that you have of you own accord take such a fancy to the child , that it be yet unnecessary to make any express declaration . oh ! sir , have that lady liv to have see this poor young man turn like a vagabond from you house : nay , sir , could she have liv to hear that you have yourself employ a lawyer to prosecute he for a murder of which he be not guilty ---- forgive I , , I must say it be unkind .-- indeed , you have be abuse , he never deserve it of you . " " indeed , madam , " say , " I have be abuse by the person , whoever he be , that tell you so . " " Nay , sir , " say she , " I would not be mistaken , I do not presume to say you be guilty of any wrong . the gentleman who come to I propose no such matter ; he only say , take I for 's wife , that , if have murder my husband , I should be assist with any money I want to carry on the prosecution , by a very worthy gentleman , who , he say , be well apprize what a villain I have to deal with . it be by this man I find out who be ; and this man , whose name be Dowling , tell I be you steward . I discover he name by a very odd accident ; for he himself refuse to tell it I ; but , who meet he at my lodging the second time he come , know he formerly at . " " and do this Mr Dowling , " say , with great astonishment in he countenance , " tell you that I would assist in the prosecution ? " -- " no , sir , " answer she , " I will not charge he wrongfully . he say I should be assist , but he mention no name . yet you must pardon I , sir , if from circumstance I think it could be no other . " -- " indeed , madam , " say , "
" from circumstance I be too well convince it be another . good heaven ! by what wonderful means be the blackest and deepest villany sometimes discover !-- shall I beg you , madam , to stay till the person you have mention come , for I expect he every minute ? nay , he may be , perhaps , already in the house . " then steep to the door , in order to call a servant , when in came , not , but the gentleman who will be see in the next chapter . chapter viii . further continuation . the gentleman who now arrive be no other than . he no sooner see , than , without consider in the least the presence of Waters , he begin to vociferate in the follow manner : " Fine doings at my house ! a rare kettle of fish I have discover at last ! who the would be plagu with a daughter ? " " what be the matter , neighbour ? " say . " matter enough , " answer western : " when I think she be just a come to ; nay , when she have in a manner promise I to do as I would ha she , and when I be a hope to have have nothing more to do than to have send for the lawyer , and finish all ; what do you think I have find out ? that the little b -- hath bin play trick with I all the while , and carry on a correspondence with that bastard of yours . , whom I have quarrell with upon she account , send I word o't , and I order she pocket to be search when she be asleep , and here I have get un sign with the son of a whore 's own name . I have not have patience to read half oot , for ' tis longer than one of parson 's sermon ; but I find plainly it be all about love ; and indeed what should it be else ? I have pack she up in chamber again , and to - morrow morning down she go into the country , unless she consent to be marry directly , and there she shall live in a garret upon bread and water all she day ; and the sooner such a benefit -- break she heart the better , though , -- and she , that I believe be too tough . she will live long enough to plague I . " " , " answer , " you know I have always protest against force , and you yourself consent that none should be use . " " ay , " cry he , " that be only upon condition that she would consent without . what the and ! sha not I do what I will with my own daughter , especially when I desire nothing but she own good ? " " well , neighbour , " answer , " if you will give I leave , I will undertake once to argue with the young lady . " " will you ? " say western ; " why that be kind now , and neighbourly , and mayhap you will do more than I have be able to do with she ; for I promise you she hath a very good opinion of you . " " well , sir , " say , " if you will go home , and release the young lady from she captivity , I will wait upon she within this half - hour . " " but suppose , " say western , " she should run away with un in the meantime ? for lawyer Dowling tell I there be no hope of hang the fellow at last ; for that the man be alive , and like to do well , and that he think will be out of prison again presently . " " how ! " say ; " what , do you employ he then to enquire or to do anything in that matter ? " " not I , " answer western , " he mention it to I just now of he own accord . " " just now ! " cry , " why , where do you see he then ? I want much to see . " " why , you may see un and you will presently at my lodging ; for there be to be a meeting of lawyer there this mor about a mortgage . ' Icod ! I shall lose two or dree thousand pound , I believe , by that honest gentleman , . " " well , sir , " say , " I will be with you within the half - hour . " " and do for once , " cry the squire , " take a fool 's advice ; never think of deal with she by gentle method , take my word for it those will never do . I have try 'um long enough . she must be frightene into it , there be no other way . tell she I be she father ; and of the horrid sin of disobedience , and of the dreadful punishment of it in t'other world , and then tell she about be lock up all she life in a garret in this , and be keep only on bread and water . " " I will do all I can , " say ; " for I promise you there be nothing I wish for more than a alliance with this amiable creature . " " Nay , the girl be well enough for matter of ' that , " cry the squire ; " a man may go farther and meet with
with worse meat ; that I may declare o'her , thor she be my own daughter . and if she will but be obedient to I , there be narrow a father within a hundr mile of ' the place , that love a daughter better than I do ; but I see you be busy with the lady here , so I will go huome and expect you ; and so you humble servant . " as soon as be gone Waters say , " I see , sir , the squire hath not the least remembrance of my face . I believe , , you would not have know I neither . I be very considerably alter since that day when you so kindly give I that advice , which I have be happy have I follow . " " indeed , madam , " cry , " it give I great concern when I first hear the contrary . " " indeed , sir , " say she , " I be ruin by a very deep scheme of villany , which if you know , though I pretend not to think it would justify I in you opinion , it would at least mitigate my offence , and induce you to pity I : you be not now at leisure to hear my whole story ; but this I assure you , I be betraye by the most solemn promise of marriage ; nay , in the eye of heaven I be marry to he ; for , after much read on the subject , I be convince that particular ceremony be only requisite to give a legal sanction to marriage , and have only a worldly use in give a woman the privileges of a wife ; but that she who live constant to one man , after a solemn private affiance , whatever the world may call she , hath little to charge on she own conscience . " " I be sorry , madam , " say , " you make so ill a use of you learning . indeed , it would have be well that you have be possess of much more , or have remain in a state of ignorance . and yet , madam , I be afraid you have more than this sin to answer for . " " during he life , " answer she , " which be above a dozen year , I most solemnly assure you I have not . and consider , sir , on my behalf , what be in the power of a woman stript of she reputation and leave destitute ; whether the good - natured world will suffer such a stray sheep to return to the road of virtue , even if she be never so desirous . I protest , then , I would have choose it have it be in my power ; but necessity drive I into the arm of , with whom , though still unmarried , I live as a wife for many year , and go by he name . I part with this gentleman at , on he march against the rebel , and it be then I accidentally meet with , who rescue I from the hand of a villain . indeed , he be the worthiest of man . no young gentleman of he age be , I believe , freer from vice , and few have the twentieth part of he virtue ; nay , whatever vice he hath have , I be firmly persuade he hath now take a resolution to abandon they . " " I hope he hath , " cry , " and I hope he will preserve that resolution . I must say , I have still the same hope with regard to yourself . the world , I do agree , be apt to be too unmerciful on these occasion ; yet time and perseverance will get the better of this they disinclination , as I may call it , to pity ; for though they be not , like heaven , ready to receive a penitent sinner ; yet a continue repentance will at length obtain mercy even with the world . this you may be assure of , , that whenever I find you be sincere in such good intention , you shall want no assistance in my power to make they effectual . " fall now upon she knee before he , and , in a flood of tear , make he many most passionate acknowledgment of he goodness , which , as she truly say , savoure more of the divine than human nature . raise she up , and speak in the most tender manner , make use of every expression which he invention could suggest to comfort she , when he be interrupt by the arrival of , who , upon he first entrance , see , start , and appear in some confusion ; from which he soon recover himself as well as he could , and then say he be in the utmost haste to attend counsel at 's lodging ; but , however , think it he duty to call and acquaint he with the opinion of counsel upon the case which he have before tell he , which be that the conversion of the money in that case could not be question in a criminal cause , but that a action of trover might be bring , and if it appear to the jury to be the money of plaintiff , that plaintiff would recover a verdict for the value . Allworthy , without make any answer to this , bolt the door , and then , advanc with a stern look to , he say , " whatever be you haste , sir , I must first receive a answer to some question
question . do you know this lady ? " --" that lady , sir ! " answer , with great hesitation . Allworthy then , with the most solemn voice , say , " look you , , as you value my favour , or you continuance a moment longer in my service , do not hesitate nor prevaricate ; but answer faithfully and truly to every question I ask .---- do you know this lady ? " --" yes , sir , " say , " I have see the lady . " " where , sir ? " " at she own lodging . " -- " upon what business do you go thither , sir ; and who send you ? " " I go , sir , to enquire , sir , about . " " and who send you to enquire about he ? " " who , sir ? why , sir , send I . " " and what do you say to the lady concerning that matter ? " " Nay , sir , it be impossible to recollect every word . " " will you please , madam , to assist the gentleman 's memory ? " " he tell I , sir , " say , " that if have murder my husband , I should be assist by any money I want to carry on the prosecution , by a very worthy gentleman , who be well apprize what a villain I have to deal with . these , I can safely swear , be the very word he speak . " -- " be these the word , sir ? " say . " I can not charge my memory exactly , " cry Dowling , " but I believe I do speak to that purpose . " -- " and do order you to say so ? " " I be sure , sir , I should not have go on my own accord , nor have willingly exceed my authority in matter of this kind . if I say so , I must have so understood 's instruction . " " look you , , " say ; " I promise you before this lady , that whatever you have do in this affair by 's order I will forgive , provide you now tell I strictly the truth ; for I believe what you say , that you would not have act of you own accord and without authority in this matter .---- then likewise send you to examine the two fellow at ? " --" he do , sy . " " well , and what instruction do he then give you ? Recollect as well as you can , and tell I , as near as possible , the very word he use . " --" why , sir , send I to find out the persons who be eye -witness of this fight . he say , he fear they might be tamper with by , or some of he friend . he say , blood require blood ; and that not only all who conceal a murderer , but those who omit anything in they power to bring he to justice , be sharer in he guilt . he say , he find you be very desirous of have the villain bring to justice , though it be not proper you should appear in it . " " he do so ? " say .--" yes , sir , " cry Dowling ; " I should not , I be sure , have proceed such length for the sake of any other person live but you worship . " --" what length , sir ? " say .--" , sir , " cry Dowling , " I would not have you worship think I would , on any account , be guilty of subornation of perjury ; but there be two way of deliver evidence . I tell they , therefore , that if any offer should be make they on the other side , they should refuse they , and that they might be assure they should lose nothing by be honest man , and tell the truth . I say , we be tell that have assault the gentleman first , and that , if that be the truth , they should declare it ; and I do give they some hint that they should be no loser . " --" I think you go length indeed , " cry .-- " Nay , sir , " answer , " I be sure I do not desire they to tell a untruth ;---- nor should I have say what I do , unless it have be to oblige you . " --" you would not have think , I believe , " say , " to have oblige I , have you know that this be my own nephew . " --" I be sure , sir , " answer he , " it do not become I to take any notice of what I think you desire to conceal . " --" how ! " cry , " and do you know it then ? " --" Nay , sir , " answer , " if you worship bids I speak the truth , I be sure I shall do it .-- indeed , sir , I do know it ; for they be almost the last word which ever speak , which she mention to I as I stand alone by she bedside , when she deliver I the letter I bring you worship from she . " -- " what letter ? " cry Allworthy .--" the letter , sir , " answer , " which I bring from , and which I deliver into the hand of . " --" of heaven ! " cry :
: " well , and what be the word ? what do my sister say to you ? " --" she take I by the hand , " answer he , " and , as she deliver I the letter , say , ` I scarce know what I have write . tell my brother , be he nephew -- he be my son .-- he , ' say she , and then fall backward , as if die away . I presently call in the people , and she never speak more to I , and die within a few minute afterwards . " -- stand a minute silent , lift up he eye ; and then , turn to , say , " how come you , sir , not to deliver I this message ? " " you worship , " answer he , " must remember that you be at that time ill in bed ; and , be in a violent hurry , as indeed I always be , I deliver the letter and message to , who tell I he would carry they both to you , which he hath since tell I he do , and that you worship , partly out of friendship to , and partly out of regard to you sister , would never have it mention , and do intend to conceal it from the world ; and therefore , sir , if you have not mention it to I first , I be certain I should never have think it belong to I to say anything of the matter , either to you worship or any other person . " we have remark somewhere already , that it be possible for a man to convey a lie in the word of truth ; this be the case at present ; for have , in fact , tell Dowling what he now relate , but have not impos upon he , nor indeed have imagine he be able so to do . in reality , the promise which have make to be the motives which have induce he to secrecy ; and , as he now very plainly see would not be able to keep they , he think proper now to make this confession , which the promise of forgiveness , join to the threat , the voice , the look of , and the discoveries he have make before , extort from he , who be besides take unawar , and have no time to consider of evasion . appear well satisfied with this relation , and , have enjoin on Dowling strict silence as to what have past , conduct that gentleman himself to the door , lest he should see , who be return to he chamber , where he exult in the thought of he last deceit on he uncle , and little suspect what have since pass below - stair . as be return to he room he meet in the entry , who , with a face all pale and full of terror , say to he , " o ! sir , I find this wicked woman hath be with you , and you know all ; yet do not on this account abandon the poor young man . consider , sir , he be ignorant it be he own mother ; and the discovery itself will most probably break he heart , without you unkindness . " " madam , " say , " I be under such a astonishment at what I have hear , that I be really unable to satisfy you ; but come with I into my room . indeed , , I have make surprizing discoveries , and you shall soon know they . " the poor woman follow he trembl ; and now Allworthy , go up to , take she by the hand , and then , turn to , say , " what reward shall I bestow upon this gentlewoman , for the service she hath do I ?--o ! , you have a thousand time hear I call the young man to whom you be so faithful a friend , my son . little do I then think he be indeed related to I at all . -- you friend , madam , be my nephew ; he be the brother of that wick viper which I have so long nourished in my bosom .-- she will herself tell you the whole story , and how the youth come to pass for she son . indeed , , I be convince that he hath be wrong , and that I have be abuse ; abuse by one whom you too justly suspect of be a villain . he be , in truth , the worst of villain . " the joy which now feel bereft she of the power of speech , and might perhaps have deprive she of she sense , if not of life , have not a friendly shower of tear come seasonably to she relief . at length , recovere so far from she transport as to be able to speak , she cry , " and be my dear then you nephew , sir , and not the son of this lady ? and be you eye open to he at last ? and shall I live to see he as happy as he deserve ? " " he certainly be my nephew , " say , " and I hope all the rest . " --" and be this the dear good woman , the person , " cry she , " to whom all this discovery be owe ? " --" she be indeed , " say .-- " why , then , " cry , upon she knee , " may heaven shower down its choicest blessing upon she head , and for this
this one good action forgive she all she sins , be they never so many ! " then inform they that she believe would very shortly be release ; for that the surgeon be go , in company with a nobleman , to the justice who commit he , in order to certify that be out of all manner of danger , and to procure he prisoner he liberty . say he should be glad to find he nephew there at he return home ; but that he be then oblige to go on some business of consequence . he then call to a servant to fetch he a chair , and presently leave the two lady together . , hear the chair order , come downstairs to attend upon he uncle ; for he never be deficient in such act of duty . he ask he uncle if he be go out , which be a civil way of ask a man whither he be go : to which the other make no answer , he again desire to know when he would be pleased to return ?-- Allworthy make no answer to this neither , till he be just go into he chair , and then , turn about , he say -- " , sir , do you find out , before my return , the letter which you mother send I on she death - bed . " then depart , and leave in a situation to be envy only by a man who be just go to be hang . chapter ix . a further continuation . take a opportunity , whilst he be in the chair , of read the letter from to , which western deliver he ; and there be some expression in it concern himself which draw tear from he eyes . at length he arrive at 's , and be introduce to . when the first ceremony be past , and the gentleman and lady have take they chair , a silence of some minute ensue ; during which the latter , who have be prepare for the visit by she father , sit play with she fan , and have every mark of confusion both in she countenance and behaviour . at length , who be himself a little disconcert , begin thus : " I be afraid , miss western , my family hath be the occasion of give you some uneasiness ; to which , I fear , I have innocently become more instrumental than I intend . be assured , madam , have I at first know how disagreeable the proposal have be , I should not have suffer you to have be so long persecute . I hope , therefore , you will not think the design of this visit be to trouble you with any further solicitation of that kind , but entirely to relieve you from they . " " , " say , with a little modest hesitation , " this behaviour be most kind and generous , and such as I could expect only from ; but as you have be so kind to mention this matter , you will pardon I for say it hath , indeed , give I great uneasiness , and hath be the occasion of my suffering much cruel treatment from a father who be , till that unhappy affair , the tenderest and fondest of all parent . I be convinced , sir , you be too good and generous to resent my refusal of you nephew . we inclination be not in we own power ; and whatever may be he merit , I can not force they in he favour . " " I assure you , most amiable young lady , " say , " I be capable of no such resentment , have the person be my own son , and have I entertaine the highest esteem for he . for you say truly , madam , we can not force we inclination , much less can they be direct by another . " " oh ! sir , " answer , " every word you speak prove you deserve that good , that great , that benevolent character the whole world allow you . I assure you , sir , nothing less than the certain prospect of future misery could have make I resist the command of my father . " " I sincerely believe you , madam , " reply , " and I heartily congratulate you on you prudent foresight , since by so justifiable a resistance you have avoid misery indeed ! " " you speak now , , " cry she , " with a delicacy which few man be capable of feel ! but surely , in my opinion , to lead we life with one to whom we be indifferent must be a state of wretchedness .---- perhaps that wretchedness would be even increase by a sense of the merit of a object to whom we can not give we affections . if I have marry -- " " my interrupt you , madam , " answer , " but I can not bear the supposition .-- believe I , , I rejoice from my heart , I rejoice in you escape .-- I have discover the wretch for whom you have suffer all this cruel violence from you father to be a villain . " " how , sir ! " cry --" you must believe this surprize I . " --" it hath surprize I , madam , " answer , " and so it will the world .----But I have acquaint you with the real truth . " " nothing but truth , " say , " can , I be convinced , come from the lip of .---- , sir , such sudden , such unexpected news .----Discover , you say
say ---- may villany be ever so ! " --" you will soon enough hear the story , " cry ; -- " at present let we not mention so detest a name .-- I have another matter of a very serious nature to propose .--o ! , I know you vast worth , nor can I so easily part with the ambition of be ally to it .-- I have a near relation , madam , a young man whose character be , I be convinced , the very opposite to that of this wretch , and whose fortune I will make equal to what he be to have be . could I , madam , hope you would admit a visit from he ? " , after a minute 's silence , answer , " I will deal with the utmost sincerity with . he character , and the obligation I have just receive from he , demand it . I have determine at present to listen to no such proposal from any person . my only desire be to be restore to the affection of my father , and to be again the mistress of he family . this , sir , I hope to owe to you good office . let I beseech you , let I conjure you , by all the goodness which I , and all who know you , have experience , do not , the very moment when you have release I from one persecution , do not engage I in another as miserable and as fruitless . " " indeed , , " reply , " I be capable of no such conduct ; and if this be you resolution , he must submit to the disappointment , whatever torment he may suffer under it . " " I must smile now , , " answer , " when you mention the torment of a man whom I do not know , and who can consequently have so little acquaintance with I . " " pardon I , dear young lady , " cry , " I begin now to be afraid he hath have too much acquaintance for the repose of he future day ; since , if ever man be capable of a sincere , violent , and noble passion , such , I be convinced , be my unhappy nephew 's for . " " a nephew of you 's , ! " answer . " it be surely strange . I never hear of he before . " " indeed , madam , " cry , " it be only the circumstance of he be my nephew to which you be a stranger , and which , till this day , be a secret to I .-- , who have long love you , he ! he be my nephew ! " " you nephew , sir ! " cry , " can it be possible ? " --" he be , indeed , madam , " answer ; " he be my own sister 's son -- as such I shall always own he ; nor be I asham of own he . I be much more asham of my past behaviour to he ; but I be as ignorant of he merit as of he birth . indeed , , I have use he cruelly ---- indeed I have . " -- here the good man wip he eye , and after a short pause proceed -- " I never shall be able to reward he for he suffering without you assistance .---- believe I , most amiable young lady , I must have a great esteem of that offering which I make to you worth . I know he hath be guilty of fault ; but there be great goodness of heart at the bottom . believe I , madam , there be . " here he stop , seem to expect a answer , which he presently receive from , after she have a little recover herself from the hurry of spirit into which so strange and sudden information have throw she : " I sincerely wish you joy , sir , of a discovery in which you seem to have such satisfaction . I doubt not but you will have all the comfort you can promise yourself from it . the young gentleman hath certainly a thousand good quality , which make it impossible he should not behave well to such a uncle . " --" I hope , madam , " say , " he hath those good quality which must make he a good husband . -- he must , I be sure , be of all man the most abandon , if a lady of you merit should condescmend -- " " you must pardon I , , " answer ; " I can not listen to a proposal of this kind . , I be convince , hath much merit ; but I shall never receive as one who be to be my husband -- Upon my honour I never will . " -- " pardon I , madam , " cry , " if I be a little surprized , after what I have hear from -- I hope the unhappy young man hath do nothing to forfeit you good opinion , if he have ever the honour to enjoy it .-- perhaps , he may have be misrepresent to you , as he be to I . the same villany may have injur he everywhere . -- he be no murderer , I assure you ; as he hath be call . " -- " , " answer , " I have tell you my resolution . I wonder not at what my father hath tell you ; but , whatever he apprehension or fear have be , if I know my heart , I have
have give no occasion for they ; since it hath always be a fix principle with I , never to have marry without he consent . this be , I think , the duty of a child to a parent ; and this , I hope , nothing could ever have prevail with I to swerve from . I do not indeed conceive that the authority of any parent can oblige we to marry in direct opposition to we inclination . to avoid a force of this kind , which I have reason to suspect , I leave my father 's house , and seek protection elsewhere . this be the truth of my story ; and if the world , or my father , carry my intentions any farther , my own conscience will acquit I . " " I hear you , miss western , " cry , " with admiration . I admire the justness of you sentiment ; but surely there be more in this . I be cautious of offend you , young lady ; but be I to look on all which I have hitherto hear or see as a dream only ? and have you suffer so much cruelty from you father on the account of a man to whom you have be always absolutely indifferent ? " " I beg , , " answer , " you will not insist on my reason ; -- yes , I have suffer indeed ; I will not , , conceal ---- I will be very sincere with you -- I own I have a great opinion of -- I believe -- I know I have suffer for my opinion -- I have be treat cruelly by my aunt , as well as by my father ; but that be now past -- I beg I may not be farther press ; for , whatever hath be , my resolution be now fix . you nephew , sir , hath many virtue -- he hath great virtue , . I question not but he will do you honour in the world , and make you happy . " --" I wish I could make he so , madam , " reply ; " but that I be convince be only in you power . it be that conviction which hath make I so earnest a solicitor in he favour . " " you be deceive indeed , sir ; you be deceive , " say . " I hope not by he . it be sufficient to have deceive I . , I must insist on be press no farther on this subject . I should be sorry -- nay , I will not injure he in you favour . I wish very well . I sincerely wish he well ; and I repeat it again to you , whatever demerit he may have to I , I be certain he hath many good quality . I do not disow my former thought ; but nothing can ever recal they . at present there be not a man upon earth whom I would more resolutely reject than ; nor would the address of himself be less agreeable to I . " western have be long impatient for the event of this conference , and be just now arrive at the door to listen ; when , have hear the last sentiment of he daughter 's heart , he lose all temper , and , burst open the door in a rage , cry out -- " it be a lie ! it be a d -- and would lie ! it be all owe to that -- and would rascal ; and if she could get at un , she would ha un any hour of the day . " here Allworthy interpose , and address himself to the squire with some anger in he look , he say , " , you have not keep you word with I . you promise to abstain from all violence . " --" why , so I do , " cry western , " as long as it be possible ; but to hear a wench tell such confound lie ---- Zound ! doth she think , if she can make vool of other volk , she can make one of I ?-- no , no , I know she better than thee dost . " " I be sorry to tell you , sir , " answer , " it doth not appear , by you behaviour to this young lady , that you know she at all . I ask pardon for what I say : but I think we intimacy , you own desire , and the occasion justify I . she be you daughter , , and I think she doth honou to you name . if I be capable of envy , I should sooner envy you on this account than any other man whatever . " -- " Odrabbit it ! " cry the squire , " I wish she be thine , with all my heart -- wouldst soon be glad to be rid of the trouble of ' she . " " indeed , my good friend , " answer , " you yourself be the cause of all the trouble you complain of . place that confidence in the young lady which she so well deserve , and I be certain you will be the happiest father on earth . " --" I confidence in she ? " cry the squire . " ' ! what confidence can I place in she , when she will not do as I would ha ' she ? let she gi' but she consent to marry as I would ha ' she , and I will place as much confidence in she as wouldst ha ' I . " --" you have
have no right , neighbour , " answer , " to insist on any such consent . a negative voice you daughter allow you , and and nature have think proper to allow you no more . " --" a negative voice ! " cry the squire , " ay ! ay ! I will show you what a negative voice I ha .-- go along , go into you chamber , go , you stubborn ----. " " indeed , , " say , " indeed you use she cruelly -- I can not bear to see this -- you shall , you must behave to she in a kinder manner . she deserve the best of treatment . " " yes , yes , " say the squire , " I know what she deserve : now she be go , I will show you what she deserve . see here , sir , here be a letter from my cousin , my , in which she be so kind to gi' I to understand that the fellow be get out of prison again ; and here she advise I to take all the care I can o ' the wench . Odzooker ! neighbour , you do not know what it be to govern a daughter . " the squire end he speech with some compliment to he own sagacity ; and then , after a formal preface , acquaint he with the whole discovery which he have make concern , with he anger to , and with every particular which hath be disclose to the reader in the preceding chapter . man over-violent in they disposition be , for the most part , as changeable in they . no sooner then be western inform of 's intention to make he heir , than he join heartily with the uncle in every commendation of the nephew , and become as eager for she marriage with as he have before be to couple she to . here be again force to interpose , and to relate what have pass between he and , at which he testify great surprize . the squire be silent a moment , and look wild with astonishment at this account .-- at last he cry out , " why , what can be the meaning of this , neighbour ? Vond of 'un she be , that I will be swear to .----Odzooker ! I have hit o't . as sure as a gun I have hit of ' the very right o't . it be all along of ' zister . the girl hath get a hankering after this son of a whore of a lord . I vound 'em together at my cousin my 's . he hath turn the head of ' she , that be certain -- but -- and I if he shall ha she -- I will ha no lord nor courtier in my vamily . " Allworthy now make a long speech , in which he repeat he resolution to avoid all violent measure , and very earnestly recommend gentle method to , as those by which he might be assure of succeed best with he daughter . he then take he leave , and return back to , but be force to comply with the earnest entreaty of the squire , in promise to bring to visit he that afternoon , that he might , as he say , " make all matters up with the young gentleman . " at 's departure , western promise to follow he advice in he behaviour to , say , " I do not know how ' tis , but -- and I , , if you do not make I always do just as you please ; and yet I have as good a estate as you , and be in the commission of the peace as well as yourself . " chapter x . wherein the history begin to draw towards a conclusion . when return to he lodging , he hear be just arrive before he . he hurry therefore instantly into a empty chamber , whither he order to be bring to he alone . it be impossible to conceive a more tender or move scene than the meeting between the uncle and nephew ( for , as the reader may well suppose , have at she last visit discover to he the secret of he birth ) . the first agony of joy which be feel on both side be indeed beyond my power to describe : I shall not therefore attempt it . after have raise from he foot , where he have prostrate himself , and receive he into he arm , " of my child ! " he cry , " how have I be to blame ! how have I injur you ! what amend can I ever make you for those unkind , those unjust suspicions which I have entertain , and for all the suffering they have occasion to you ? " " be I not now make amend ? " cry . " would not my suffering , if they have be ten time greater , have be now richly repay ? of my dear uncle , this goodness , this tenderness overpower , unman , destroy I . I can not bear the transport which flow so fast upon I . to be again restore to you presence , to you favour ; to be once more thus kindly receive by my great , my noble , my generous benefactor . " -- " indeed , child , " cry , " I have use you cruelly ." ---- he then explain to he all the treachery of , and again repeat expression of the utmost concern , for have be induce by that treachery to use he so ill . " o , talk not
not so ! " answer ; " indeed , sir , you have use I nobly . the wisest man might be deceive as you be ; and , under such a deception , the best must have ac just as you do . you goodness display itself in the midst of you anger , just as it then see . I owe everything to that goodness , of which I have be most unworthy . do not put I on self - accusation , by carry you generous sentiment too far . ! sir , I have not be punish more than I have deserve ; and it shall be the whole business of my future life to deserve that happiness you now bestow on I ; for , believe I , my dear uncle , my punishment hath not be throw away upon I : though I have be a great , I be not a harden sinner ; I thank Heaven , I have have time to reflect on my past life , where , though I can not charge myself with any gross villany , yet I can discern folly and vice more than enough to repent and to be asham of ; folly which have be attend with dreadful consequence to myself , and have bring I to the brink of destruction . " " I be rejoice , my dear child , " answer , " to hear you talk thus sensibly ; for as I be convince hypocrisy ( good Heaven ! how have I be impos on by it in other ! ) be never among you fault , so I can readily believe all you say . you now see , , to what dangers imprudence alone may subject virtue ( for virtue , I be now convince , you love in a great degree ) . Prudence be indeed the duty which we owe to ourselves ; and if we will be so much we own enemie as to neglect it , we be not to wonder if the world be deficient in discharge they duty to we ; for when a man lay the foundation of he own ruin , other will , I be afraid , be too apt to build upon it . you say , however , you have see you error , and will reform they . I firmly believe you , my dear child ; and therefore , from this moment , you shall never be remind of they by I . remember they only yourself so far as for the future to teach you the better to avoid they ; but still remember , for you comfort , that there be this great difference between those fault which candor may construe into imprudence , and those which can be deduce from villany only . the former , perhaps , be even more apt to subject a man to ruin ; but if he reform , he character will , at length , be totally retrieve ; the world , though not immediately , will in time be reconcile to he ; and he may reflect , not without some mixture of pleasure , on the dangers he hath escape ; but villany , my boy , when once discover be irretrievable ; the stain which this leave behind , no time will wash away . the censure of mankind will pursue the wretch , they scorn will abash he in publick ; and if shame drive he into retirement , he will go to it with all those terror with which a weary child , who be afraid of hobgoblin , retreats from company to go to bed alone . here he murder conscience will haunt he .-- Repose , like a false friend , will fly from he . wherever he turn he eye , horror present itself ; if he look backward , unavailable repentance tread on he heel ; if forward , incurable despair stare he in the face , till , like a condemn prisoner confine in a dungeon , he detest he present condition , and yet dread the consequence of that hour which be to relieve he from it . Comfort yourself , I say , my child , that this be not you case ; and rejoice with thankfulness to he who hath suffer you to see you error , before they have bring on you that destruction to which a persistance in even those error must have lead you . you have desert they ; and the prospect now before you be such , that happiness seem in you own power . " at these word fetch a deep sigh ; upon which , when remonstrate , he say , " , I will conceal nothing from you : I fear there be one consequence of my vice I shall never be able to retrieve . o , my dear uncle ! I have lose a treasure . " " you need say no more , " answer ; " I will be explicit with you ; I know what you lament ; I have see the young lady , and have discourse with she concern you . this I must insist on , as a earnest of you sincerity in all you have say , and of the stedfastness of you resolution , that you obey I in one instance . to abide intirely by the determination of the young lady , whether it shall be in you favour or no . she hath already suffer enough from solicitation which I hate to think of ; she shall owe no further constraint to my family : I know she father will be as ready to torment she now on you account as he hath formerly be on another ' ; but I be determi she shall suffer no more confinement , no more violence ,
, no more uneasy hour . " " o , my dear uncle ! " answer , " lay , I beseech you , some command on I , in which I shall have some merit in obedience . believe I , sir , the only instance in which I could disobey you would be to give a uneasy moment to my . no , sir , if I be so miserable to have incur she displeasure beyond all hope of forgiveness , that alone , with the dreadful reflection of cause she misery , will be sufficient to overpower I . to call mine be the greatest , and now the only additional blessing which heaven can bestow ; but it be a blessing which I must owe to she alone . " " I will not flatter you , child , " cry ; " I fear you case be desperate : I never see stronger mark of a unalterable resolution in any person than appear in she vehement declaration against receive you address ; for which , perhaps , you can account better than myself . " " oh , sir ! I can account too well , " answer ; " I have sinn against she beyond all hope of pardon ; and guilty as I be , my guill unfortunately appear to she in ten time blacker than the real colour . o , my dear uncle ! I find my folly be irretrievable ; and all you goodness can not save I from perdition . " a servant now acquaint they that be below - stair ; for he eagerness to see could not wait till the afternoon . upon which , whose eye be full of tear , beg he uncle to entertain western a few minute , till he a little recover himself ; to which the good man consent , and , have order western to be shew into a parlour , go down to he . no sooner hear that be alone ( for she have not yet see he since he release from prison ) than she come eagerly into the room , and , advanc towards , wish he heartily joy of he new - find uncle and he happy reconciliation ; add , " I wish I could give you joy on another account , my dear child ; but anything so inexorable I never see . " , with some appearance of surprize , ask she what she mean . " why then , " say she , " I have be with you young lady , and have explain all matters to she , as they be tell to I by my son Nightingale . she can have no longer any doubt about the letter ; of that I be certain ; for I tell she my son be ready to take he oath , if she please , that it be all he own invention , and the letter of he inditing . I tell she the very reason of send the letter ought to recommend you to she the more , as it be all upon she account , and a plain proof that you be resolve to quit all you profligacy for the future ; that you have never be guilty of a single instance of infidelity to she since you see she in town : I be afraid I go too far there ; but forgive I ! I hope you future behaviour will be my justification . I be sure I have say all I can ; but all to no purpose . she remain inflexible . she say , she have forgive many fault on account of youth ; but express such detestation of the character of a libertine , that she absolutely silence I . I often attempt to excuse you ; but the justness of she accusation fly in my face . upon my honour , she be a lovely woman , and one of the sweetest and most sensible creature I ever see . I could have almost kiss she for one expression she make use of . it be a sentiment worthy of , or of a bishop . ` I once fancie madam . ' and she , ` I have discover great goodness of heart in ; and for that I own I have a sincere esteem ; but a entire profligacy of manners will corrupt the best heart in the world ; and all which a good - natured libertine can expect be , that we should mix some grains of pity with we contempt and abhorrence . ' she be a angelic creature , that be the truth of not . " " o , ! " answer , " can I bear to think that I have lose such a angel ? " " lose ! no , " cry ; " I hope you have not lose she yet . resolve to leave such vicious course , and you may yet have hope , nay , if she would remain inexorable , there be another young lady , a sweet pretty young lady , and a swing fortune , who be absolutely die for love of you . I hear of it this very morning , and I tell it to ; nay , I go a little beyond the truth again ; for I tell she you have refuse she ; but indeed I know you would refuse she . and here I must give you a little comfort ; when I mention the young lady 's name , who be no other than the pretty widow hunt , I think she turn pale ; but when I say you have refuse she , I will be swear she face be all over scarlet in a instant ; and these be she very word : ` I will not
not deny but that I believe he have some affection for I . ' " here the conversation be interrupt by the arrival of western , who could no longer be keep out of the room even by the authority of himself ; though this , as we have often see , have a wonderful power over he . western immediately go up to , cry out , " my old friend , I be glad to see thee with all my heart ! all past must be forget ; I could not intend any affront to thee , because , as here know , nay , dost know it thyself , I take thee for another person ; and where a body mean no harm , what signify a hasty word or two ? one must forget and forgive another . " " I hope , sir , " say , " I shall never forget the many obligation I have have to you ; but as for any offence towards I , I declare I be a utter stranger . " " A't , " say western , " then give I thy fist ; a't as hearty a honest cock as any in the kingdom . come along with I ; I will carry thee to thy mistress this moment . " here Allworthy interpose ; and the squire be unable to prevail either with the uncle or nephew , be , after some litigation , oblige to consent to delay introduce to till the afternoon ; at which time Allworthy , as well in compassion to as in compliance with the eager desire of western , be prevail upon to promise to attend at the tea - table . the conversation which now ensue be pleasant enough ; and with which , have it happen earlier in we history , we would have entertain we reader ; but as we have now leisure only to attend to what be very material , it shall suffice to say that matter be entirely adjust as to the afternoon visit again return home . chapter xi . the history draw nearer to a conclusion . when be depart , begin to inform and that he liberty have be procure by two noble lord , who , together with two surgeon and a friend of 's , have attend the magistrate by whom he have be commit , and by whom , on the surgeon ' oath , that the wounded person be out of all manner of danger from he wound , he be discharge . one only of these lord , he say , he have ever see before , and that no more than once ; but the other have greatly surprize he by ask he pardon for a offence he have be guilty of towards he , occasion , he say , entirely by he ignorance who he be . now the reality of the case , with which be not acquaint till afterwards , be this :-- the lieutenant whom have employ , accord to the advice of , to press as a vagabond into the sea-service , when he come to report to he lordship the event which we have before see , speak very favourably of the behaviour of on all account , and strongly assure that lord that he must have mistake the person , for that be certainly a gentleman ; insomuch that he lordship , who be strictly a man of honour , and would by no means have be guilty of a action which the world in general would have condemn , begin to be much concerned for the advice which he have take . within a day or two after this , happen to dine with the irish peer , who , in a conversation upon the duel , acquaint he company with the character of ; to which , indeed , he do not do strict justice , especially in what related to he lady . he say she be the most innocent , the most injured woman alive , and that from compassion alone he have undertake she cause . he then declare a intention of go the next morning to 's lodging , in order to prevail with he , if possible , to consent to a separation from he wife , who , the peer say , be in apprehension for she life , if she should ever return to be under the power of she husband . agree to go with he , that he might satisfy himself more concern and the circumstance of the duel ; for he be by no means easy concern the part he have acte . the moment he lordship give a hint of he readiness to assist in the delivery of the lady , it be eagerly embrace by the other nobleman , who depend much on the authority of , as he think it would greatly contribute to awe into a compliance ; and perhaps he be in the right ; for the poor no sooner see these noble peer have undertake the cause of he wife than he submit , and article of separation be soon draw up and sign between the party . , who have be so well satisfie by concern the innocence of he wife with at , or perhaps , from some other reason , be now become so indifferent to that matter , that he speak highly in favour of to , take all the blame upon himself , and say the other have behave very much like a gentleman and a man of honour ; and upon that lord 's further enquiry concern , tell he he be nephew to a gentleman of very great fashion and fortune , which be the account he have just receive from after she interview with Dowling . now think it behove he to
to do everything in he power to make satisfaction to a gentleman whom he have so grossly injured , and without any consideration of rivalship ( for he have now give over all thought of ) , determine to procure 's liberty , be satisfied , as well from as he surgeon , that the wound be not mortal . he therefore prevail with the irish peer to accompany he to the place where be confine , to whom he behave as we have already relate . when return to he lodging , he immediately carry into he room , and then acquaint he with the whole matter , as well what he have hear from Waters as what he have discover from . express great astonishment and no less concern at this account , but without make any comment or observation upon it . and now a message be brotch from , desire to know if he uncle be at leisure that he might wait upon he . start and turn pale , and then in a more passionate tone than I believe he have ever use before , bid the servant tell Blifil he know he not . " consider , dear sir , " cry , in a trembling voice . " I have consider , " answer , " and you yourself shall carry my message to the villain . no one can carry he the sentence of he own ruin so properly as the man whose ruin he hath so villanously contrive . " " pardon I , dear sir , " say ; " a moment 's reflection will , I be sure , convince you of the contrary . what might perhaps be but justice from another tongue , would from mine be insult ; and to whom ?--my own brother and you nephew . do he use I so barbarously -- indeed , that would have be more inexcusable than anything he hath do . Fortune may tempt man of no very bad disposition to injustice ; but insult proceed only from black and rancorous mind , and have no temptation to excuse they . let I beseech you , sir , to do nothing by he in the present height of you anger . consider , my dear uncle , I be not myself condemne unheard . " stand silent a moment , and then , embrace , he say , with tear gush from he eye , " of my child ! to what goodness have I be so long blind ! " enter the room at that moment , after a gentle rap which be not perceive , and see in the arm of he uncle , the poor woman in a agony of joy fell upon she knee , and burst forth into the most ecstatic thanksgiving to heave for what have happen ; then , run to , she embrace he eagerly , cry , " my dearest friend , I wish you joy a thousand and a thousand time of this blest day . " and next himself receive the same congratulation . to which he answer , " indeed , indeed , , I be beyond expression happy . " some few more rapture have pass on all side , desire they both to walk down to dinner in the parlour , where she say there be a very happy set of people assemble -- be indeed no other than and he bride , and he cousin Harriet with she bridegroom . excuse himself from dining with the company , say he have order some little thing for he and he nephew in he own apartment , for that they have much private business to discourse of ; but would not resist promise the good woman that both he and would make part of she society at supper . then ask what be to be do with ? " for indeed , " say she , " I can not be easy while such a villain be in my house . " -- answer , " he be as uneasy as herself on the same account . " " oh ! " cry she , " if that be the case , leave the matter to I , I will soon show he the outside out of my door , I warrant you . here be two or three lusty fellow below - stair . " " there will be no need of any violence , " cry ; " if you will carry he a message from I , he will , I be convinced , depart of he own accord . " " will I ? " say ; " I never do anything in my life with a better will . " here interfere , and say , " he have consider the matter better , and would , if please , be himself the messenger . I know , " say he , " already enough of you pleasure , sir , and I beg leave to acquaint he with it by my own word . let I beseech you , sir , " add he , " to reflect on the dreadful consequence of drive he to violent and sudden despair . how unfit , alas ! be this poor man to die in he present situation . " this suggestion have not the least effect on . she leave the room , cry , " you be too good , , infinitely too good to live in this world . " but it make a deeper impression on . " my good child , " say he , " I be equally astonished at the goodness of you heart , and the quickness of you understanding . heaven indeed forbid that this wretch should be deprive of any means or time for repentance ! that would be a shocking consideration
consideration indeed . go to he , therefore , and use you own discretion ; yet do not flatter he with any hope of my forgiveness ; for I shall never forgive villany farther than my religion oblige I , and that extend not either to we bounty or we conversation . " go up to 's room , whom he find in a situation which move he pity , though it would have raise a less amiable passion in many beholder . he cast himself on he bed , where he lay abandon himself to despair , and drown in tear ; not in such tear as flow from contrition , and wash away guilt from mind which have be seduce or surprize into it unaware , against the bent of they natural disposition , as will sometimes happen from human frailty , even to the good ; no , these tear be such as the frighted thief shed in he cart , and be indeed the effect of that concern which the most savage nature be seldom deficient in feeling for themselves . it would be unpleasant and tedious to paint this scene in full length . let it suffice to say , that the behaviour of be kind to excess . he omit nothing which he invention could supply , to raise and comfort the droop spirit of , before he communicate to he the resolution of he uncle that he must quit the house that even . he offer to furnish he with any money he want , assure he of he hearty forgiveness of all he have do against he , that he would endeaavor to live with he hereafter as a brother , and would leave nothing unattempted to effectuate a reconciliation with he uncle . be at first sullen and silent , balance in he mind whether he should yet deny all ; but , find at last the evidence too strong against he , he betake himself at last to confession . he then ask pardon of he brother in the most vehement manner , prostrate himself on the ground , and kiss he foot ; in short he be now as remarkably mean as he have be before remarkably wick . Jones could not so far check he disdain , but that it a little discover itself in he countenance at this extreme servility . he raise he brother the moment he could from the ground , and advise he to bear he affliction more like a man ; repeat , at the same time , he promise , that he would do all in he power to lessen they ; for which Blifil , make many profession of he unworthiness , pour forth a profusion of thanks ; and then , he have declare he would immediately depart to another lodging , return to he uncle . among other matter , now acquaint with the discovery which he have make concern the  500 bank - note . " I have , " say he , " already consult a lawyer , who tell I , to my great astonishment , that there be no punishment for a fraud of this kind . indeed , when I consider the black ingratitude of this fellow toward you , I think a highwayman , compare to he , be a innocent person . " " ! " say , " be it possible ?-- I be shocke beyond measure at this news . I think there be not a honester fellow in the world .---- the temptation of such a sum be too great for he to withstand ; for smaller matter have come safe to I through he hand . indeed , my dear uncle , you must suffer I to call it weakness rather than ingratitude ; for I be convince the poor fellow love I , and hath do I some kindness , which I can never forget ; nay , I believe he hath repent of this very act ; for it be not above a day or two ago , when my affair see in the most desperate situation , that he visit I in my confinement , and offer I any money I want . consider , sir , what a temptation to a man who hath taste such bitter distress , it must be , to have a sum in he possession which must put he and he family beyond any future possibility of suffer the like . " " child , " cry , " you carry this forgive temper too far . such mistaken mercy be not only weakness , but border on injustice , and be very pernicious to society , as it encourage vice . the dishonesty of this fellow I might , perhaps , have pardon , but never he ingratitude . and give I leave to say , when we suffer any temptation to atone for dishonesty itself , we be as candid and merciful as we ought to be ; and so far I confess I have go ; for I have often pitie the fate of a highwayman , when I have be on the grand jury ; and have more than once apply to the judge on the behalf of such a have have any mitigating circumstance in they case ; but when dishonesty be attend with any blacker crime , such as cruelty , murder , ingratitude , or the like , compassion and forgiveness then become fault . I be convince the fellow be a villain , and he shall be punish ; at least as far as I can punish he . " this be speak with so stern a voice , that do not think proper to make any reply ; besides , the hour appoint by now draw so near , that he have barely time leave to dress himself . here
here therefore end the present dialogue , and retire to another room , where attend , accord to order , with he cloath . have scarce see he master since the happy discovery . the poor fellow be unable either to contain or express he transport . he behave like one frantic , and make almost as many mistake while he be dress as I have see make by in dress himself on the stage . he memory , however , be not in the least deficient . he recollect now many omen and presage of this happy event , some of which he have remark at the time , but many more he now remember ; nor do he omit the dream he have dreamt the evening before he meeting with ; and conclude with say , " I always tell you honour something bod in my mind that you would one time or other have it in you power to make my fortune . " assure he that this boding should as certainly be verifie with regard to he as all the other omen have be to himself ; which do not a little add to all the rapture which the poor fellow have already conceive on account of he master . chapter xii . Approach still nearer to the end . , be now completely dress , attend he uncle to 's . he be , indeed , one of the finest figure ever beheld , and he person alone would have charme the greater part of womankind ; but we hope it hath already appear in this history that , when she form he , do not totally rely , as she sometimes doth , on this merit only , to recommend she work . , who , angry as she be , be likewise set forth to the best advantage , for which I leave my female reader to account , appear so extremely beautiful , that even , when he see she , could not forbear whisper western , that he believe she be the finest creature in the world . to which Western answer , in a whisper , overheard by all present , " so much the better for ;-- for -- and I if he not ha the tousl she . " be all over scarlet at these word , while 's countenance be altogether as pale , and he be almost ready to sink from he chair . the tea - table be scarce remove before lug out of the room , tell he he have business of consequence to impart , and must speak to he that instant in private , before he forget it . the lover be now alone , and it will , I question not , appear strange to many reader , that those who have so much to say to one another when danger and difficulty attend they conversation , and who seem so eager to rush into each other 's arm when so many bar lay in they way , now that with safety they be at liberty to say or do whatever they please , should both remain for some time silent and motionless ; insomuch that a stranger of moderate sagacity might have well conclude they be mutually indifferent ; but so it be , however strange it may seem ; both sit with they eye cast downward on the ground , and for some minute continue in perfect silence . during this interval attempt once or twice to speak , but be absolutely incapable , mutter only , or rather sigh out , some break word ; when at length , partly out of pity to he , and partly to turn the discourse from the subject which she know well enough he be endeavour to open , say -- " sure , sir , you be the most fortunate man in the world in this discovery . " " and can you really , madam , think I so fortunate , " say , sigh , " while I have incur you displeasure ? " --" , sir , " say she , " as to that you best know whether you have deserve it . " " indeed , madam , " answer he , " you yourself be as well apprize of all my demerit . hath acquaint you with the whole truth . o ! my , be I never to hope for forgiveness ? " --" I think , , " say she , " I may almost depend on you own justice , and leave it to yourself to pass sentence on you own conduct. " -- " Alas ! madam , " answer he , " it be mercy , and not justice , which I implore at you hand . Justice I know must condemn I . -- yet not for the letter I send to . of that I most solemnly declare you have have a true account . " he then insist much on the security give he by Nightingale of a fair pretence for breaking off , if , contrary to they expectation , she ladyship should have accept he offer ; but confest that he have be guilty of a great indiscretion to put such a letter as that into she power , " which , " say he , " I have dearly pay for , in the effect it have upon you . " " I do not , I can not , " say she , " believe otherwise of that letter than you would have I . my conduct , I think , shew you clearly I do not believe there be much in that . and yet , , have I not enough to resent ? after what past at , so soon to engage in a new amour with another woman , while
while I fancie , and you pretend , you heart be bleed for I ? indeed , you have act strangely . can I believe the passion you have profest to I to be sincere ? or , if I can , what happiness can I assure myself of with a man capable of so much inconstancy ? " " o ! my , " cry he , " do not doubt the sincerity of the purest passion that ever inflam a human breast . think , most adorable creature , of my unhappy situation , of my despair . could I , my , have flatter myself with the most distant hope of be ever permit to throw myself at you foot in the manner I do now , it would not have be in the power of any other woman to have inspire a thought which the severest chastity could have condemn . Inconstancy to you ! of ! if you can have goodness enough to pardon what be past , do not let any cruel future apprehension shut you mercy against I . no repentance be ever more sincere . o ! let it reconcile I to my heaven in this dear bosom . " " Sincere repentance , , " answer she , " will obtain the pardon of a sinner , but it be from one who be a perfect judge of that sincerity . a human mind may be impos on ; nor be there any infallible method to prevent it . you must expect , however , that if I can be prevail on by you repentance to pardon you , I will at least insist on the strongest proof of its sincerity . " " name any proof in my power , " answer eagerly . " time , " reply she ; " time alone , , can convince I that you be a true penitent , and have resolve to abandon these vicious course , which I should detest you for , if I imagine you capable of persever in they . " " do not imagine it , " cry . " on my knee I intreat , I implore you confidence , a confidence which it shall be the business of my life to deserve . " " let it then , " say she , " be the business of some part of you life to show I you deserve it . I think I have be explicin enough in assure you , that , when I see you merit my confidence , you will obtain it . after what be past , sir , can you expect I should take you upon you word ? " he reply , " do not believe I upon my word ; I have a better security , a pledge for my constancy , which it be impossible to see and to doubt . " " what be that ? " say , a little surprized . " I will show you , my charming angel , " cry , seize she hand and carry she to the glass . " there , behold it there in that lovely figure , in that face , that shape , those eye , that mind which shine through these eye ; can the man who shall be in possession of these be inconstant ? impossible ! my ; they would fix a Dorimant , a . you could not doubt it , if you could see yourself with any eye but you own . " blush and half smile ; but , force again she brow into a frown -- " if I be to judge , " say she , " of the future by the past , my image will no more remain in you heart when I be out of you sight , than it will in this glass when I be out of the room . " " by heaven , by all that be sacr ! " say , " it never be out of my heart . the delicacy of you sex can not conceive the grossness of ours , nor how little one sort of amour have to do with the heart . " " I will never marry a man , " reply , very gravely , " who shall not learn refinement enough to be as incapable as I be myself of make such a distinction . " " I will learn it , " say . " I have learn it already . the first moment of hope that my might be my wife teach it I at once ; and all the rest of she sex from that moment become as little the object of desire to my sense as of passion to my heart . " " well , " say , " the proof of this must be from time . you situation , , be now alter , and I assure you I have great satisfaction in the alteration . you will now want no opportunity of be near I , and convince I that you mind be alte too . " " o ! my angel , " cry , " how shall I thank thy goodness ! and be you so good to own that you have a satisfaction in my prosperity ?----Believe I , believe I , madam , it be you alone have give a relish to that prosperity , since I owe to it the dear hope ---- o ! my , let it not be a distant one .-- I will be all obedience to you command . I will not dare to press anything further than you permit I . yet let I intreat you to appoint a short trial . o ! tell I when I may expect you will be convince of what be most solemnly true . " "
" when I have go voluntarily thus far , , " say she , " I expect not to be press . Nay , I will not . " --" o ! do not look unkindly thus , my , " cry he . " I do not , I dare not press you . -- yet permit I at least once more to beg you would fix the period . o ! consider the impatience of love . " --" a twelvemonth , perhaps , " say she . " o ! my , " cry he , " you have name a eternity . " -- " perhaps it may be something sooner , " say she ; " I will not be teaze . if you passion for I be what I would have it , I think you may now be easy . " --" easy ! , call not such a exulting happiness as mine by so cold a name .----o ! transport thought ! be I not assure that the blessed day will come , when I shall call you mine ; when fear shall be no more ; when I shall have that dear , that vast , that exquisite , ecstatic delight of make my happy ? " --" indeed , sir , " say she , " that day be in you own power . " --" o ! my dear , my divine angel , " cry he , " these word have make I mad with joy .----but I must , I will thank those dear lip which have so sweetly pronounce my bliss . " he then catch she in he arm , and kiss she with a ardour he have never venture before . at this instant western , who have stand some time listen , burst into the room , and , with he hunting voice and phrase , cry out , " to she , boy , to she , go to she .---- that be it , little honey , of that be it ! well ! what , be it all over ? Hath she appoint the day , boy ? what , shall it be to - morrow or next day ? it sha not be put off a minute longer than next day , I be resolve . " " let I beseech you , sir , " say , " do not let I be the occasion " ---- " beseech mine a ----, " cry western . " I think thou hadst be a lad of higher mettle than to give way to a parcel of maidenish trick .---- I tell thee ' ti all flimflam . Zoodiker ! she would have the wedding to - night with all she heart . would 'st not , ? come , confess , and be a honest girl for once . what , be dumb ? why dost not speak ? " " why should I confess , sir , " say , " since it seem you be so well acquaint with my thought ? " ----" that be a good girl , " cry he , " and dost consent then ? " " no , indeed , sir , " say , " I have give no such consent . " ---" and wunt not ha un then to - morrow , nor next day ? " say western .--" indeed , sir , " say she , " I have no such intention . " " but I can tell thee , " reply he , " why hast nut ; only because thou dost love to be disobedient , and to plague and vex thy father . " " pray , sir , " say , interfere ----" I tell thee thou be a puppy , " cry he . " when I vorbid she , then it be all nothing but sigh and whin , and languish and write ; now I be vor thee , she be against thee . all the spirit of contrary , that be all . she be above be guide and govern by she father , that be the whole truth o not . it be only to disoblige and contradict I . " " what would my papa have I do ? " cry . " what would I ha thee do ? " say he , " why , gi' un thy hand this moment . " -- " well , sir , " say , " I will obey you .-- there be my hand , . " " well , and will you consent to ha un to - morrow morning ? " say western .--" I will be obedient to you , sir , " cry she .-- " why then to - morrow morning be the day , " cry he . " why then to - morrow morning shall be the day , papa , since you will have it so , " say . then fall upon he knee , and kiss she hand in a agony of joy , while western begin to caper and dance about the room , presently cry out -- " where the devil be ? he be without now , a talk with that would --d lawyer Dowling , when he should be mind other matters . " he then sally out in quest of he , and very opportunely leave the lover to enjoy a few tender minute alone . but he soon return with , say , " if you will not believe I , you may ask she yourself . Hast nut gin thy consent , , to be marry to - morrow ? " " such be you command , sir , " cry , " and I dare not be guilty of disobedience . " " I hope , madam ,
, " cry , " my nephew will merit so much goodness , and will be always as sensible as myself of the great honour you have do my family . a alliance with so charme and so excellent a young lady would indeed be a honour to the greatest in . " " yes , " cry western , " but if I have suffer she to stand shill I shall I , dilly dally , you might not have have that honour yet a while ; I be force to use a little fatherly authority to bring she to . " " I hope not , sir , " cry , " I hope there be not the least constraint . " " why , there , " cry western , " you may bid she unsay all again if you will . Dost repent heartily of thy promise , dost not , ? " " indeed , papa , " cry she , " I do not repent , nor do I believe I ever shall , of any promise in favour of . " " then , nephew , " cry , " I felicitate you most heartily ; for I think you be the happiest of man . and , madam , you will give I leave to congratulate you on this joyful occasion : indeed , I be convince you have bestow yourself on one who will be sensible of you great merit , and who will at least use he best endeavour to deserve it . " " he best endeavour ! " cry western , " that he will , I warrant un .----Harkee , , I will bet thee five pound to a crown we have a boy to - morrow nine month ; but prithee tell I what wut ha ! , , or what ? for , please , we will make a night o not . " " indeed , sir , " say , " you must excuse I ; both my nephew and I be engage before I suspect this near approach of he happiness . " -- " engage ! " quoth the squire , " never tell I .-- I will not part with thee to - night upon any occasion . Shal sup here , please the . " " you must pardon I , my dear neighbour ! " answer ; " I have give a solemn promise , and that you know I never break . " " why , prithee , who be engage to ? " cry the squire .---- then inform he , as likewise of the company .----" Odzooker ! " answer the squire , " I will go with thee , and so shall Sophy ! for I will not part with thee to - night ; and it would be barbarous to part and the girl . " this offer be presently embrace by , and consent , have first obtain a private promise from she father that he would not mention a syllable concern she marriage . the last . in which the history be conclude . young Nightingale have be that afternoon , by appointment , to wait on he father , who receive he much more kindly than he expect . there likewise he meet he uncle , who be return to town in quest of he new -married daughter . this marriage be the luckiest incident which could have happen to the young gentleman ; for these brother live in a constant state of contention about the government of they child , both heartily despise the method which each other took . each of they therefore now endeavoure , as much as he could , to palliate the offence which he own child have commit , and to aggravate the match of the other . this desire of triumph over he brother , add to the many argument which have use , so strongly operate on the old gentleman that he meet he son with a smile countenance , and actually agree to sup with he that evening at 's . as for the other , who really love he daughter with the most immoderate affection , there be little difficulty in inclin he to a reconciliation . he be no sooner inform by he nephew where he daughter and she husband were , than he declare he would instantly go to she . and when he arrive there he scarce suffer she to fall upon she knee before he take she up , and embrace she with a tenderness which affect all who see he ; and in less than a quarter of a hour be as well reconcile to both she and she husband as if he have himself join they hand . in this situation be affair when and he company arrive to complete the happiness of , who no sooner see than she guess everything that have happen ; and so great be she friendship to , that it add not a few transport to those she feel on the happiness of she own daughter . there have not , I believe , be many instance of a number of people meet together , where every one be so perfectly happy as in this company . amongst whom the father of young enjoy the least perfect content ; for , notwithstand he affection for he son , notwithstand the authority and the argument of , together with the other motive mention before , he could not so entirely be satisfied with he son 's choice ; and , perhaps , the presence of herself ten a little to aggravate and heighten he concern , as a thought now and then suggest itself that he son might have have that lady , or some other such . not that any of the charms which adorn either the person or
or mind of create the uneasiness ; it be the contents of she father 's coffer which set he heart a longing . these be the charms which he could not bear to think he son have sacrifice to the daughter of . the bride be both very pretty woman ; but so totally be they eclipse by the beauty of , that , have they not be two of the best - tempered girl in the world , it would have raise some envy in they breast ; for neither of they husband could long keep he eye from , who sit at the table like a queen receive homage , or , rather , like a superior be receive adoration from all around she . but it be a adoration which they give , not which she exact ; for she be as much distinguished by she modesty and affability as by all she other perfection . the evening be spend in much true mirth . all be happy , but those the most who have be most unhappy before . they former suffering and fear give such a relish to they felicity as even love and fortune , in they fullest flow , could not have give without the advantage of such a comparison . yet , as great joy , especially after a sudden change and revolution of circumstance , be apt to be silent , and dwell rather in the heart than on the tongue , and appear the least merry of the whole company ; which western observe with great impatience , often cry out to they , " why dost not talk , boy ? why dost look so grave ? lose thy tongue , girl ? drink another glass of wine ; sh aot drink another glass . " and , the more to enlive she , he would sometimes s a merry song , which bear some relation to matrimony and the loss of a maidenhead . Nay , he would have proceed so far on that topic as to have drive she out of the room , if have not checkt he , sometimes by look , and once or twice by a " Fie ! Mr western ! " he begin , indeed , once to debate the matter , and assert he right to talk to he own daughter as he think fit ; but , as nobody second he , he be soon reduce to order . Notwithstand this little restraint , he be so pleased with the chearfulness and good - humour of the company , that he insist on they meeting the next day at he lodging . they all do so ; and the lovely , who be now in private become a bride too , officiate as the mistress of the ceremony , or , in the polite phrase , do the honour of the table . she have that morning give she hand to , in the chapel at doctors '- Commons , where , , and , be the only person present . have earnestly desire she father that no other of the company , who be that day to dine with he , should be acquaint with she marriage . the same secrecy be enjoin to , and undertook for . this somewhat reconcile the delicacy of to the public entertainment which , in compliance with she father 's will , she be oblige to go to , greatly against she own inclination . in confidence of this secrecy she go through the day pretty well , till the squire , who be now advanc into the second bottle , could contain he joy no longer , but , fill out a bumper , drank a health to the bride . the health be immediately pledge by all present , to the great confusion of we poor blushing , and the great concern of upon she account . to say truth , there be not a person present make wiser by this discovery ; for have whisper it to she daughter , she daughter to she husband , she husband to he sister , and she to all the rest . now take the first opportunity of withdraw with the ladie , and the squire sit in to he cup , in which he be , by degree , desert by all the company except the uncle of young , who love he bottle as well as western himself . these two , therefore , sit stoutly to it during the whole evening , and long after that happy hour which have surrender the to the eager arm of she enrapture . thus , reader , we have at length bring we history to a conclusion , in which , to we great pleasure , though contrary , perhaps , to thy expectation , appear to be the happiest of all humankind ; for what happiness this world affords equal to the possession of such a woman as , I sincerely own I have never yet discover . as to the other person who have make any considerable figure in this history , as some may desire to know a little more concern they , we will proceed , in as few word as possible , to satisfy they curiosity . Allworthy hath never yet be prevail upon to see , but he hath yield to the importunity of , back by , to settle  200 a - year upon he ; to which hath privately add a third . upon this income he live in one of the northern county , about 200 mile distant from , and lay up  200 a - year out of it , in order to purchase a seat in the next parliament from a neighbour borough , which he have bargain for with a attourney there . he be also lately turn
