the Life and opinion of , . a work by ( two line in ) to the . , never poor wight of a have less hope from he dedication , than I have from this of mine ; for it be write in a bye corner of the kingdom , and in a retir would thatch ' house , where I live in a constant endeavour to fence against the infirmity of ill health , and other evils of life , by mirth ; be firmly persuade that every time a man smile , -- but much more so , when he laugh , it add something to this Fragment of life . I humbly beg , , that you will honour this book , by take it --( not under you Protection , -- it must protect itself , but )-- into the country with you ; where , if I be ever tell , it have make you smile ; or can conceive it have beguil you of one moment 's pain -- I shall think myself as happy as a minister of state ;-- perhaps much happier than any one ( one only accept ) that I have read or hear of . I be , great sir , ( and , what be more to you Honour ) I be , , you well - wisher , and most humble fellow - subject , the Author . the Life and opinion of , . . I wish either my father or my mother , or indeed both of they , as they be in duty both equally bound to it , have mind what they be about when they beget I ; have they duly consider would how much depend upon what they be then do ; -- that not only the production of a rational being be concerned in it , but that possibly the happy formation and temperature of he body , perhaps he genius and the very cast of he mind ; -- and , for atch they know to the contrary , even the fortune of he whole house might take they turn from the humour and disposition which be then uppermost ;-- have they duly weigh and consider all this , and proceed accordingly , -- I be verily persuade I should have make a quite different figure in the world , from that in which the reader be likely to see I .-- believe I , good folk , this be not so inconsiderable a thing as many of you may think it ; -- you have all , I dare say , hear of the animal spirit , as how they be transfuse from father to son , &c . &c .-- and a great deal to that purpose :-- well , you may take my word , that nine part in ten of a man 's sense or he nonsense , he success and miscarriage in this world depend upon they motion and activity , and the different track and train you put they into , so that when they be once set a - go , whether right or wrong , ' ti not a half - penny matter , -- away they go clutter like hey - go mad ; and by tread the same step over and over again , they presently make a road of it , as plain and as smooth as a garden - walk , which , when they be once use to , the himself sometimes shall not be able to drive they off it . pray my dear , quoth my mother , have you not forget to wind up the clock ?-- good g ..! cry my father , make a exclamation , but take care to moderate he voice at the same time , -- do ever woman , since the creation of the world , interrupt a man with such a silly question ? pray , what be you father say ?-- Nothing . . -- then , positively , there be nothing in the question that I can see , either good or bad .-- then , let I tell you , , it be a very unseasonable question at least , -- because it scatter and disperse the animal spirit , whose business it be to have escort and go hand in hand with the Homunculus , and conduct he safe to the place destin for he reception . the , , in however low and ludicrous a light he may appear , in this age of levity , to the eye of folly or prejudice ; -- to the eye of reason in scientific research , he stand confess' -- a being guarde and circumscribe with rights .-- the minutest philosopher , who by the bye , have the most enlarged understanding , ( they soul be inversely as they enquiry ) show we incontestably , that the Homunculus be create by the same hand , -- engender ' in the same course of nature ,-- endow ' with the same loco -motive power and faculty with we :-- that he consist as we do , of skin , hair , fat , flesh , vein , arteries , ligament , nerve , cartilage , bone , marrow , brain , gland , genitals , humour , and articulation ; -- be a being of as much activity , -- and in all sense of the word , as much and as truly we fellow - creature as my of .-- he may be benefitt , -- he may be injured , -- he may obtain redress ; in a word , he have all the claim and rights of humanity , which Tully , Puffendorf , or the best ethick writer allow to arise out of that state and relation . now , dear , what if any accident have befall he
he in he way alone !-- or that through terror of it , natural to so yong a traveller , my little have get to he journey 's end miserably spend ; -- he muscular strength and virility wear down to a thread ; -- he own animal spirits ruffle beyond description , -- and that in this sad disorder have state of nerve , he have lain down a prey to sudden start , or a series of melancholy dream and fancie , for nine long , long month together .-- I tremble to think what a foundation have be laid for a thousand weakness both of body and mind , which no skill of the physician or the philosopher could ever afterwards have set thoroughly to rights . . to my uncle do I stand indebt for the preceding anecdote , to whom my father , who be a excellent natural philosopher , and much give to close reaso upon the smallest matter , have oft , and heavily complain of the injury ; but once more particularly , as my uncle Toby well remember' , upon he observe a most unaccountable obliquity , ( as he call would it ) in my manner of setting up my top , and justify the principle upon which i have do it , -- the old gentleman shook he head , and in a tone more expressive by half of sorrow than reproach , -- he say he heart all along forebod , and he see it verify in this , and from a thousand other observation he have make upon I , that I should neither think nor act like any other man 's child :-- but alas ! continue he , shak he head a second time , and wip away a tear which be trick down he cheek , my Tristram 's misfortune begin nine month before ever he come into the world . -- my mother , who be sit by , look ' up , but she know no more than she backside what my father mean , -- but my uncle , , who have be often inform of the affair ,-- understand he very well . . I know there be reader in the world , as well as many other good people in it , who be no reader at all , -- who find themselves ill at ease , unless they be let into the whole secret from first to last , of every thing which concern you . it be in pure compliance with this humour of theirs , and from a backwardness in my nature to disappoind any one soul live , that I have be so very particular already . as my life and opinion be likely to make some noise in the world , and , if I conjecture right , will take in all rank , profession , and denomination of man whatever , -- be no less read than the 's itself -- and in the end , prove the very thing which dread he should turn out , that be , a book for a parlour -window ; -- I find it necessary to consult every one a little in he turn ; and therefore must beg pardon for go on a little farther in the same way : for which cause , right glad I be , that I have begin the history of myself in the way I have do ; and that I be able to go on , trace every thing in it , as say , ab . , I know , do not recommend this fashion altogether : but that gentleman be speak only of a epic poem or a tragedy ; -- ( I forget which , ) beside , if it be not so , I should beg 's pardon ; -- for in writing what I have set about , I shall confine myself neither to he rule , nor to any man 's rule that ever liv . to such however as do not choose to go so far back into these thing , I can give no better advice than that they skip over the remaining part of this chapter ; for I declare before - hand , ' tis write only for the curiious and inquisitive . -- shut the door .-- I be beget in the night betwixt the first and the first in the month of , in the year of we one thousand seven hundred and eighteen . I be positive I be . -- but how I come to be so very particular in my account of a thing which happen before I be bear , be owe to another small anecdote know only in we own family , but now make publick for the better clear up this point . my father , you must know , who be originally a merchant , but have leave off business for some year , in order to retire to , and die upon , he paternal estate in the county of ----, be , I believe , one of the most regular man in every thing he do , whether ' twa matter of business , or matter of amusement , that ever liv . as a small specimen of this extreme exactness of he , to which he be in truth a slave , he have make it a rule for many year of he life , -- on the first - night of every month throughout the whole year , -- as certain as ever the - night come , -- to wind up a large house - clock , which we have stand on the back - stair head , with he own hand :-- and be somewhere between fifty and sixty year of age at the time I have be speak of , -- he have
have likewise gradually bring some other little family concernment to the same period , in order , as he would often say to my uncle , to get they all out of the way at one time , and be no more plague and pester with they the rest of the month . it be attend but with one misfortune , which , in a great measure , fall upon myself , and the effect of which I fear I shall carry with I to my grave ; namely , that from a unhappy association of idea , which have no connection in nature , it so fall out at length , that my poor mother could never hear the say clock wound up , -- but the thought of some other thing unavoidably pop into she head --& vice versa :-- which strange combination of idea , the sagacious Locke , who certainly understand the nature of these thing better than most man , affirm to have produce more wry action than all other source of prejudice whatsoever . but this by the bye . now it appear by a memorandum in my father 's pocket - book , which now lie upon the table , ' that on lady - day , which be on the 25th of the same month in which I date my geniture , -- my father set upon he journey to , with my eldest brother , to fix he at Westminster school ; ' and , as it appear from the same authority , ' that he do not get down to he wife and family till the second week in follow , '-- it bring the thing almost to a certainty . however , what follow in the beginning of the next chapter , put it beyond all possibility of a doubt . -- but pray , , what be you father do all , , and ?-- why , ,-- he be all that time afflict with a Sciatica . . on the fifth day of , 1718 , which to the aera fix on , be as near nine kalendar month as any husband could in reason have expect ,-- be I , , bring forth into this scurvy and disastrous world of ours .-- I wish I have be bear in the Moon , or in any of the planet , ( except or , because I never could bear cold weather ) for it could not well have fa worse with I in any of they ( though I will not answer for ) than it have in this vile , dirty planet of ours , -- which , of ' my conscience , with reverence be it speak , I take to be make up of the shred and clipping of the rest ;-- not but the planet be well enough , provide a man could be bear in it to a great title or to a great estate ; or could any how contrive to be call up to public charge , and employment of dignity or power ; -- but that be not my case ; -- and therefore every man will speak of the fair as he own market have go in it ; -- for which cause I affirm it over again to be one of the vilest world that ever be make ; -- for I can truly say , that from the first hour I draw my breath in it , to this , that I can now scarce draw it at all , for a asthma I get in scating against the wind in Flanders ;-- I have be the continual sport of what the world call ; and though I will not wrong she by say , she have ever make I feel the weight of any great or signal evil ; -- yet with all the good temper in the world I affirm it of she , that in every stage of my life , and at every turn and corner where she could get fairly at I , the ungracious duchess have pelt I with a set of as pitiful misadventure and cross accident as ever small hero sustain . . in the beginning of the last chapter , I inform you exactly when I be bear ; but I do not inform you how . no , that particular be reserve entirely for a chapter by itself ; -- besides , , as you and I be in a manner perfect stranger to each other , it would not have be proper to have let you into too many circumstance relate to myself all at once . -- you must have a little patience . I have undertake , you see , to write not only my life , but my opinion also ; hope and expect that you knowledge of my character , and of what kind of a mortal I be , by the one , would give you a better relish for the other : as you proceed farther with I , the slight acquaintance , which be now begin betwixt we , will grow into familiarity ; and that unless one of we be in fault , will terminate in friendship .-- of diem praeclarum !-- then nothing which have touch I will be think trifling in its nature , or tedious in its telling . therefore , my dear friend and companion , if you should think I somewhat sparing of my narrative on my first set out -- bear with I , -- and let I go on , and tell my story my own way :-- or , if I should seem now and then to trifle upon the road , -- or should sometimes put on a fool 's cap with a bell to it , for a moment or two as we pass along , -- do
do not fly off , -- but rather courteously give I credit for a little more wisdom than appear upon my outside ; -- and as we jog on , either laugh with I , or at I , or in short do any thing , -- only keep you temper . . in the same village where my father and my mother dwelt , dwelt also a thing , upright , motherly , notable , good old body of a midwife , who with the help of a little plain good sense , and some year full employment in she business , in which she have all along trust little to she own effort , and a great deal to those of dame , -- have acquired , in she way , no small degree of reputation in the world :-- by which word world , need I in this place inform you worship , that I would be understand to mean no more of it , than a small circle describe upon the circle of the great world , of four English mile diameter , or thereabout , of which the cottage where the good old woman liv be suppose to be the centre ?-- she have be leave it seem a widow in great distress , with three or four small child , in she forty - seventh year ; and as she be at that time a person of decent carriage ,-- grave deportment , -- a woman moreover of few word and withal a object of compassion , whose distress , and silence under it , call out the louder for a friendly lift : the wife of the parson of the parish be touch with pity ; and have often lament a inconvenience to which she husband 's flock have for many year be exposed , inasmuch as there be no such thing as a midwife , of any kind or degree , to be get at , let the case have be never so urgent , within less than six or seven long mile ride ; which say seven long mile in dark night and dismal roads , the country thereabout be nothing but a deep clay , be almost equal to fourtee ; and that in effect be sometimes next to have no midwife at all ; it come into she head , that it would be do as seasonable a kindness to the whole parish , as to the poor creature herself , to get she a little instructed in some of the plain principles of the business , in order to set she up in it . as no woman thereabout be better qualified to execute the plan she have form than herself , the gentlewoman very charitably undertake it ; and have great influence over the female part of the parish , she find no difficulty in effect it to the utmost of she wish . in truth , the parson join would he interest with he wife 's in the whole affair , and in order to do thing as they should be , and give the poor soul as good a title by law to practise , as he wife have give by institution , -- he cheerfully pay the fee for the ordinary 's licence himself , amount in the whole , to the sum of eighteen shilling and four pence ; so that betwixt they both , the good woman be fully invested in the real and corporal possession of she office , together with all its rights , member , and appurtenance whatsoever . these last word , you must know , be not accord to the old form in which such licence , faculty , and power usually run , which in like case have heretofore be grant to the sisterhood . but it be accord to a neat of he own devising , who have a particular turn for take to piece , and new framing over again all kind of instrument in that way , not only hit upon this dainty amendment , but coax many of the old license matron in the neighbourhood , to open they faculty afresh , in order to have this wham - wham of he insert . I own I never could envy in these kind of fancie of he :-- but every man to he own taste . -- do not , that great man , at he leisure hour , take the greatest delight imaginable in combing of ass tail , and pluck the dead hair out with he tooth , though he have tweezers always in he pocket ? Nay , if you come to that , , have not the wisest of man in all age , not except himself , -- have they not have they hobby - horse ; -- they run horse , -- they coin and they cockle - shell , they drum and they trumpet , they fiddle , they pallet , -- they maggot and they butterfly ?-- and so long as a man rides he hobby - horse peaceably and quietly along the 's highway , and neither compel you or I to get up behind he ,-- pray , , what have either you or I to do with it ? . -- De gustibus non est disputandum ; -- that be , there be no disputing against - horse ; and for my part , I seldom do ; nor could I with any sort of , have I be a enemy to they at the bottom ; for happening , at certain interval and change of the moon , to be both fidler and painter , accord as the fly sting :-- be it know to you , that I keep a couple of pads myself , upon which , in they turn , ( nor do I care who know it
it ) I frequently ride out and take the air ;--though sometimes , to my shame be it speak , I take somewhat longer journy than what a wise man would think altogether right . -- but the truth be , -- I be not a wise man ; -- and besides be a mortal of so little consequence in the world , it be not much matter what I do : so I seldom fret or fume at all about it : do it much disturb my rest , when I see such great Lord and tall Personage as hereafter follow ; --such , for instance , as my , , , , , , , h , I , , , , , o , P , q , and so on , all of a row , mount upon they several horse , -- some with large stirrup , get on in a more grave and sober pace ;-- other on the contrary , tuck up to they very chin , with whip across they mouth , scour and scamper it away like so many little party - colou devils astride a mortgage , -- and as if some of they be resolve to break they neck .-- so much the better -- say I to myself ; -- for in case the worst should happen , the world will make a shift to do excellently well without they ; and for the rest ,-- why -- speed they -- e 'en let they ride on without opposition from I ; for be they lordship unhorse this very night --'tis ten to one but that many of they would be worse mount by one half before tomorrow morning . not one of these instance therefore can be say to break in upon my rest .- - but there be a instance , which I own put I off my guard , and that be , when I see one bear for great action , and what be still more for he honour , whose nature ever incline he to good one ; -- when I behold such a one , my , like yourself , whose principle and conduct be as generous and noble as he blood , and whom , for that reason , a corrupt world can not spare one moment ; -- when I see such a one , my , mount , though it be but for a minute beyond the time which my love to my country have prescribe to he , and my zeal for he glory wish , -- then , my , I cease to be a philosopher , and in the first transport of a honest impatience , I wish the hobby - horse , with all he fraternity , at the . ' my , I maintain this to be a dedication , notwithstand its singularity in the three great essential of matter , form and place : I beg , therefore , you will accept it as such , and that you will permit I to lay it , with the most respectful humility , at you Lordship 's foot -- when you be upon they ,- - which you can be when you please ; -- and that be , my , whenever there be occasion for it , and I will add , to the best purpose too . I have the honour to be , my , you Lordship 's most obedient , and most devoted , and most humble servant , . ' . I solemnly declare to all mankind , that the above dedication be make for no one , , , or , -- , , , , or , of this , or any other in ; -- nor have it yet be hawk about , or offer publicly or privately , directly or indirectly , to any one person or personage , great or small ; but be honestly a true Virgin - dedication untried on , upon any soul living . I labour this point so particularly , merely to remove any offence or objection which might arise against it from the manner in which I propose to make the most of it ;-- which be the put it up fairly to public sale ; which I now do . -- every author have a way of he own in bring he point to bear ; -- for my own part , as I hate chaffer and higgl for a few guinea in a dark entry ; -- I resolve within myself , from the very beginning , to deal squarely and openly with you great folk in this affair , and try whether I should not come off the better by it . if therefore there be any one , , , , or , in these he Majesty 's dominion , who stand in need of a tight , genteel dedication , and whom the above will suit , ( for by the bye , unless it suit in some degree , I will not part with it ) -- it be much at he service for fifty guinea ;-- which I be positive be twenty guinea less than it ought to be afforde for , by any man of genius . my , if you examine it over again , it be far from be a gross piece of daubing , as some dedication be . the design , you Lordship see , be good , -- the colouring transparent , -- the drawing not amiss ; -- or to speak more like a man of science , -- and measure my piece in the painter 's scale , divide into 20 ,-- I believe , my , the outline will turn out as 12 , -- the composition as 9 ,-- the colouring as 6 , -- the expression 13 and a half ,
, -- and the design , -- if I may be allow , my , to understand my own design , and suppose absolute perfection in designing , to be as 20 ,-- I think it can not well fall short of 19 . besides all this , -- there be keeping in it , and the dark stroke in the hobby - horse , ( which be a secondary figure , and a kind of back - ground to the whole ) give great force to the principal light in you own figure , and make it come off wonderfully ; -- and besides , there be a air of originality in the tout ensemble . be pleased , my good , to order the sum to be pay into the hand of , for the benefit of the author ; and in the next edition care shall be take that this chapter be expunge , and you Lordship 's title , distinction , arm , and good action , be place at the front of the preceding chapter : all which , from the word , De gustibus non est disputandum , and whatever else in this book relate to - , but no more , shall stand dedicated to you Lordship .-- the rest I dedicate to the Moon , who , by the bye , of all the Patrons or Matrons I can think of , have most power to set my book a - go , and make the world run mad after it . , if thou be not too busy with and 's affair , -- take 's under thy protection also . . whatever degree of small merit the act of benignity in favour of the midwife might justly claim , or in whom that claim truly rest , -- at first sight seem not very material to this history ; -- certain however it be , that the gentlewoman , the parson 's wife , do run away at that time with the whole of it : and yet , for my life , I can not help think but that the parson himself , though he have not the good fortune to hit upon the design first , -- yet , as he heartily concur in it the moment it be laid before he , and as heartily part with he money to carry it into execution , have a claim to some share of it , -- if not to a full half of whatever honour be due to it . the world at that time be pleased to determine the matter otherwise . lay down the book , and I will allow you half a day to give a probable guess at the grounds of this procedure . be it know then , that , for about five year before the date of the midwife 's licence , of which you have have so circumstantial a account , -- the parson we have to do with have make himself a country - talk by a breach of all decorum , which he have commit against himself , he station , and he office ; -- and that be in never appear better , or otherwise mount , than upon a lean , sorry , jackass of a horse , value about one pound fifteen shilling ; who , to shorten all description of he , be full brother to Rosinante , as far as similitude congenial could make he ; for he answer he description to a hair - breadth in every thing ,-- except that I do not remember ' tis any where say , that be break - win ; and that , moreover , , as be the happiness of most spanish horse , fat or lean , -- be undoubtedly a horse at all point . I know very well that the hero 's horse be a horse of chaste deportment , which may have give grounds for the contrary opinion : but it be as certain at the same time that 's continency ( as may be demonstrate from the adventure of the Yanguesian carrier ) proceed from no bodily defect or cause whatsoever , but from the temperance and orderly current of he blood . -- and let I tell you , madam , there be a great deal of very good chastity in the world , in behalf of which you could not say more for you life . let that be as it may , as my purpose be to do exact justice to every creature bring upon the stage of this dramatic work , -- I could not stifle this distinction in favour of 's horse ; -- in all other point , the parson 's horse , I say , be just such another , for he be as lean , and as lank , and as sorry a jade , as Humility herself could have bestride . in the estimation of here and there a man of weak judgament , it be greatly in the parson 's power to have help the figure of this horse of he , -- for he be master of a very handsome demi-peaked saddle , quilt on the seat with green plush , garnish with a double row of silver - head stud , and a noble pair of shining brass stirrup , with a housing altogether suitable , of grey superfine cloth , with a edging of black lace , terminate in a deep , black , silk fringe , poudre , -- all which he have purchase in the pride and prime of he life , together with a grand embossed bridle , ornament at all point as it should be . -- but not care to banter he beast , he have hang all these up behind he study door : and , in lieu of they , have
have seriously befit he with just such a bridle and such a saddle , as the figure and value of such a steed might well and truly deserve . in the several sally about he parish , and in the neighbour visit to the gentry who live around he , -- you will easily comprehend , that the parson , so appoint , would both hear and see enough to keep he philosophy from rusting . to speak the truth , he never could enter a village , but he catch the attention of both old and young .-- Labwe stand still as he pass ' -- the bucket hang suspend in the middle of the well , -- the spinning - wheel forget its round ,-- even chuck - farthing and shuffle - cap themselves stand gape till he have get out of sight ; and as he movement be not of the quickest , he have generally time enough upon he hand to make he observation , -- to hear the groan of the serious , -- and the laughter of the light - hear ; all which he bear with excellent tranquillity . -- he character be , -- he love a jest in he heart -- and as he see himself in the true point of ridicule , he would say he could not be angry with other for see he in a light , in which he so strongly see himself : so that to he friend , who know he foible be not the love of money , and who therefore make the less scruple in banter the extravagance of he humour ,-- instead of give the true cause , -- he choose rather to join in the laugh against himself ; and as he never carry one single ounce of flesh upon he own bone , be altogether as spare a figure as he beast , -- he would sometimes insist upon it , that the horse be as good as the rider deserve ; -- that they be , centaur - like , -- both of a piece . at other time , and in other mood , when he spirit be above the temptation of false wit , -- he would say , he find himself go off fast in a consumption ; and , with great gravity , would pretend , he could not bear the sight of a fat horse , without a dejection of heart , and a sensible alteration in he pulse ; and that he have make choice of the lean one he ride upon , not only to keep himself in countenance , but in spirit . at different time he would give fifty humorous and apposite reason for ride a meek - spirit jade of a break - win horse , preferably to one of mettle ; -- for on such a one he could sit mechanically , and meditate as delightfully de vanitate mundi et fuga faeculi , as with the advantage of a death 's - head before he ; -- that , in all other exercitation , he could spend he time , as he ride slowly along , -- to as much account as in he study ; -- that he could draw up a argument in he sermon , -- or a hole in he breech , as steadily on the one as in the other ; -- that brisk trotting and slow argumentation , like wit and judgment , be two incompatible movement .-- but that upon he steed -- he could unite and reconcile every thing , -- he could compose he sermon -- he could compose he cough , -- and , in case nature give a call that way , he could likewise compose himself to sleep .-- in short , the parson upon such encounter would assign any cause but the true cause , -- and he with - hold the true one , only out of a nicety of temper , because he think it do honou to he . but the truth of the story be as follow : in the first year of this gentleman 's life , and about the time when the superb saddle and bridle be purchase by he , it have be he manner , or vanity , or call it what you will , -- to run into the opposite extreme .-- in the language of the county where he dwelt , he be say to have love a good horse , and generally have one of the best in the whole parish stand in he stable always ready for saddl : and as the nearest midwife , as I tell you , do not live nearer to the village than seven mile , and in a vile country , -- it so fell out that the poor gentleman be scarce a whole week together without some piteous application for he beast ; and as he be not a unkind - hear man , and every case be more pressing and more distressful than the last ; -- as much as he love he beast , he have never a heart to refuse he ; the upshot of which be generally this ; that he horse be either clapp' , or spavin' , or greaz ' ; -- or he be twitter - bon ' , or break - win , or something , in short , or other have befall he , which would let he carry no flesh ; -- so that he have every nine or ten month a bad horse to get rid of , -- and a good horse to purchase in he stead . what the loss in such a balance might amount to , communibus annis , I would leave to a special jury of sufferer in the same traffick , to determine ; -- but let it be what
what it would , the honest gentleman bear it for many year without a murmur , till at length , by repeat ill accident of the kind , he find it necessary to take the thing under consideration ; and upon weigh the whole , and summ it up in he mind , he find it not only disproportion to he other expence , but withal so heavy a article in itself , as to disable he from any other act of generosity in he parish : besides this , he consider that with half the sum thus gallop away , he could do ten time as much good ; -- and what still weigh more with he than all other consideration put together , be this , that it confin all he charity into one particular channel , and where , as he fancie , it be the least want , namely , to the child - bearing and child - get part of he parish ; reserve nothing for the impotent , -- nothing for the aged , -- nothing for the many comfortless scene he be hourly call forth to visit , where poverty , and sickness and affliction dwelt together . for these reason he resolve to discontinue the expence ; and there appear but two possible way to extricate he clearly out of it ; -- and these be , either to make it a irrevocable law never more to lend he steed upon any application whatever , -- or else be content to ride the last poor devil , such as they have make he , with all he ach and infirmity , to the very end of the chapter . as he dread he own constancy in the first -- he very chearfully betake himself to the second ; and though he could very well have explain it , as I say , to he honour , -- yet , for that very reason , he have a spirit above it ; choose rather to bear the contempt of he enemy , and the laughter of he friend , than undergo the pain of tell a story , which might seem a panegyrick upon himself . I have the highest idea of the spiritual and refin sentiment of this reverend gentleman , from this single stroke in he character , which I think come up to any of the honest refinement of the peerless knight of , whom , by the bye , with all he folly , I love more , and would actually have go farther to have pay a visit to , than the greatest hero of antiquity . but this be not the moral of my story : the thing I have in view be to show the temper of the world in the whole of this affair .-- for you must know , that so long as this explanation would have do the parson credit , -- the a soul could find it out ,-- I suppose he enemy would not , and that he friend could not . --but no sooner do he bestir himself in behalf of the midwife , and pay the expence of the ordinary 's licence to set she up ,- - but the whole secret come out ; every horse he have lose , and two horse more than ever he have lost , with all the circumstance of they destruction , be know and distinctly remember .-- the story run like wild - fire .--' the parson have a return fit of pride which have just seize he ; and he be go to be well mount once again in he life ; and if it be so , 'tbe plain as the sun at noon -day , he would pocket the expence of the licence ten time tell , the very first year :-- so that every body be leave to judge what be he view in this act of charity . ' what be he views in this , and in every other action of he life , -- or rather what be the opinion which float in the brain of other people concern it , be a thought which too much float in he own , and too often break in upon he rest , when he should have be sound asleep . about ten year ago this gentleman have the good fortune to be make entirely easy upon that score , -- it be just so long since he leave he parish , -- and the whole world at the same time behind he , -- and stand accountable to a judge of whom he will have no cause to complain . but there be a fatality attend the action of some man : order they as they will , they pass thro ' a certain medium , which so twist and refract they from they true direction -- that , with all the title to praise which a rectitude of heart can give , the doer of they be nevertheless force to live and die without it . of the truth of which , this gentleman be a painful example . -- but to know by what mean this come to pass , -- and to make that knowledge of use to you , I insist upon it that you read the two follow chapter , which contain such a sketch of he life and conversation , as will carry its moral along with it .-- when this be do , if nothing stop we in we way , we will go on with the midwife . . be this parson 's name , and , what be very remarkable in it , ( as appear from a most ancient account of the family , write upon strong vellum , and now in perfect preservation ) it have be exactly so spelt for near ,-- I be
be within a ace of say nine hundred year ; -- but I would not shake my credit in tell a improbable truth , however indisputable in itself , -- and therefore I shall content myself with only say -- it have be exactly so spelt , without the least variation or transposition of a single letter , for I do not know how long ; which be more than I would venture to say of one half of the best surname in the kingdom ; which , in a course of year , have generally undergone as many chop and change as they owner .- - have this be owe to the pride , or to the shame of the respective proprietor ?-- in honest truth , I think sometimes to the one , and sometimes to the other , just as the temptation have wrotch . but a villainous affair it be , and will one day so blend and confound we all together , that no one shall be able to stand up and swear , ' that he own great grandfather be the man who do either this or that . ' this evil have be sufficientely fence against by the prudent care of the 's family , and they religious preservation of these record I quote , which do farther inform we , that the family be originally of Danish extraction , and have be transplant into as early as in the reign of , king of , in whose court , it seem , a ancestor of this 's , and from whom he be lineally descende , hold a considerable post to the day of he death . of what nature this considerable post be , this record saith not ; -- it only add , that , for near two centurie , it have be totally abolish , as altogether unnecessary , not only in that court , but in every other court of the Christian world . it have often come into my head , that this post could be no other than that of the king 's chief ; -- and that 's , in we Shakespeare , many of whose play , you know , be founde upon authenticated fact , be certainly the very man . I have not the time to look into Saxo- 's history , to know the certainty of this ; -- but if you have leisure , and can easily get at the book , you may do it full as well yourself . I have just time , in my travels through with 's eldest son , whom , in the year 1741 , I accompany as , ride along with he at a prodigious rate thro ' most part of , and of which original journey perform by we two , a most delectable narrative will be give in the progress of this work . I have just time , I say , and that be all , to prove the truth of a observation make by a long sojourner in that country ;-- namely , ' that nature be neither very lavish , nor be she very stingy in she gift of genius and capacity to its inhabitant ; -- but , like a discreet parent , be moderately kind to they all ; observe such a equal tenor in the distribution of she favour , as to bring they , in those point , pretty near to a level with each other ; so that you will meet with few instance in that kingdom of refin part ; but a great deal of good plain houshold understand amongst all rank of people , of which every body have a share ; ' which be , I think , very right . with we , you see , the case be quite different :-- we be all up and downs in this matter ; -- you be a great genius ; -- or ' tis fifty to one , Sir , you be a great dunce and a blockhead ;-- not that there be a total want of intermediate step , -- no , -- we be not so irregular as that come to ; -- but the two extreme be more common , and in a greater degree in this unsettled island , where nature , in she gift and disposition of this kind , be most whimsical and capricious ; fortune herself not be more so in the bequest of she good and chattel than she . this be all that ever stagger my faith in regard to 's extraction , who , by what I can remember of he , and by all the account I could ever get of he , see not to have have one single drop of Danish blood in he whole crasis ; in nine hundred year , it might possibly have all run out :-- I will not philosophize one moment with you about it ; for happen how it would , the fact be this :-- that instead of that cold phlegm and exact regularity of sense and humour , you would have look for , in one so extract ; -- he be , on the contrary , as mercurial and sublimate a composition , -- as heteroclite a creature in all he declension ;-- with as much life and whim , and gaite de coeur about he , as the kindliest climate could have engender and put together . with all this sail , poor carry not one ounce of ballast ; he be utterly unpractised in the world ; and at the age of twenty - six , know just about as well how to steer he course in it , as a romping , unsuspicious girl of thirteen : so that upon he first set out , the brisk gale of he spirit , as you will
will imagine , run he foul ten time in a day of somebody 's tackling ; and as the grave and more slow - pace be oftenest in he way , -- you may likewise imagine , ' twa with such he have generally the ill luck to get the most entangled . for atch I know there might be some mixture of unlucky wit at the bottom of such Fracas :-- for , to speak the truth , have a invincible dislike and opposition in he nature to gravity ; -- not to gravity as such ; -- for where gravity be want , he would be the most grave or serious of mortal man for day and week together ; -- but he be a enemy to the affectation of it , and declare open war against it , only as it appear a cloak for ignorance , or for folly : and then , whenever it fall in he way , however shelter and protect , he seldom give it much quarter . sometimes , in he wild way of talking , he would say , that gravity be a errant scoundrel , and he would add , -- of the most dangerous kind too , -- because a sly one ; and that he verily believe , more honest , well - mean people be bubble out of they good and money by it in one twelve - month , than by pocket -picking and shop - lifte in seven . in the naked temper which a merry heart discover , he would say there be no danger , -- but to itself :--whereas the very essence of gravity be design , and consequently deceit ;--'tbe a teach trick to gain credit of the world for more sense and knowledge than a man be worth ; and that , with all its pretension , -- it be no better , but often worse , than what a french wit have long ago define it ,-- viz . 'a mysterious carriage of the body to cover the defect of the mind ; '-- which definition of gravity , , with great imprudence , would say , deserv to be write in letter of gold . but , in plain truth , he be a man unhackneyed and unpractise in the world , and be altogether as indiscreet and foolish on every other subject of discourse where policy be will not to impress restraint . have no impression but one , and that be what arise from the nature of the deed speak of ; which impression he would usually translate into plain without any periphrasis ; -- and too oft without much distinction of either person , time , or place ; -- so that when mention be make of a pitiful or a ungenerous proceeding -- he never give himself a moment 's time to reflect who be the hero of the piece , -- what he station , -- or how far he have power to hurt he hereafter ; -- but if it be a dirty action ,-- without more ado ,-- the man be a dirty fellow , -- and so on . -- and as he comment have usually the ill fate to be terminate either in a bon mot , or to be enliven throughout with some drollery or humour of expression , it give wing to 's indiscretion . in a word , though ' he never seek , yet , at the same time , as he seldom shunn occasion of say what come uppermost , and without much ceremony ; -- he have but too many temptation in life , of scatter he wit and he humour , -- he gibe and he jest about he .-- they be not lose for want of gathering . what be the consequence , and what be 's catastrophe thereupon , you will read in the next chapter . . the and differ the one from the other , not more in length of purse , than the and do , in that of memory . but in this the comparison between they run , as the scholiast call it , upon all - four ; which , by the bye , be upon one or two leg more than some of the best of 's can pretend to ;-- namely , that the one raise a sum , and the other a laugh at you expence , and think no more about it . interest , however , still run on in both case ; -- the periodical or accidental payment of it , just serve to keep the memory of the affair alive ; till , at length , in some evil hour , pop come the creditor upon each , and by demand principal upon the spot , together with full interest to the very day , make they both feel the full extent of they obligation . as the reader ( for I hate you if ) have a thorough knowledge of human nature , I need not say more to satisfy he , that my hero could not go on at this rate without some slight experience of these incidental memento . to speak the truth , he have wantonly involved himself in a multitude of small book - debt of this stamp , which , notwithstand 's frequent advice , he too much disregard ; think , that as not one of they be contract thro ' any malignancy ; -- but , on the contrary , from a honesty of mind , and a mere jocundity of humwe , they would all of they be cross ' out in course . would never admit this ; and would often tell he , that one day or other he would certainly be reckon with ; and he would often add , in a accent of sorrowful
sorrowful apprehension , -- to the uttermost mite . to which , with he usual carelessness of heart , would have often answer with a pshaw !-- and if the subject be start in the field , -- with a hop , skip , and a jump at the end of it ; but if close pend up in the social chimney - corner , where the culprit be barricado ' in , with a table and a couple of arm -chair , and could not so readily fly off in a tangent ,-- would then go on with he lecture upon discretion in word to this purpose , though somewhat better put together . trust I , dear , this unwary pleasantry of thine will sooner or later bring thee into scrape and difficulty , which no after - wit can extricate thee out of .-- in these sally , too oft , I see , it happen , that a person laugh at , consider himself in the light of a person injur , with all the rights of such a situation belong to he ; and when thou viewest he in that light too , and reckon up he friend , he family , he kindred and ally , -- and muster up with they the many recruit which will list under he from a sense of common danger ; --'tis no extravagant arithmetic to say , that for every ten joke , -- thou hast get a hundred enemy ; and till thou hast go on , and raise a swarm of wasp about thine ear , and art half sting to death by they , thou will never be convince it be so . I can not suspect it in the man whom I esteem , that there be the least spur from spleen or malevolence of intent in these sally -- I believe and know they to be truly honest and sportive :--but consider , my dear lad , that fools can not distinguish this , -- and that knaves will not : and thou knowest not what it be , either to provoke the one , or to make merry with the other :-- whenever they associate for mutual defence , depend upon it , they will carry on the war in such a manner against thee , my dear friend , as to make thee heartily sick of it , and of thy life too . revenge from some baneful corner shall level a tale of dishonour at thee , which no innocence of heart or integrity of conduct shall set right .-- the fortune of thy house shall totter , -- thy character , which lead the way to they , shall bleed on every side of it , -- thy faill question , -- thy work bely , -- thy win forget , -- thy learn trample on . to wind up the last scene of thy tragedy , cruelty and Cowardice , twin ruffian , hire and set on by Malice in the dark , shall strike together at all thy infirmity and mistake :-- the best of we , my dear lad , lie open there , -- and trust I , -- trust I , , when to gratify a private appetite , it be once resolve upon , that a innocent and a helpless creature shall be sacrificed , ' ti a easy matter to pick up stick enough from any thicket where it have stray , to make a fire to offer it up with . scarce ever hear this sad vaticination of he destiny read over to he , but with a tear stealing from he eye , and a promissory look attend it , that he be resolve , for the time to come , to ride he tit with more sobriety .-- but , alas , too late !-- a grand confederacy with . . . and . . . at the head of it , be form before the first prediction of it .-- the whole plan of the attack , just as have forebod , be put in execution all at once , -- with so little mercy on the side of the ally , -- and so little suspicion in , of what be carry on against he , -- that when he think , good easy man ! full surely preferment be o'ripening , -- they have smote he root , and then he fall , as many a worthy man have fall before he . , however , fight it out with all imaginable gallantry for some time ; till , overpower by number , and wear out at length by the calamity of the war , -- but more so , by the ungenerous manner in which it be carry on , -- he throw down the sword ; and though he keep up he spirit in appearance to the last , he die , nevertheless , as be generally think , quite break - heart . what inclin to the same opinion be as follow : a few hour before breathe he last , stept in with a intent to take he last sight and last farewell of he . upon he draw 's curtain , and ask how he feel himself , look up in he face take hold of he hand , -- and after thanke he for the many token of he friendship to he , for which , he say , if it be they fate to meet hereafter , -- he would thank he again and again , -- he tell he , he be within a few hour of give he enemy the slip for ever .-- I hope not , answer , with tear trickling down he cheek , and with the tenderest tone that ever man speak .-- I hope not , , say he .-- reply ,
, with a look up , and a gentle squeeze of 's hand , and that be all , -- but it cut to he heart .-- come ,--come , , quoth , wip he eye , and summon up the man within he ,--my dear lad , be comforte , -- let not all thy spirit and fortitude forake thee at this crisis when thou must want they ; -- who know what resource be in store , and what the power of may yet do for thee ! -- lay he hand upon he heart , and gently shook he head ;-- for my part , continue , cry bitterly as he utter the word , -- I declare I know not , , how to part with thee , and would gladly flatter my hope , add , chear up he voice , that there be still enough left of thee to make a bishop , and that I may live to see it .-- I beseech thee , , quoth , take off he night- cap as well as he could with he left hand , -- he right be still grasp close in that of , -- I beseech thee to take a view of my head .-- I see nothing that ail it , reply . then , alas ! my friend , say , let I tell you , that ' tis so bruise and mis-shapen with the blow which . . .and . . . , and some other have so unhandsomely give I in the dark , that I might say with , that should I recover , and ' thereupon be suffer to rain down from heaven as thick as hail , not one of they would fit it . '-- 's last breath be hang upon he trembling lip ready to depart as he utter this :-- yet still it be utter with something of a tone ; -- and as he speak it , could perceive a stream of lambent fire light up for a moment in he eye ; -- faint picture of those flash of he spirit , which ( as say of he ancestor ) be will not to set the table in a roar ! be convince from this , that the heart of he friend be break : he squeeze he hand , -- and then walk softly out of the room , weep as he walk . follow with he eye to the door , -- he then close they , and never open they more . he lie bury in the corner of he church - yard , in the parish of . . . , under a plain marble slab , which he friend , by leave of he executor , laid upon he grave , with no more than these three word of inscription , serve both for he epitaph and elegy . Alas , poor ! ten time a day have 's ghost the consolation to hear he monumental inscription read over with such a variety of plaintive tone , as denote a general pity and esteem for he ; -- a foot - way cross the church - yard close by the side of he grave , -- not a passenger go by without stop to cast a look upon it , -- and sigh as he walk on , , poor ! . it be so long since the reader of this rhapsodical work have be part from the midwife , that it be high time to mention she again to he , merely to put he in mind that there be such a body still in the world , and whom , upon the best judgment I can form upon my own plan at present , I be go to introduce to he for good and all : but as fresh matter may be start , and much unexpected business fall out betwixt the reader and myself , which may require immediate dispatch ;--'tbe right to take care that the poor woman should not be lose in the mean time ; -- because when she be want , we can no way do without she . I think I tell you that this good woman be a person of no small note and consequence throughout we whole village and township ; -- that she fame have spread itself to the very out - edge and circumference of that circle of importance , of which kind every soul living , whether he have a shirt to he back or no , -- have one surround he ;-- which say circle , by the way , whenever ' tis say that such a one be of great weight and importance in the world , -- I desire may be enlarge or contract in you worship 's fancy , in a compound ratio of the station , profession , knowledge , ability , height and depth ( measure both way ) of the personage bring before you . in the present case , if I remember , I fix it about four or five mile , which not only comprehend the whole parish , but extend itself to two or three of the adjacent hamlet in the skirt of the next parish ; which make a considerable thing of it . I must add , that she be , moreover , very well look on at one large grange - house , and some other odd house and farm within two or three mile , as I say , from the smoke of she own chimney :-- but I must here , once for all , inform you , that all this will be more exactly delineate and explain would in a map , now in the hand of the engraver , which , with many other piece and developement of this work , will be add to the
the end of the twentieth volume , -- not to swell the work ,-- I detest the thought of such a thing ; -- but by way of commentary , scholium , illustration , and key to such passage , incidents , or inuendo as shall be think to be either of private interpretation , or of dark or doubtful meaning , after my life and my opinion shall have be read over ( now do not forget the meaning of the word ) by all the world ; -- which , betwixt you and I , and in spite of all the gentlemen-reviewer in Great , and of all that they worship shall undertake to write or say to the contrary ,-- I be determine shall be the case .-- I need not tell you worship , that all this be speak in confidence . . upon look into my mother 's marriage settlement , in order to satisfy myself and reader in a point necessary to be clear up , before we could proceed any farther in this history ;-- I have the good fortune to pop upon the very thing I want before I have read a day and a half straight forward , -- it might have take I up a month ;-- which shew plainly , that when a man sit down to write a history , -- tho ' it be but the history of or , he know no more than he heel what let and confound hindrance he be to meet with in he way , -- or what a dance he may be lead , by one excursion or another , before all be over . could a historiographer drive on he history , as a muleteer drive on he mule , -- straight forward ; -- for instance , from all the way to , without ever once turn he head aside , either to the right hand or to the left ,- - he might venture to foretell you to a hour when he should get to he journey 's end ; -- but the thing be , morally speak , impossible : for , if he be a man of the least spirit , he will have fifty deviation from a straight line to make with this or that party as he go along , which he can no way avoid . he will have view and prospects to himself perpetually solicite he eye , which he can no more help stand still to look at than he can fly ; he will moreover have various account to reconcile : Anecdote to pick up : Inscription to make out : story to weave in : tradition to sift : Personage to call upon : Panegyrick to paste up at this door ; Pasquinade at that :-- all which both the man and he mule be quite exempt from . to sum up all ; there be archive at every stage to be look ' into , and roll , record , document , and endless genealogy , which justice ever and anon call he back to stay the reading of :-- in short there be no end of it ; -- for my own part , I declare I have be at it these six week , make all the speed I possibly could , -- and be not yet bear :-- I have just be able , and that be all , to tell you when it happe n' , but not how ;-- so that you see the thing be yet far from be accomplish . these unforeseen stoppage , which I own I have no conception of when I first set out ; -- but which , I be convince now , will rather increase than diminish as I advance , -- have struck out a hint which I be resolve to follow ; -- and that be , -- not to be in a hurry ; -- but to go on leisurely , write and publish two volume of my life every year ; -- which , if I be suffer to go on quietly , and can make a tolerable bargain with my bookseller , I shall continue to do as long as I live . . the article in my mother 's marriage - settlement , which I tell the reader I be at the pain to search for , and which , now that I have find it , I think proper to lay before he , -- be so much more fully express would in the deed itself , than ever I can pretend to do it , that it would be barbarity to take it out of the lawyer 's hand :-- it be as follow . ' and this Indenture further witnesseth , that the say , merchant , in consideration of the say intend marriage to be have , and , by 's blessing , to be well and truly solemnize and consummate between the say and aforesaid , and diver other good and valuable cause and consideration he thereuntoo specially move , -- doth grant , covenant , condescend , consent , conclude , bargain , and fully agree to and with , and , . the above -named Trustees , &c . &c . -- to wit , -- that in case it should hereafter so fall out , chance , happen , or otherwise come to pass ,-- that the say , merchant , shall have leave off business before the time or time , that the say shall , accord to the course of nature , or otherwise , have leave off bear and bring forth child ; -- and that , in consequence of the say have so leave off business , he shall in despight , and against the free - will , consent , and good - liking of the say
say , -- make a departure from the city of , in order to retire to , and dwell upon , he estate at , in the county of . . . , or at any other country - seat , castle , hall , mansion - house , messuage or grainge - house , now purchase , or hereafter to be purchase , or upon any part or parcel thereor :-- that then , and as often as the say shall happen to be enceint with child or child severally and lawfully beget , or to be beget , upon the body of the say , during she say coverture , -- he the say shall , at he own proper cost and charge , and out of he own proper money , upon good and reasonable notice , which be hereby agree to be within six week of she the say 's full reckoning , or time of suppose and compute delivery , -- pay , or cause to be pay , the sum of one hundred and twenty pound of good and lawful money , to , and , . or assign ,-- upon trust and confidence , and for and unto the use and use , intent , end , and purpose follow :-- that be to say ,-- that the say sum of one hundred and twenty pound shall be pay into the hand of the say , or to be otherwise apply by they the say Trustees , for the well and truly hire of one coach , with able and sufficient horse , to carry and convey the body of the say , and the child or child which she shall be then and there enceint and pregnant with , -- unto the city of ; and for the further pay and defray of all other incidental cost , charge , and expence whatsoever , -- in and about , and for , and relate to , she say intend delivery and lie - in , in the say city or suburb thereof . and that the say shall and may , from time to time , and at all such time and time as be here covenant and agree upon , -- peaceably and quietly hire the say coach and horse , and have free ingress , egress , and regress throughout she journey , in and from the said coach , accord to the tenor , true intent , and meane of these present , without any let , suit , trouble , disturbance , molestation , discharge , hinderance , forfeiture , eviction , vexation , interruption , or incumbrance whatsoever . -- and that it shall moreover be lawful to and for the say , from time to time , and as oft or often as she shall well and truly be advanced in she say pregnancy , to the time heretofore stipulate and agree upon , -- to live and reside in such place or place , and in such family or family , and with such relation , friend , and other person within the say city of , as she at she own will and pleasure , notwithstand she present coverture , and as if she be a femme sole and unmarried , -- shall think fit . - - and this Indenture further witnesseth , that for the more effectually carry of the say covenant into execution , the say , merchant , doth hereby grant , bargain , sell , release , and confirm unto the say , and , . they heir , executor , and assign , in they actual possession now be , by virtue of a indenture of bargain and sale for a year to they the say , and , . by he the say , merchant , thereor make ; which say bargain and sale for a year , bear date the day next before the date of these present , and by force and virtue of the statute for transferring of use into possession , -- all that the manor and lordship of , in the county of . . . , with all the rights , member , and appurtenance thereon ; and all and every the messuage , house , building , barn , stable , orchard , garden , backside , toft , croft , garth , cottage , lands , meadow , feedings , pasture , marsh , common , wood , underwood , drain , fishery , water , and water - course ;--together with all rent , reversion , service , annuity , fee - farms , knight fee , view of frankpledge , escheat , relief , mine , quarry , good and chattel of felon and fugitive , felon of themselves , and put in exigent , deodand , free warren , and all other royalty and seigniory , rights and jurisdiction , privileges and hereditament whatsoever . -- and also the advowson , donation , presentation , and free disposition of the rectory or parsonage of Shandy aforesaid , and all and every the tent , tythes , glebe - land .'-- in three word ,--'My mother be to lay in ( if she choose it ) in . ' but in order to put a stop to the practice of any unfair play on the part of my mother , which a marriage - article of this nature too manifestly open a door to , and which indeed have never be think of at all , but for my uncle ; -- a clause be add in security of my father which be this :--' that in case my mother hereafter should , at any time , put my father to the trouble and expence of a journey , upon false cry and token ; -- that for every such instance , she should forfeit all the right
right and title which the covenant give she to the next turn ; -- but to no more , -- and so on , toty quoty , in as effectual a manner , as if such a covenant betwixt they have not be make .'-- this , by the way , be no more than what be reasonable ; -- and yet , as reasonable as it be , I have ever think it hard that the whole weight of the article should have fall entirely , as it do , upon myself . but I be beget and bear to misfortune ; -- for my poor mother , whether it be wind or water -- or a compound of both , -- or neither ; -- or whether it be simply the mere swell of imagination and fancy in she ; -- or how far a strong wish and desire to have it so , might mislead she judgment ; -- in short , whether she be deceive or deceive in this matter , it no way become I to decide . the fact be this , that in the latter end of 1717 , which be the year before I be bear , my mother have carry my father up to town much against the grain , -- he peremptorily insist upon the clause ;- - so that I be doom ' , by marriage - article , to have my nose squeez would as flat to my face , as if the destiny have actually spun I without one . how this event come about , -- and what a train of vexatious disappointment , in one stage or other of my life , have pursue I from the mere loss , or rather compression , of this one single member , -- shall be laid before the reader all in due time . . my father , as any body may naturally imagine , come down with my mother into the country , in but a pettish kind of a humour . the first twenty or five - and - twenty mile he do nothing in the world but fret and teaze himself , and indeed my mother too , about the cursed expence , which he say might every shilling of it have be save ; -- then what vex he more than every thing else be , the provoke time of the year , -- which , as I tell you , be towards the end of , when he wall - fruit and green gage especially , in which he be very curious , be just ready for pull :-- ' have he be whistle up to , upon a 's , in any other month of the whole year , he should not have say three word about it . ' for the next two whole stage , no subject would go down , but the heavy blow he have sustain would from the loss of a son , whom it seem he have fully reckon would upon in he mind , and register would down in he pocket - book , as a second staff for he old age , in case should fail he . ' the disappointment of this , he say , be ten time more to a wise man , than all the money which the journey , & c. have cost he , put together , -- rot the hundred and twenty pound , -- he do not mind it a rush . ' from , all the way to , nothing in the whole affair provoke he so much as the condolence of he friend , and the foolish figure they should both make at church , the first ; -- of which , in the satirical vehemence of he wit , now sharpen would a little by vexation , he would give so many humorous and provoke description , -- and place he rib and self in so many torment light and attitude in the face of the whole congregation ; -- that my mother declare , these two stage be so truly tragi- comical , that she do nothing but laugh and cry in a breath , from one end to the other of they all the way . from , till they have cross would the Trent , my father be out of all kind of patience at the vile trick and imposition which he fancie my mother have put upon he in this affair --'Certainly ,' he would say to himself , over and over again , ' the woman could not be deceive herself -- if she could , -- what weakness !'-- torment word !-- which lead he imagination a thorny dance , and , before all be over , play would the duce and all with he ; -- for sure as ever the word weakness be uttered , and struck full upon he brain -- so sure it set he upon run division upon how many kind of weakness there be ; -- that there be such a thing as weakness of the body , -- as well as weakness of the mind , -- and then he would do nothing but syllogize within himself for a stage or two together , how far the cause of all these vexation might , or might not , have arisen out of himself . in short , he have so many little subject of disquietude spring out of this one affair , all fretting successively in he mind as they rise up in it , that my mother , whatever be she journey up , have but a uneasy journey of it down .-- in a word , as she complain to my uncle , he would have ti out the patience of any flesh alive . . though my father travel homeward , as I tell you , in
in none of the best of mood ,-- pshaw and pish all the way down , -- yet he have the complaisance to keep the worst part of the story still to himself ; -- which be the resolution he have take of do himself the justice , which my uncle 's clause in the marriage - settlement empower he ; nor be it till the very night in which I be beget , which be thirteen month after , that she have the least intimation of he design : when my father , happen , as you remember , to be a little chagrin would and out of temper , -- take occasion as they lay chat gravely in bed afterwards , talk over what be to come , -- to let she know that she must accommodate herself as well as she could to the bargain make between they in they marriage - deed ; which be to lye - in of she next child in the country , to balance the last year 's journey . my father be a gentleman of many virtue , -- but he have a strong spice of that in he temper , which might , or might not , add to the number .--'Tis know by the name of perseverance in a good cause , -- and of obstinacy in a bad one : of this my mother have so much knowledge , that she know ' twas to no purpose to make any remonstrance , -- so she e'en resolve to sit down quietly , and make the most of it . . as the point be that night agree , or rather determine , that my mother should lye - in of I in the country , she take she measure accordingly ; for which purpose , when she be three day , or thereabout , go with child , she begin to cast she eye upon the midwife , whom you have so often hear I mention ; and before the week be well get round , as the famous be not to be have , she have come to a final determination in she mind ,--notwithstand there be a scientific operator within so near a call as eight mile of we , and who , moreover , have expressly write a five shilling book upon the subject of midwifery , in which he have expose , not only the blunders of the sisterhood itself , -- but have likewise super - add many curiious improvement for the quicker extraction of the foetus in cross birth , and some other case of danger , which belay we in get into the world ; notwithstand all this , my mother , I say , be absolutely determined to trust she life , and mine with it , into no soul 's hand but this old woman 's only .-- now this I like ; -- when we can not get at the very thing we wish -- never to take up with the next best in degree to it :-- no ; that be pitiful beyond description ; -- it be no more than a week from this very day , in which I be now write this book for the edification of the world ;-- which be 9 , 1759 , -- that my dear , dear , observe I look a little grave , as she stand cheapen a silk of five - and - twenty shilling a yard , -- tell the mercer , she be sorry she have give he so much trouble ; -- and immediately go and buy herself a yard - wide stuff of ten - pence a yard .--'Tis the duplication of one and the same greatness of soul ; only what lessen the honour of it , somewhat , in my mother 's case , be , that she could not heroine it into so violent and hazardous a extreme , as one in she situation might have wish , because the old midwife have really some little claim to be depend upon , -- as much , at least , as success could give she ; have , in the course of she practice of near twenty year in the parish , bring every mother 's son of they into the world without any one slip or accident which could fairly be laid to she account . these fact , tho ' they have they weight , yet do not altogether satisfy some few scruple and uneasiness which hang upon my father 's spirit in relation to this choice .-- to say nothing of the natural workings of humanity and justice -- or of the yearning of parental and connubial love , all which prompt he to leave as little to hazard as possible in a case of this kind ; -- he feel himself concerned in a particular manner , that all should go right in the present case ; -- from the accumulated sorrow he lay open to , should any evil betide he wife and child in lie - in at - .-- he know the world judge by event , and would add to he affliction in such a misfortune , by load he with the whole blame of it .--'Alas o' day ; -- have , poor gentlewoman ! have but she wish in go up to town just to lye - in and come down again ; -- which they say , she beg and pray for upon she bare knee , -- and which , in my opinion , consider the fortune which get with she , -- be no such mighty matter to have comply with , the lady and she babe might both of they have be alive at this hour . ' this exclamation , my father know , be unanswerable ; -- and yet , it be not merely
merely to shelter himself , -- nor be it altogether for the care of he offspring and wife that he see so extremely anxious about this point ;-- my father have extensive view of thing , -- and stood moreover , as he think , deeply concerned in it for the publick good , from the dread he entertain of the bad use a ill - fated instance might be put to . he be very sensible that all political writer upon the subject have unanimously agree and lament , from the beginning of 's reign down to he own time , that the current of man and money towards the metropolis , upon one frivolous errand or another , -- set in so strong , -- as to become dangerous to we civil rights , -- though , by the bye , -- a current be not the image he take most delight in , -- a distemper be here he favourite metaphor , and he would run it down into a perfect allegory , by maintain it be identically the same in the body national as in the body natural , where the blood and spirit be drive up into the head faster than they could find they way down ;-- a stoppage of circulation must ensue , which be death in both case . there be little danger , he would say , of lose we libertie by french politick or french invasion ; -- nor be he so much in pain of a consumption from the mass of corrupt matter and ulcerate humours in we constitution , which he hope be not so bad as it be imagine ; -- but he verily fear , that in some violent push , we should go off , all at once , in a state - apoplexy ; -- and then he would say , the have mercy upon we all . my father be never able to give the history of this distemper ,-- without the remedy along with it . ' be I a absolute prince ,' he would say , pull up he breech with both he hand , as he rise from he arm -chair , ' I would appoint able judge , at every avenue of my metropolis , who should take cognizance of every fool 's business who come there ; -- and if , upon a fair and cando hear , it appear not of weight sufficient to leave he own home , and come up , bag and baggage , with he wife and child , farmer 's son , & c . &c. at he backside , they should be all send back , from constable to constable , like vagrant as they be , to the place of they legal settlement . by this means I shall take care , that my metropolis totter have not thro ' its own weight ; -- that the head be no longer too big for the body ; -- that the extreme , now waste and pinn would in , be restore to they due share of nourishment , and regain with it they natural strength and beauty :-- I would effectually provide , that the meadow and corn field of my dominion , should laugh and s ; -- that good chear and hospitality flourish once more ; -- and that such weight and influence be put thereby into the hand of the Squirality of my kingdom , as should counterpoise what I perceive my Nobility be now take from they . ' why be there so few palace and gentleman 's seat ,' he would ask , with some emotion , as he walk across the room , ' throughout so many delicious province in ? Whence be it that the few remain amongst they be so dismantled , -- so unfurnished , and in so ruinous and desolate a condition ?-- because , ' ( he would say ) 'in that kingdom no man have any country - interest to support ; -- the little interest of any kind which any man have any where in it , be concentrate in the court , and the look of the : by the sunshine of whose countenance , or the cloud which pass across it , every french man life or die . ' another political reason which prompt my father so strongly to guard against the least evil accident in my mother 's lie - in in the country , -- be , that any such instance would infallibly throw a balance of power , too great already , into the weaker vessel of the gentry , in he own , or higher stations ;-- which , with the many other usurped rights which that part of the constitution be hourly establish ,-- would , in the end , prove fatal to the monarchical system of domestick government establish in the first creation of thing by . in this point he be entirely of 's opinion , that the plan and institution of the greatest monarchy in the eastern part of the world , be , originally , all steal from that admirable pattern and prototype of this houshold and paternal power ; -- which , for a century , he say , and more , have gradually be degenerat away into a mix have government ; -- the form of which , however desirable in great combination of the species , -- be very troublesome in small one , -- and seldom produce any thing , that he see , but sorrow and confusion . for all these reason , private and publick , put together , -- my father be for have the man-midwife by all means , -- my mother , by no means . my father begg have and intreate , she would for once recede from she prerogative in this matter , and suffer
suffer he to choose for she ; -- my mother , on the contrary , insist upon she privilege in this matter , to choose for herself , -- and have no mortal 's help but the old woman 's . -- what could my father do ? he be almost at he wit 's end ;-- talk it over with she in all mood ; -- place he argument in all light ;-- argue the matter with she like a christian ,-- like a heathen , -- like a husband , -- like a father , -- like a patriot , -- like a man :-- my mother answer every thing only like a woman ; which be a little hard upon she ; -- for as she could not assume and fight it out behind such a variety of character ,--'twas no fair match :--'tbe seven to one .-- what could my mother do ?-- she have the advantage ( otherwise she have be certainly overpower ) of a small reinforcement of chagrin personal at the bottom , which bear she up , and enable she to dispute the affair with my father with so equal a advantage , -- that both side sng . in a word , my mother be to have the old woman , -- and the operator be to have licence to drink a bottle of wine with my father and my uncle in the back parlour , -- for which he be to be pay five guinea . I must beg leave , before I finish this chapter , to enter a caveat in the breast of my fair reader ; -- and it be this , -- not to take it absolutely for grant , from a unguarded word or two which I have dropp ' in it ,--' that I be a married man . '-- I own , the tender appellation of my dear , dear , -- with some other stroke of conjugal knowledge , intersperse here and there , might , naturally enough , have misl the most candid judge in the world into such a determination against I .-- all I plead for , in this case , madam , be strict justice , and that you do so much of it , to I as well as to yourself , -- as not to prejudge , or receive such a impression of I , till you have better evidence , than , I be positive , at present can be produce against I .-- not that I can be so vain or unreasonable , madam , as to desire you should therefore think , that my dear , dear be my keep mistress ;-- no ,-- that would be flatter my character in the other extreme , and give it a air of freedom , which , perhaps , it have no kind of right to . all I contend for , be the utter impossibility , for some volume , that you , or the most penetrating spirit upon earth , should know how this matter really stand .-- it be not impossible , but that my dear , dear ! tender as the appellation be , may be my child .-- consider ,-- I be bear in the year eighteen .-- nor be there any thing unnatural or extravagant in the supposition , that my dear may be my friend .-- friend !-- my friend .-- surely , , a friendship between the two sex may subsist , and be support without -- ! :-- without any thing , madam , but that tender and delicious sentiment which ever mix in friendship , where there be a difference of sex . let I intreat you to study the pure and sentimental part of the best french Romances ; -- it will really , Madam , astonish you to see with what a variety of chaste expression this delicious sentiment , which I have the honour to speak of , be dress ' out . . I would sooner undertake to explain the hardest problem in geometry , than pretend to account for it , that a gentleman of my father 's great good sense ,-- know , as the reader must have observe he , and curiious too in philosophy , -- wise also in political reasoning , -- and in polemical ( as he will find ) no way ignorant , -- could be capable of entertaine a notion in he head , so out of the common track , -- that I fear the reader , when I come to mention it to he , if he be the least of a cholerick temper , will immediately throw the book by ; if mercurial , he will laugh most heartily at it ;-- and if he be of a grave and saturnine cast , he will , at first sight , absolutely condemn as fanciful and extravagant ; and that be in respect to the choice and imposition of christian name , on which he think a great deal more depend than what superficial mind be capable of conceiving . he opinion , in this matter , be , that there be a strange kind of magick bia , which good or bad name , as he call they , irresistibly impress upon we character and conduct . the hero of Cervantes argue not the point with more seriousness , -- nor have he more faith , -- or more to say on the power of necromancy in dishonour he deed , -- or on 's name , in shedding lustre upon they , than my father have on those of or , on the one hand -- or of and on the other . how many Caesars and Pompeys , he would say , by mere inspiration of the name , have be render worthy of they ? and how many
many , he would add , be there , who might have do exceed well in the world , have not they character and spirit be totally depressed and would into nothing ? I see plainly , , by you look , ( or as the case happen ) my father would say -- that you do not heartily subscribe to this opinion of mine , -- which , to those , he would add , who have not carefully sift it to the bottom ,-- I own have a air more of fancy than of solid reasoning in it ; -- and yet , my dear Sir , if I may presume to know you character , I be morally assure , I should hazard little in sta a case to you , not as a party in the dispute , -- but as a judge , and trust my appeal upon it to you own good sense and candid disquisition in this matter ; -- you be a person free from as many narrow prejudice of education as most man ;-- and , if I may presume to penetrate farther into you , -- of a liberality of genius above bear down a opinion , merely because it want friend . you son , -- you dear son , -- from whose sweet and open temper you have so much to expect .-- you , !-- would you , for the world , have call he Judas ?-- would you , my dear Sir , he would say , lay he hand upon you breast , with the genteelest address , -- and in that soft and irresistible piano of , which the nature of the argumentum ad hominem absolutely require ,-- would you , , if a of a godfather have propose the name for you child , and offer you he purse along with it , would you have consent to such a desecration of he ?--o my ! he would say , look up , if I know you temper right , ,-- you be incapable of it ;-- you would have trample upon the offer ;-- you would have throw the temptation at the tempter 's head with abhorrence . you greatness of mind in this action , which I admire , with that generous contempt of money , which you show I in the whole transaction , be really noble ; -- and what render it more so , be the principle of it ; -- the workings of a parent 's love upon the truth and conviction of this very hypothesis , namely , that be you son call , -- the forbid and treacherous idea , so inseparable from the name , would have accompany he through life like he shadow , and , in the end , make a miser and a rascal of he , in spite , , of you example . I never know a man able to answer this argument .-- but , indeed , to speak of my father as he be ; -- he be certainly irresistible ; -- both in he oration and disputation ; -- he be bear a orator ; --( ) .-- hang upon he lip , and the element of and be so blend up in he , -- and , withal , he have so shrewd a guess at the weakness and passion of he respondent , -- that might have stand up and say ,--' this man be eloquent .'-- in short , whether he be on the weak or the strong side of the question , ' twas hazardous in either case to attack he . -- and yet , ' ttis strange , he have never read , nor , nor , nor , nor , amongst the antient ;-- nor , nor , nor , nor , amongst the modern ; -- and what be more astonishing , he have never in he whole life the least light or spark of subtilty struck into he mind , by one single lecture upon or or any Dutch logician or commentator ; -- he know not so much as in what the difference of a argument ad ignorantiam , and a argument ad thhominey consist ; so that I well remember , when he go up along with I to enter my name at in . . .,-- it be a matter of just wonder with my worthy tutor , and two or three fellow of that learn society , -- that a man who know not so much as the name of he tool , should be able to work after that fashion with they . to work with they in the best manner he could , be what my father be , however , perpetually force upon ; -- for he have a thousand little sceptical notion of the comick kind to defend -- most of which notion , I verily believe , at first enter upon the footing of mere whim , and of a vive la ; and as such he would make merry with they for half a hour or so , and have sharpen he wit upon they , dismiss they till another day . I mention this , not only as matter of hypothesis or conjecture upon the progress and establishment of my father 's many odd opinion , -- but as a warning to the learn reader against the indiscreet reception of such guest , who , after a free and undisturbed entrance , for some year , into we brain , -- at length claim a kind of settlement there , -- work sometimes like yeast ; -- but more generally after the manner of the gentle passion , begin in , -- but end in downright earnest . whether this be the case of the singularity of my father 's notions -- or that he judgament ,
, at length , become the dupe of he wit ; -- or how far , in many of he notion , he might , though odd , be absolutely right ; -- the reader , as he come at they , shall decide . all that I maintain here , be , that in this one , of the influence of christian name , however it gain footing , he be serious ; -- he be all uniformity ; -- he be systematical , and , like all systematic reasoner , he would move both heaven and earth , and twist and torture every thing in nature to support he hypothesis . in a word I repeat it over again ; -- he be serious ; -- and , in consequence of it , he would lose all kind of patience whenever he see people , especially of condition , who should have know better , -- as careless and as indifferent about the name they impos upon they child , -- or more so , than in the choice of or for they puppy - dog . this , he would say , look ' ill ;-- and have , moreover , this particular aggravation in it , viz . that when once a vile name be wrongfully or injudiciously give , ' twas not like the case of a man 's character , which , when wrong would , might hereafter be cleared ; -- and , possibly , some time or other , if not in the man 's life , at least after he death , -- be , somehow or other , set to right with the world : but the injury of this , he would say , could never be undone ; -- nay , he doubt even whether a act of parliament could reach it :-- he know as well as you , that the legislature assume a power over surname ; -- but for very strong reason , which he could give , it have never yet adventur , he would say , to go a step farther . it be observable , that tho ' my father , in consequence of this opinion , have , as I have tell you , the strongest liking and disliking towards certain name ; -- that there be still number of name which hang so equally in the balance before he , that they be absolutely indifferent to he . , , and be of this class : these my father call neutral name ;--affirm of they , without a satire , that there have be as many knave and fool , at least , as wise and good man , since the world begin , who have indifferently borne they ;--so that , like equal force act against each other in contrary direction , he think they mutually destroy each other 's effect ; for which reason , he would often declare , he would not give a cherry - stone to choose amongst they . , which be my brother 's name , be another of these neutral kind of christian name , which operate very little either way ; and as my father happen ' to be at , when it be give he , -- he would oft -time thank heaven it be no worse . be something like a negative quantity in with he ;- -'twas worse , he say , than nothing .--Willibe stand pretty high :-- Numps again be low with he :-- and , he say , be the . but of all name in the universe he have the most unconquerable aversion for ; -- he have the lowest and most contemptible opinion of it of any thing in the world , -- think it could possibly produce nothing in rerum natura , but what be extremely mean and pitiful : so that in the midst of a dispute on the subject , in which , by the bye , he be frequently involved , -- he would sometimes break off in a sudden and spirit , or rather , raise a third , and sometimes a full fifth above the key of the discourse , -- and demand it categorically of he antagonist , whether he would take upon he to say , he have ever remember ,-- whether he have ever read , -- or even whether he have ever hear tell of a man , call Tristram , perform any thing great or worth recording ?-- no ,-- he would say ,-- Tristram !-- the thing be impossible . what could be want in my father but to have write a book to publish this notion of he to the world ? little boot it to the subtle speculatist to stand single in he opinion ,-- unless he give they proper vent :-- it be the identical thing which my father do :-- for in the year sixteen , which be two year before I be bear , he be at the pain of write a express Dissertation simply upon the word Tristram , -- shew the world , with great candour and modesty , the grounds of he great abhorrence to the name . when this story be compare with the title - page ,-- will not the gentle reader pity my father from he soul ? -- to see a orderly and well - dispose gentleman , who tho ' singular , -- yet inoffensive in he notion ,-- so play upon in they by cross purpose ; -- to look down upon the stage , and see he baffle and overthrow in all he little system and wish ; to behold a train of event perpetually fall out against he , and in so critical and cruel a way , as if they have purposedly be plann ' and point against he , merely to insult he speculation
speculation .-- in a word , to behold such a one , in he old age , ill - fit for trouble , ten time in a day suffer sorrow ; -- ten time in a day call the child of he prayer Tristram !-- Melancholy dissyllable of sound ! which , to he ears , be unison to , and every name vituperative under heaven .-- by he ash ! I swear it , -- if ever malignant spirit take pleasure , or busy itself in traverse the purpose of mortal man , -- it must have be here ; -- and if it be not necessary I should be bear before I be christen , I would this moment give the reader a account of it . . -- how could you , madam , be so inattentive in read the last chapter ? I tell you in it , that my mother be not a papist .-- Papist ! you tell I no such thing , .-- Madam , I beg leave to repeat it over again , that I tell you as plain , at least , as word , by direct inference , could tell you such a thing .-- then , , I must have miss have a page .-- no , Madam , you have not miss would a word .-- then I be asleep , .-- my pride , madam , can not allow you that refuge .-- then , I declare , I know nothing at all about the matter .-- that , , be the very fault I lay to you charge ; and as a punishment for it , I do insist upon it , that you immediately turn back , that be as soon as you get to the next full stop , and read the whole chapter over again . I have impos this penance upon the lady , neither out of wantonness nor cruelty ; but from the best of motive ; and therefore shall make she no apology for it when she return back :--'Tis to rebuke a vicious taste , which have crept into thousand besides herself , -- of read straight forwards , more in quest of the adventur , than of the deep erudition and knowledge which a book of this cast , if read over as it should be , would infallibly impart with they -- the mind should be accustom to make wise reflection , and draw curiious conclusion as it go along ; the habitude of which make Pliny the younger affirm , ' that he never read a book so bad , but he draw some profit from it . ' the story of and , run over without this turn and application , -- do less service , I affirm it , than the history of and , or of the of , read with it . -- but here come my fair lady . have you read over again the chapter , madam , as I desire you ?-- you have : and do you not observe the passage , upon the second reading , which admit the inference ?-- not a word like it ! then , Madam , be pleased to ponder well the last line but one of the chapter , where I take upon I to say , ' it be necessary I should be bear before I be christe not ' . ' have my mother , madam , be a Papist , that consequence do not follow . ( the direct the baptizing of the child , in casis of danger , before it be bear ;--but upon this proviso , that some part or other of the child 's body be see by the baptizer :-- but the doctor of the , by a deliberation hold amongst they , 10 , 1733 , -- have enlarge the power of the midwive , by determining , that though no part of the child 's body should appear , -- that baptism shall , nevertheless , be administer to it by injection , -- par le moyen d'une petite canulle ,-- a squirt .--'Tis very strange that , who have so good a mechanical head , both for tying and unty the knot of school -divinity ,-- should , after so much pain bestow upon this ,- - give up the point at last , as a second La choose impossible ,--'Infante in maternis uteris existente ( quoth ! ) baptizari possunt nullo modo . ' -- of ! ! if the reader have the curiosity to see the question upon baptism by injection , as present to the doctor of the , with they consultation thereupon , it be as follow . ) it be a terrible misfortune for this same book of mine , but more so to the Republick of letter ; -- so that my own be quite swallow up in the consideration of it , -- that this self - same vile pruriency for fresh adventur in all thing , have get so strongly into we habit and humour ,-- and so wholly intent be we upon satisfye the impatience of we concupiscence that way , -- that nothing but the gross and more carnal part of a composition will go down :-- the subtle hint and sly communication of science fly off , like spirit upward , -- the heavy moral escape downward ; and both the one and the other be as much lose to the world , as if they be still leave in the bottom of the ink - horn . I wish the male - reader have not pass would by many a one , as quaint and curiious as this one , in which the female - reader have be detect . I wish it may have its effect ; -- and that all good people , both male and female
female , from example , may be teach to think as well as read . Memoire presente a les . 4to , 1734 , p. 366 . , represente a les , qu'il y a des cas , quoique tr rare , out une mere ne scauroit accoucher , & meme out l'enfant est tellement renferme dans le sein de sa mere , qu'il ne fait paroitre aucune partie de son corps , ce qui seroit un cas , suivant les Rituels , de lui conferer , do moin sous condition , le bapteme . , qui consulte , pretend , par le moyen d'une petite canulle , de pouvoir baptiser immediatement l'enfant , sans faire aucun tort a la mere .-- demand si ce moyen , qu'il vient de proposer , est permis & legitime , & 's 'il peut s'en servir dan les cas qu'il vient d'exposer . Reponse estime , que la question proposee souffre grande difficulte . posent would 'un cote pour principe , que le bapteme , qui est une naissance spirituelle , suppose une premiere naissance ; il faut etre ne dan le monde , pwe renaitre en , comme il l'enseignent . , 3 part. quaesto 88 artic . ii . suit cette doctrine comme une verite constante ; l 'on ne peut , dit ce , baptiser les enfan qui so not renferme dans le sein de leur mere , & est fonde sur ce , que les enfan ne so not point nes , & ne peuvent etre compte parmi les autre homme ; d'out il conclud , qu'il ne peuvent etre l'objet d'une action exterieure , pour recevoir par leur ministere , les sacremen necessaire au salut : Pueri in maternis uteris existente nondum prodierunt in lucem ut cum aliis hominibus vitam ducant ; unde non possunt subjici actioni humana , ut per eorum ministerium sacramento recipiant ad salutem . le rituel ordonnent dan la pratique ce que les theologien of nt etabli sur les meme matiere , & il deffendent tous d'une maniere uniforme , de baptiser les enfan qui so not renferme dans le sein de leur mere , s'il ne so not paroitre quelque partire de leur corps . concour des theologien , & des rituel , qui so not le regles des dioceses , paroit former une autorite qui termine la question present ; cependant le conseil de conscience considerant d'un cote , que le raisonnement des theologiend est uniquement fonde yosu une raison de convenance , & que la deffense des rituel suppose que l 'on ne peut baptiser immediatement les enfand ainsi renferme dans le sein de leur mere , ce qui est contre la supposition present ; & would 'un autre cote , considerant que les meme theologien enseignent , que l 'on peut risquer les sacremen que a etablis comme des moyen facile , tmais necessaire pour sanctifier les homme ; & d'ailleur estimant , que les enfan renferme dan le sein de leur mere , pourroient etre capable de salut , parcequ'il so not capable de damnation ;--pour ce consideration , & e egard a l'expose , suivant lequel on assure avoir trouve un moyen certain de baptiser ce enfand ainsi renferme , sand faire aucun tort a la mere , le Conseil estime que l'on pourroit se servir do moyen propose , dand la confiance qu'il a , que n'a point laisse ce sorte d'enfan san aucun secour , & supposant , comme il est expose , que le moyen do not il s'agit est propre a leur procurer le bapteme ; cependant comme il s'agiroit , en autorisant la pratique proposee , de changer une regle universellement etablie , le Conseil croit que celui qui consulte doit s'addresser a son eveque , & a qui il appartient de juger de l'utilite , & du danger do moyen propose , & comme , sous le bon plaisir de l'eveque , le Conseil estime qu'il faudroit recourir au Pape , qui a le droit d'expliquer les regles de l'eglise , & would 'y deroger dan le cas , out la loi ne scauroit obliger , quelque sage & quelque utile que paroisse la maniere de baptiser do not il s'agit , le Conseil ne pourroit l'approver san le concour de ce deux autorite . on conseile au moin a celui qui consulte , de s'addresser a son eveque , & de lui faire part de la present decision , afin que , si le prelat entre dans les raison sur lesquelle les docteur soussigne s'appuyent , il puisse etre autorise dan le cas de necessite , out il risqueroit trop d'attendre que la permission fut demandee & accordee d'employer le moyen qu'il propose si avantageux au salut de l'enfant . reste , le , en estimant que l'on pourroit s'en servir , croit cependant , que si les enfan do not il s'agit , venoient au monde , contre l'esperance de ceux qui se seroient servis do meme moyen , il seroit necessaire de les baptiser sous condition ; & en cela le se conforme a tous les rituel , qui en autorisant le bapteme d'un enfant qui fait paroitre quelque partire de son corps , enjoignent neantmoin , & ordonnent de le baptiser sous condition , s'il vient heureusement au monde . , le 10 Avril , 1733 . a . . . . . 's compliment to Messrs . , , and ; hope they all rest well the night after so tiresome a consultation . -- he beg to know , whether after the ceremony of marriage , and before that of consummation , the baptizing all the at once , slapdash , by injection , would not be a shorter and safer cut still ; on condition , as above , that if the do well , and come safe into the world after this , that each and every of they shall be baptize again ( sous
sous condition ) -- and provide , in the second place , that the thing can be do , which apprehend it may , par le moyen d'une petite canulle , and san faire aucune tort au pere . . -- I wonder what be all that noise , and run backwards and forward for , above stair , quoth my father , address himself , after a hour and a half 's silence , to my uncle , -- who , you must know , be sit on the opposite side of the fire , smoak he social pipe all the time , in mute contemplation of a new pair of black plush - breech which he have get on :-- what can they be do , brother ?-- quoth my father , -- we can scarce hear ourselves talk . I think , reply my uncle , take he pipe from he mouth , and strike the head of it two or three time upon the nail of he left thumb , as he begin he sentence ,-- I think , say he :-- but to enter rightly into my uncle 's sentiment upon this matter , you must be make to enter first a little into he character , the out - line of which I shall just give you , and then the dialogue between he and my father will go on as well again . pray what be that man 's name , -- for I write in such a hurry , I have no time to recollect or look for it , -- who first make the observation , ' that there be great inconstancy in we air and climate ? ' whoever he be , ' tbe a just and good observation in he . -- but the corollary draw from it , namely , ' that it be this which have furnish we with such a variety of odd and whimsical character ;' -- that be not he ; -- it be find out by another man , at least a century and a half after he : then again , -- that this copious store - house of original materials , be the true and natural cause that we Comedy be so much better than those of , or any other that either have , or can be write upon the continent :-- that discovery be not fully make till about the middle of 's reign , -- when the great , in write one of he long preface , ( if I mistake not ) most fortunately hit upon it . indeed toward the latter end of , the great begin to patronize the notion , and more fully explain it to the world in one or two of he Spectator ; -- but the discovery be not he .-- then , fourthly and lastly , that this strange irregularity in we climate , produce so strange a irregularity in we character , -- doth thereby , in some sort , make we amend , by give we somewhat to make we merry with when the weather will not suffer we to go out of door , -- that observation be my own ; -- and be strike out by I this very rainy day , 26 , 1759 , and betwixt the hour of nine and ten in the morning . thus -- thus , my fellow - labourer and associate in this great harvest of we learning , now ripen before we eye ; thus it be , by slow step of casual increase , that we knowledge physical , metaphysical , physiological , polemical , nautical , mathematical , aenigmatical , technical , biographical , romantical , chemical , and obstetrical , with fifty other branch of it , ( most of th'ey end as these do , in ical ) have for these two last century and more , gradually be creep upwards towards that Akme of they perfection , from which , if we may form a conjecture from the advance of these last seven year , we can not possibly be far off . when that happen , it be to be hope , it will put a end to all kind of writing whatsoever ; -- the want of all kind of writing will put a end to all kind of reading ; -- and that in time , as war beget poverty ; poverty peace ,-- must , in course , put a end to all kind of knowledge , -- and then -- we shall have all to begin over again ; or , in other word , be exactly where we start . -- happy ! Thrice happy time ! I only wish that the aera of my begetting , as well as the mode and manner of it , have be a little alter ' , -- or that it could have be put off , with any convenience to my father or mother , for some twenty or five - and - twenty year longer , when a man in the literary world might have stand some chance .-- but I forget my uncle , whom all this while we have leave knock the ash out of he tobacco - pipe . he humour be of that particular species , which do honour to we atmosphere ; and I should have make no scruple of rank he amongst one of the first - rate productions of it , have not there appear too many strong line in it of a family - likeness , which shew that he derive the singularity of he temper more from blood , than either wind or water , or any modification or combination of they whatever : and I have , therefore , oft -time wonder , that my father , tho ' I believe he have he reason for it , upon
upon he observe some token of eccentricity , in my course , when I be a boy , -- should never once endeavou to account for they in this way : for all the family be of a original character throughout :-- I mean the male , -- the female have no character at all ,-- except , indeed , my great aunt , who , about sixty year ago , be married and get with child by the coachman , for which my father , accord to he hypothesis of christian name , would often say , she might thank she godfather and godmother . it will seem strange , -- and I would as soon think of drop a riddle in the reader 's way , which be not my interest to do , as set he upon guess how it could come to pass , that a event of this kind , so many year after it have happen , should be reserve for the interruption of the peace and unity , which otherwise so cordially subsist , between my father and my uncle . one would have think , that the whole force of the misfortune should have spend and waste itself in the family at first , -- as be generally the case . -- but nothing ever wrotch with we family after the ordinary way . possibly at the very time this happen , it might have something else to afflict it ; and as affliction be send down for we good , and that as this have never do the family any good at all , it might lie wait till apt time and circumstance should give it a opportunity to discharge its office .-- , I determine nothing upon this .-- my way be ever to point out to the curiious , different tract of investigation , to come at the first spring of the event I tell ; -- not with a pedantic Fescue , -- or in the decisive manner or Tacitus , who outwit himself and he reader ; -- but with the officious humility of a heart devote to the assistance merely of the inquisitive ; -- to they I write , -- and by they I shall be read , -- if any such reading as this could be suppose to hold out so long , -- to the very end of the world . why this cause of sorrow , therefore , be thus reserve for my father and uncle , be undetermined by I . but how and in what direction it exert itself so as to become the cause of dissatisfaction between they , after it begin to operate , be what I be able to explain with great exactness , and be as follow : my uncle , , be a gentleman , who , with the virtue which usually constitute the character of a man of honour and rectitude , -- possess one in a very eminent degree , which be seldom or never put into the catalogue ; and that be a most extreme and unparallel would modesty of nature ; -- though I correct the word nature , for this reason , that I may not prejudge a point which must shortly come to a hearing , and that be , whether this modesty of he be natural or acquy ' .-- Whichever way my uncle come by it , ' twas nevertheless modesty in the truest sense of it ; and that be , madam , not in regard to word , for he be so unhappy as to have very little choice in they , -- but to thing ; -- and this kind of modesty so possess he , and it arise to such a height in he , as almost to equal , if such a thing could be , even the modesty of a woman : that female nicety , madam , and inward cleanliness of mind and fancy , in you sex , which make you so much the awe of ours . you will imagine , Madam , that my uncle have contract all this from this very source ; -- that he have spend a great part of he time in converse with you sex , and that from a thorough knowledge of you , and the force of imitation which such fair example render irresistible , he have acquire this amiable turn of mind . I wish I could say so , -- for unless it be with he sister - in - law , my father 's wife and my mother -- my uncle scarce exchange three word with the sex in as many year ; -- no , he get it , , by a blow .-- a blow !-- yes , , it be owe to a blow from a stone , break off by a ball from the parapet of a horn - work at the siege of , which strike full upon my uncle 's groin .-- which way could that effect it ? the story of that , Madam , be long and interesting ; -- but it would be run my history all upon heap to give it you here .--'Tis for a episode hereafter ; and every circumstance relate to it , in its proper place , shall be faithfully laid before you :--'Till then , it be not in my power to give farther light into this matter , or say more than what I have say already ,-- that my uncle be a gentleman of unparallel ' modesty , which happen to be somewhat subtilize and rarify by the constant heat of a little family pride , -- they both so wrotch together within he , that he could never bear to hear the affair of my aunt Dinah touch would upon , but with the greatest emotion .-- the least hint
hint of it be enough to make the blood fly into he face ; -- but when my father enlarge upon the story in mixed company , which the illustration of he hypothesis frequently oblige he to do , -- the unfortunate blight of one of the fairest branch of the family , would set my uncle 's honour and modesty o' bleed ; and he would often take my father aside , in the greatest concern imaginable , to expostulate and tell he , he would give he any thing in the world , only to let the story rest . my father , I believe , have the truest love and tenderness for my uncle , that ever one brother bore towards another , and would have do any thing in nature , which one brother in reason could have desir ' of another , to have make my uncle 's heart easy in this , or any other point . but this lay out of he power . -- my father , as I tell you be a philosopher in grain ,-- speculative , -- systematical ; -- and my aunt 's affair be a matter of as much consequence to he , as the retrogradation of the planet to :-- the backsliding of in she orbit fortify the Copernican system , call so after he name ; and the backsliding of my aunt Dinah in she orbit , do the same service in establish my father 's system , which , I trust , will for ever hereafter be call the , after he . in any other family dishonour , my father , I believe , have as nice a sense of shame as any man whatever ; -- and neither he , nor , I dare say , , would have divulge the affair in either case , or have take the least notice of it to the world , but for the obligation they owed , as they think , to truth , my father would say , construe the word to my uncle , as he go along , ; that be , be my aunt ;--se magis amica verita -- but be my sister . this contrariety of humour betwixt my father and my uncle , be the source of many a fraternal squabble . the one could not bear to hear the tale of family disgrace record , -- and the other would scarce ever let a day pass to a end without some hint at it . for 's sake , my uncle would cry , -- and for my sake , and for all we sake , my dear brother , -- do let this story of we aunt 's and she ash sleep in peace ;--how can you ,-- how can you have so little feeling and compassion for the character of we family ?-- what be the character of a family to a hypothesis ? my father would reply .-- , if you come to that -- what be the life of a family ?-- the life of a family !--my uncle would say , throw himself back in he arm chair , and lift up he hand , he eye , and one leg -- yes , the life ,--my father would say , maintain he point . how many thousand of th'ey be there every year that come cast away , ( in all civilized country at least ) -- and consider as nothing but common air , in competition of a hypothesis . in my plain sense of thing , my uncle would answer ,-- every such instance be downright murder , let who will commit it .-- there lie you mistake , my father would reply ;-- for , in there be no such thing as ,--'tis only death , brother . my uncle would never offer to answer this by any other kind of argument , than that of whistling half a dozen bar of .-- you must know it be the usual channel thro ' which he passion get vent , when any thing shock or surprize he :-- but especially when any thing , which he thdeey would very absurd , be offer . as not one of we logical writer , nor any of the commentator upon they , that I remember , have think proper to give a name to this particular species of argument .-- I here take the liberty to do it myself , for two reason . first , that , in order to prevent all confusion in dispute , it may stand as much distinguished for ever , from every other species of argument -- as the ad Verecundiam , ex Absurdo , ex , or any other argument whatsoever :-- and , secondly , that it may be say by my child 's child , when my head be laid to rest , -- that they learn would grandfather 's head have be busy to as much purpose once , as other people 's ; -- that he have invent a name , and generously throw it into the Treasury of the , for one of the most unanswerable argument in the whole science . and , if the end of disputation be more to silence than convince , -- they may add , if they please , to one of the best argument too . I do , therefore , by these present , strictly order and command , that it be know and distinguished by the name and title of the , and no other ; -- and that it rank hereafter with the and the ad Crumenam , and for ever hereafter be treat of in the same chapter . as for the , which be never use but by the woman against the man ; -- and the ad , which , contrarywise , be make use of by
by the man only against the woman ;-- as these two be enough in conscience for one lecture ;-- and , moreover , as the one be the best answer to the other , -- let they likewise be keep apart , and be treat of in a place by themselves . . the learn , I mean the famous , who be of in the 's reign , tell we in one of Decads , at the end of he divine art of meditation , imprint at , in the year 1610 , by , dwell in - street , ' that it be a abominable thing for a man to commend himself ; '-- and I really think it be so . and yet , on the other hand , when a thing be execute in a masterly kind of a fashion , which thing be not likely to be find out ;-- I think it be full as abominable , that a man should lose the honour of it , and go out of the world with the conceit of it rot in he head . this be precisely my situation . for in this long digression which I be accidentally lead into , as in all my digression ( one only accept ) there be a master - stroke of digressive skill , the merit of which have all along , I fear , be over -look by my reader , -- not for want of penetration in he , -- but because ' ttis a excellence seldom look for , or expect indeed , in a digression ; -- and it be this : that tho ' my digression be all fair , as you observe , -- and that I fly off from what I be about , as far , and as often too , as any writer in Great ; yet I constantly take care to order affair so that my main business do not stand still in my absence . I be just go , for example , to have give you the great out - line of my uncle 's most whimsical character ; -- when my aunt and the coachman come across we , and lead we a vagary some million of mile into the very heart of the planetary system : Notwithstand all this , you perceive that the drawing of my uncle 's character go on gently all the time ; -- not the great contour of it , -- that be impossible , -- but some familiar stroke and faint designation of it , be here and there touch ' on , as we go along , so that you be much better acquaint with my uncle now than you be before . by this contrivance the machinery of my work be of a species by itself ; two contrary motion be introduce into it , and reconcile , which be think to be at variance with each other . in a word , my work be digressive , and it be progressive too , -- and at the same time . this , , be a very different story from that of the earth 's move round she axis , in she diurnal rotation , with she progress in she elliptick orbit which bring about the year , and constitute that variety and vicissitude of seasons we enjoy ;-- though I own it suggest the thought , -- as I believe the greatest of we boast improvement and discoveries have come from such trifling hint . Digression , incontestably , be the sunshine ; -- they be the life , the soul of reading !-- take they out of this book , for instance , -- you might as well take the book along with they ; -- one cold eternal winter would reign in every page of it ; restore they to the writer ; -- he step forth like a bridegroom , -- bid all - hail ; bring in variety , and forbid the appetite to fail . all the dexterity be in the good cookery and management of they , so as to be not only for the advantage of the reader , but also of the author , whose distress , in this matter , be truly pitiable : for , if he begin a digression , -- from that moment , I observe , he whole work stand stock still ; -- and if he go on with he main work , -- then there be a end of he digression . -- this be vile work .-- for which reason , from the beginning of this , you see , I have construct the main work and the adventitious part of it with such intersection , and have so complicate and involve the digressive and progressive movement , one wheel within another , that the whole machine , in general , have be keep a - go ; -- and , what be more , it shall be keep a - go these forty year , if it please the fountain of health to bless I so long with life and good spirit . . I have a strong propensity in I to begin this chapter very nonsensically , and I will not balk my fancy .-- accordingly I set off thus : if the fixture of 's glass in the human breast , accord to the propose emendation of that arch-critick , have take place ,-- first , this foolish consequence would certainly have follow , -- that the very wisest and very gravest of we all , in one coin or other , must have pay window - money every day of we life . and , secondly , that have the said glass be there set up , nothing more would have be want , in order to have take a man 's character , but
but to have take a chair and go softly , as you would to a dioptrical bee - hive , and look would in ,-- view ' the soul stark nake ;-- observe all she motion , -- she machination ;-- trace all she maggot from they first engendering to they crawling forth ; -- watch she loose in she frisk , she gambol , she capricio ; and after some notice of she more solemn deportment , consequent upon such frisk , &c .-- then take you pen and ink and set down nothing but what you have see , and could have swear to :-- but this be a advantage not to be have by the biographer in this planet ; -- in the planet ( belike ) it may be so , if not better still for he ; -- for there the intense heat of the country , which be prove by computator , from its vicinity to the sun , to be more than equal to that of red - hot iron ,-- must , I think , long ago have vitrify the body of the inhabitant , ( as the efficient cause ) to suit they for the climate ( which be the final cause ;) so that betwixt they both , all the tenement of they soul , from top to bottom , may be nothing else , for atch the soundest philosophy can show to the contrary , but one fine transparent body of clear glass ( bat the umbilical knot ) -- so that , till the inhabitant grow old and tolerably wrinkle , whereby the ray of light , in pass through they , become so monstrously refract , -- or return reflect from they surface in such transverse line to the eye , that a man can not be see through ; -- he soul might as well , unless for mere ceremony , or the trifling advantage which the umbilical point give she , -- might , upon all other account , I say , as well play the fool out og door as in she own house . but this , as I say above , be not the case of the inhabitant of this earth ; -- we mind shine not through the body , but be wrapt up here in a dark covering of uncrystalized flesh and blood ; so that , if we would come to the specific character of they , we must go some other way to work . many , in good truth , be the way , which human wit have be force to take , to do this thing with exactness . some , for instance , draw all they character with wind - instrument .-- take notice of that way in the affair of and ; -- but it be as fallacious as the breath of fame ; -- and , moreover , bespeak a narrow genius . I be not ignorant that the pretend to a mathematical exactness in they designation of one particular sort of character among they , from the forte or piano of a certain wind - instrument they use , -- which they say be infallible .-- I dare not mention the name of the instrument in this place ; --'tis sufficient we have it amongst we , -- but never think of make a drawing by it ;-- this be aenigmatical , and intend to be so , at least ad populum :-- and therefore , I beg , Madam , when you come here , that you read on as fast as you can , and never stop to make any inquiry about it . there be other again , who will draw a man 's character from no other help in the world , but merely from he evacuation ; -- but this often give a very incorrect outline ,-- unless , indeed , you take a sketch of he repletion too ; and by correcte one draw from the other , compound one good figure out of they both . I should have no objection to this method , but that I think it must smell too strong of the lamp , -- and be render would still more operose , by force you to have a eye to the rest of he Non-natural .-- why the most natural action of a man 's life should be call he Non-natural , -- be another question . there be other , fourthly , who disdain every one of these expedient ;-- not from any fertility of they own , but from the various way of do it , which they have borrowed from the honourable device which the ( , a instrument to copy Prints and pictures mechanically , and in any proportion . ) of the brush have shew in take copy .-- these , you must know , be you great historian . one of these you will see draw a full length character against the light ; -- that be illiberal , -- dishonest , -- and hard upon the character of the man who sit . other , to mmend the matter , will make a drawing of you in the camera ; -- that be most unfair of all , because , there you be sure to be represent in some of you most ridiculous attitude . to avoid all and every one of these error in give you my uncle 's character , I be determined to draw it by no mechanical help whatever ; -- nor shall my pencil be guide by any one wind -instrument which ever be blow upon , either on this , or on the other side of the ; -- nor will I consider either he repletion or he discharge , -- or touch upon he non - naturals ; but , in a word , I will draw
draw my uncle 's character from he hobby - horse . . if I be not morally sure that the reader must be out of all patience for my uncle 's character , -- I would here previously have convince he that there be no instrument so fit to draw such a thing with , as that which I have pitch ' upon . a man and he hobby - horse , tho ' I can not say that they act and re-act exactly after the same manner in which the soul and body do upon each other : yet doubtless there be a communication between they of some kind ; and my opinion rather be , that there be something in it more of the manner of electrify body , -- and that , by means of the heat part of the rider , which come immediately into contact with the back of the hobby - horse , -- by long journy and much friction , it so happen , that the body of the rider be at length fill would as full of - Horsical matter as it can hold ; -- so that if you be able to give but a clear description of the nature of the one , you may form a pretty exact notion of the genius and character of the other . now the hobby - horse which my uncle always ride upon , be in my opinion a - horse well worth give a description of , if it be only upon the score of he great singularity ; -- for you might have travel from to , -- from to in , and from Penzance to back again , and not have see such another upon the road ; or if you have see such a one , whatever haste you have be in , you must infallibly have stopp ' to have take a view of he . indeed , the gait and figure of he be so strange , and so utterly unlike be he , from he head to he tail , to any one of the whole species , that it be now and then make a matter of dispute ,-- whether he be really a hobby - horse or no : but as the would use no other argument to the , who dispute with he against the reality of motion , save that of rise up upon he leg , and walk across the room ;-- so would my uncle use no other argument to prove he hobby - horse be a hobby - horse indeed , but by get upon he back and ride he about ; -- leave the world , after that , to determine the point as it think fit . in good truth , my uncle mount he with so much pleasure , and he carry my uncle so well , -- that he trouble he head very little with what the world either say or think about it . it be now high time , however , that I give you a description of he :--But to go on regularly , I only beg you will give I leave to acquaint you first , how my uncle come by he . . the wound in my uncle 's groin , which he receive at the siege of , render he unfin for the service , it be think expedient he should return to , in order , if possible , to be set to rights . he be four year totally confin , -- part of it to he bed , and all of it to he room : and in the course of he cure , which be all that time in hand , suffer ' unspeakable misery ,-- owe to a succession of exfoliation from the os pubis , and the outward edge of that part of the coxendix call the os illium , -- both which bone be dismally crush would , as much by the irregularity of the stone , which I tell you be break off the parapet , -- as by its size , --( tho ' it be pretty large ) which inclin the surgeon all along to think , that the great injury which it have do my uncle 's groin , be more owing to the gravity of the stone itself , than to the projectile force of it , -- which he would often tell he be a great happiness . my father at that time be just begin business in , and have take a house ; -- and as the truest friendship and cordiality subsist between the two brothers , -- and that my father think my uncle could no where be so well nurse and take care of as in he own house , -- he assign would he the very best apartment in it .-- and what be a much more sincere mark of he affection still , he would never suffer a friend or a acquaintance to step into the house on any occasion , but he would take he by the hand , and lead he up stair to see he brother , and chat a hour by he bed - side . the history of a soldier 's wound beguile the pain of it ;-- my uncle 's visitor at least think so , and in they daily call upon he , from the courtesy arise out of that belief , they would frequently turn the discourse to that subject , -- and from that subject the discourse would generally roll on to the siege itself . these conversation be infinitely kind ; and my uncle receive great relief from they , and would have receive much more , but that they bring he into some unforeseen perplexity , which , for three month together , retarde he cure greatly ; and if
if he have not hit upon a expedient to extricate himself out of they , I verily believe they would have lay he in he grave . what these perplexity of my uncle be ,--'tis impossible for you to guess ; -- if you could ,-- I should blush ; not as a relation , -- not as a man , -- nor even as a woman , -- but I should blush as a author ; inasmuch as I set no small store by myself upon this very account , that my reader have never yet be able to guess at any thing . and in this , , I be of so nice and singular a humour , that if I think you be able to form the least judgment or probable conjecture to yourself , of what be to come in the next page , -- I would tear it out of my book . . I have begin a new book , on purpose that I might have room enough to explain the nature of the perplexity in which my uncle be involved , from the many discourse and interrogation about the siege of , where he receive he wound . I must remind the reader , in case he have read the history of 's wars , -- but if he have not ,-- I then inform he , that one of the most memorable attack in that siege , be that which be make by the and upon the point of the advanced counterscarp , between the gate of , which inclose the great sluice or water - stop , where the be terribly expose to the shot of the counter - guard and demi-bastion of : the issue of which hot dispute , in three word , be this ; that the lod themselves upon the counter - guard , -- and that the make themselves master of the covered - way before - gate , notwithstand the gallantry of the french officer , who expose themselves upon the glacis sword in hand . as this be the principal attack of which my uncle be a eye -witness at ,-- the army of the besieger be cut off , by the confluence of the and , from see much of each other 's operation , -- my uncle be generally more eloquent and particular in he account of it ; and the many perplexity he be in , arise out of the almost insurmountable difficulty he find in tell he story intelligibly , and give such clear idea of the difference and distinction between the scarp and counterscarp , -- the glacis and cover - way , -- the half - moon and ravelin , -- as to make he company fully comprehend where and what he be about . Writer themselves be too apt to confound these term ; so that you will the less wonder , if in he endeavour to explain they , and in opposition to many misconception , that my uncle do oft -time puzzle he visitor , and sometimes himself too . to speak the truth , unless the company my father lead up stair be tolerably clear - heade , or my uncle be in one of he explanatory mood , ' twas a difficult thing , do what he could , to keep the discourse free from obscurity . what render the account of this affair the more intricate to my uncle , be this , -- that in the attack of the counterscarp , before the gate of , extend itself from the bank of the , quite up to the great water - stop , -- the ground be cut and cross cut with such a multitude of dyke , drain , rivulet , and sluice , on all side , -- and he would get so sadly bewilder , and set fast amongst they , that frequently he could neither get backward or forwards to save he life ; and be oft -time oblige to give up the attack upon that very account only . these perplex rebuff give my uncle more perturbation than you would imagine ; and as my father 's kindness to he be continually drag up fresh friend and fresh enquirer , -- he have but a very uneasy task of it . no doubt my uncle have great command of himself , -- and could guard appearance , I believe , as well as most man ;-- yet any one may imagine , that when he could not retreat out of the ravelin without get into the half - moon , or get out of the covered - way without fall down the counterscarp , nor cross the dyke without danger of slipp into the ditch , but that he must have fret and fume inwardly :-- he do so ; -- and the little and hourly vexation , which may seem trifling and of no account to the man who have not read , yet , whoever have read , or , and have consider well the effect which the passion and affection of the mind have upon the digestion --( why not of a wound as well as of a dinner ?) --may easily conceive what sharp paroxysm and exacerbation of he wound my uncle must have undergone upon that score only . -- my uncle could not philosophize upon it ;--'twas enough he feel it be so , -- and have sustain the pain and sorrow of it for three month together , he be resolve some way or other to extricate himself . he be one morning lie upon he back in he bed , the anguish and nature of the wound upon he groin suffer he to lie in no other position , when a thought come into he head , that if he could purchase such a thing , and have it
it paste down upon a board , as a large map of the fortification of the town and citadel of , with its environ , it might be a means of give he ease .-- I take notice of he desire to have the environ along with the town and citadel , for this reason , -- because my uncle 's wound be get in one of the traverse , about thirty toise from the return angle of the trench , opposite to the salient angle of the demi-bastion of :-- so that he be pretty confident he could stick a pin upon the identical spot of ground where he be stand on when the stone strike he . all this succeed to he wish , and not only free he from a world of sad explanation , but , in the end , it prove the happy means , as you will read , of procure my uncle he - . . there be nothing so foolish , when you be at the expence of make a entertainment of this kind , as to order thing so badly , as to let you critick and gentry of refin taste run it down : be there any thing so likely to make they do it , as that of leave they out of the party , or , what be full as offensive , of bestow you attention upon the rest of you guest in so particular a way , as if there be no such thing as a critick ( by occupation ) at table . -- I guard against both ; for , in the first place , I have leave half a dozen place purposely open for they ; -- and in the next place , I pay they all court .-- gentlemen , I kiss you hand , I protest no company could give I half the pleasure , -- by my soul I be glad to see you -- I beg only you will make no strangers of yourselves , but sit down without any ceremony , and fall on heartily . I say I have leave six place , and I be upon the point of carry my complaisance so far , as to have leave a seventh open for they , -- and in this very spot I stand on ; but be tell by a ( tho ' not by occupation ,- - but by nature ) that I have acquit myself well enough , I shall fill it up directly , hope , in the mean time , that I shall be able to make a great deal of more room next year . -- how , in the name of wonder ! could you uncle , who , it seem , be a military man , and whom you have represent as no fool , -- be at the same time such a confused , pudding - head , muddle - head , fellow , as -- look . so , , I could have reply ; but I scorn it t.--'Tis language unurbane , -- and only befitt the man who can not give clear and satisfactory account of thing , or dive deep enough into the first cause of human ignorance and confusion . it be moreover the reply valiant -- and therefore I reject it ; for tho ' it might have suit my uncle 's character as a soldier excellently well , -- and have he not accustom himself , in such attack , to whistle the , as he want no courage , ' ti the very answer he would have give ; yet it would by no means have do for I . you see as aplain as can be , that I write as a man of erudition ; -- that even my simily , my allusion , my illustration , my metaphor , be erudite , -- and that I must sustain my character properly , and contrast it properly too ,-- else what would become of I ? why , , I should be undone ; -- at this very moment that I be go here to fill up one place against a critick , -- I should have make a opening for a couple . -- therefore I answer thus : , , in all the reading which you have ever read , do you ever read such a book as 's upon the human understanding ? -- do not answer I rashly -- because many , I know , quote the book , who have not read it -- and many have read it who understand it not :-- if either of these be you case , as I write to instruct , I will tell you in three word what the book be .-- it be a history .-- a history ! of who ? what ? where ? when ? do not hurry yourself -- it be a history - book , , ( which may possibly recommend it to the world ) of what pass in a man 's own mind ; and if you will say so much of the book , and no more , believe I , you will cut no contemptible figure in a metaphysick circle . but this by the way . now if you will venture to go along with I , and look down into the bottom of this matter , it will be find that the cause of obscurity and confusion , in the mind of a man , be threefold . dull organ , dear , in the first place . secondly , slight and transient impression make by the object , when the said organ be not dull . and thirdly , a memory like unto a sieve , not able to retain what it have receive .-- call down Dolly you chamber-maid , and I will
will give you my cap and bell along with it , if I make not this matter so plain that Dolly herself should understand it as well as .-- when Dolly have indit she epistle to , and have thrust she arm into the bottom of she pocket hang by she right side ; -- take that opportunity to recollect that the organ and faculty of perception can , by nothing in this world , be so aptly typify and explain as by that one thing which 's hand be in search of .-- you organ be not so dull that I should inform you t--'tis a inch , , of red seal - wax . when this be melt and drop upon the letter , if Dolly fumble too long for she thimble , till the wax be over harden , it will not receive the mark of she thimble from the usual impulse which be will not to imprint it . very well . if 's wax , for want of better , be be - wax , or of a temper too soft , -- though ' it may receive , -- it will not hold the impression , how hard soever Dolly thrust against it ; and last of all , suppose the wax good , and eke the thimble , but apply theretoo in careless haste , as she ring the bell ; -- in any one of these three case the print leave by the thimble will be as unlike the prototype as a brass - jack . now you must understand that not one of these be the true cause of the confusion in my uncle 's discourse ; and it be for that very reason I enlarge upon they so long , after the manner of great physiologist -- to show the world , what it do not arise from . what it do arise from , I have hint above , and a fertile source of obscurity it be , -- and ever will be , -- and that be the unsteady use of word , which have perplex the clearest and most exalted understanding . it be ten to one ( at 's ) whether you have ever read the literary histories of past ag ; -- if you have , what terrible battle , ' yclept logomachy , have they occasion and perpetuate with so much gall and ink - shed , -- that a good - natured man can not read the account of they without tear in he eye . Gentle critick ! when thou hast weigh all this , and consider within thyself how much of thy own knowledge , discourse , and conversation have be pester and disorder , at one time or other , by this , and this only :-- what a pudder and racket in Councils about ( ) ; and in the of the learn about power and about spirit ;--about essences , and about quintessence ;-- about substance , and about space .-- what confusion in greater theatre from word of little meaning , and as indeterminate a sense ! when thou considerest this , thou will not wonder at my uncle 's perplexity , -- thou will drop a tear of pity upon he scarp and he counterscarp ; t--his glacis and he cover way ; t--his ravelin and he half - moon : ' Tbe not by idea , -- by ; he life be put in jeopardy by word . . when my uncle get he map of to he mind , he begin immediately to apply himself , and with the utmost diligence , to the study of it ; for nothing be of more importance to he than he recovery , and he recovery depending , as you have read , upon the passion and affection of he mind , it behove he to take the nicest care to make himself so far master of he subject , as to be able to talk upon it without emotion . in a fortnight 's close and painful application , which , by the bye , do my uncle 's wound , upon he groin , no good , -- he be enable , by the help of some marginal document at the foot of the elephant , together with 's military architecture and pyroballogy , translate from the , to form he discourse with passable perspicuity ; and before he be two full month gone , -- he be right eloquent upon it , and could make not only the attack of the advanced counterscarp with great order ; -- but have , by that time , go much deeper into the art , than what he first motive make necessary , my uncle be able to cross the and ; make diversion as far as 's line , the abbey of Salsines , &c. and give he visitor as distinct a history of each of they attack , as of that of the gate of , where he have the honour to receive he wound . but desire of knowledge , like the thirst of rich , increase ever with the acquisition of it . the more my uncle po over he map , the more he take a liking to it !-- by the same process and electrical assimilation , as I tell you , through which I ween the soul of connoisseur themselves , by long friction and incumbition , have the happiness , at length , to get all be - virtu would -- be -pictured , -- be - butterflied , and be - fiddled . the more my uncle drank of this sweet fountain of science , the greater be the heat and impatience of he thirst , so that before the first year of he confinement have well gone round , there be scarce a fortify town in or ,
, of which , by one means or other , he have not procure a plan , read over as he get they , and carefully collat therewith the histories of they siege , they demolition , they improvement , and new work , all which he would read with that intense application and delight , that he would forget himself , he wound , he confinement , he dinner . in the second year my uncle purchase and , translate from the italian ;--likewise , , the , , , , the , the , . , with almost as many more book of military architecture , as be find to have of chivalry , when the curate and barber invade he library . towards the beginning of the third year , which be in , ninety - nine , my uncle find it necessary to understand a little of projectile :-- and have judge it best to draw he knowledge from the fountain - head , he begin with , who it seem be the first man who detect the imposition of a cannon - ball 's do all that mischief under the notion of a right line -- this prove to my uncle to be a impossible thing . -- be the search of . no sooner be my uncle satisfy which road the cannon - ball do not go , but he be insensibly lead on , and resolve in he mind to enquire and find out which road the ball do go : for which purpose he be oblige to set off afresh with old Maltus , and study he devoutly . -- he proceed next to and , wherein , by certain Geometrical rule , infallibly laid down , he find the precise path to be a -- or else and , -- and that the parameter , or latus rectum , of the conic section of the say path , be to the quantity and amplitude in a direct ratio , as the whole line to the sine of double the angle of incidence , form by the breech upon a horizontal plane ; -- and that the semiparameter ,-- stop ! my dear uncle -- stop !-- go not one foot farther into this thorny and bewilder track , -- intricate be the step ! intricate be the maze of this labyrinth ! intricate be the trouble which the pursuit of this bewitch phantom will bring upon thee .-- of my uncle ; -- fly -- fly , -- fly from it as from a serpent .-- be it fit -- goodnature man ! thou should 'st sit up , with the wound upon thy groin , whole night bake thy blood with hectic watchings ?-- ! 'twill exasperate thy symptom ,-- check thy perspiration -- evaporate thy spirit -- waste thy animal strength , dry up thy radical moisture , bring thee into a costive habit of body , -- impay thy health , -- and hasten all the infirmity of thy old age .-- of my uncle ! my uncle . . I would not give a groat for that man 's knowledge in pen-craft , who do not understand this ,-- that the best plain narrative in the world , tacke very close to the last spirit apostrophe to my uncle -- would have feel both cold and vapid upon the reader 's palate ;-- therefore I forthwill put a end to the chapter , though I be in the middle of my story . -- Writer of my stamp have one principle in common with painter . where a exact copying make we picture less striking , we choose the less evil ; deeme it even more pardonable to trespass against truth , than beauty . this be to be understand cum grano salis ; but be it as it will , -- as the parallel be make more for the sake of let the apostrophe cool , than any thing else ,--'tis not very material whether upon any other score the reader approve of it or not . in the latter end of the third year , my uncle perceive that the parameter and semi-parameter of the conic section anger he wound , he leave off the study of projectile in a kind of a huff , and betake himself to the practical part of fortification only ; the pleasure of which , like a spring hold back , return upon he with redoubled force . it be in this year that my uncle begin to break in upon the daily regularity of a clean shirt , -- to dismiss he barber unshaven , -- and to allow he surgeon scarce time sufficient to dress he wound , concern himself so little about it , as not to ask he once in seven time dressing , how it go on : when , lo !-- all of a sudden , for the change be quick as lightning , he begin to sigh heavily for he recovery , -- complain to my father , grow impatient with the surgeon :-- and one morning , as he hear he foot come up stair , he shut up he book , and thrust aside he instrument , in order to expostulate with he upon the protraction of the cure , which , he tell he , might surely have be accomplish at least by that time :-- he dwelt long upon the misery he have undergone , and the sorrow of he four year melancholy imprisonment ;-- adding , that have it not be for the kind look and fraternal chearing of the best of brothers , -- he have long since sunk under he misfortune .-- my father be by . my uncle 's eloquence bring tear into he eye ;--'tbe unexpect :-- my uncle , by nature be not eloquent ; -- it have the greater effect :-- the
the surgeon be confound ; -- not that there want grounds for such , or greater mark of impatience , -- but ' tbe unexpect too ; in the four year he have attend he , he have never see any thing like it in my uncle 's carriage ; he have never once drop one fretful or discontent word ; -- he have be all patience , -- all submission . -- we lose the right of complain sometimes by forbear it ; -- but we often treble the force :-- the surgeon be astonished ; but much more so , when he hear my uncle go on , and peremptorily insist upon he healing up the wound directly , -- or send for , the king 's serjeant - surgeon , to do it for he . the desire of life and health be implant in man 's nature ; -- the love of liberty and enlargement be a sister - passion to it : these my uncle have in common with he species -- and either of they have be sufficient to account for he earnest desire to get well and out of door ; -- but I have tell you before , that nothing wrotch with we family after the common way ; -- and from the time and manner in which this eager desire shew itself in the present case , the penetrating reader will suspect there be some other cause or crotchet for it in my uncle 's head :-- there be so , and ' ti the subject of the next chapter to set forth what that cause and crotchet be . I own , when that be do , ot will be time to return back to the parlour fire - side , where we leave my uncle in the middle of he sentence . . when a man give himself up to the government of a rule passion , -- or , in other word , when he hobby - horse grow headstrong , -- farewell cool reason and fair discretion ! my uncle 's wound be near well , and as soon as the surgeon recovere he surprize , and could get leave to say as much -- he tell he , ' tbe just begin to incarnate ; and that if no fresh exfoliation happen , which there be no sign of , -- it would be dry up in five or six week . the sound of as many Olympiads , twelve hour before , would have convey a idea of shorter duration to my uncle 's mind .-- the succession of he idea be now rapid , -- he broil with impatience to put he design in execution ; -- and so , without consult farther with any soul live , -- which , by the bye , I think be right , when you be predetermine to take no one soul 's advice , -- he privately order , he man , to pack up a bundle of lint and dressing , and hire a chariot - and - four to be at the door exactly by twelve o'clock that day , when he know my father would be upon ' .-- so leave a bank - note upon the table for the surgeon 's care of he , and a letter of tender thanks for he brother 's -- he pack up he map , he book of fortification , he instrument , & c. and by the help of a crutch on one side , and on the other , -- my uncle embark for - . the reason , or rather the rise of this sudden demigration be as follow : the table in my uncle 's room , and at which , the night before this change happen , he be sit with he map , & c. about he -- be somewhat of the smallest , for that infinity of great and small instrument of knowledge which usually lay crowd upon it -- he have the accident , in reach over for he tobacco - box , to throw down he compass , and in stooping to take the compass up , with he sleeve he throw down he case of instrument and snuffer ; -- and as the dice take a run against he , in he endeavouring to catch the snuffer in falling , -- he thrust off the table , and o'top of he . ' Twas to no purpose for a man , lame as my uncle be , to think of redresse these evils by himself , -- he ring he bell for he man ;-- , quoth my uncle , prithee see what confusion I have here be make -- I must have some better contrivance , .-- can 'st not thou take my rule , and measure the length and breadth of this table , and then go and bespeak I one as big again ? -- yes , a ' please you , reply , make a bow ; but I hope you Honou will be soon well enough to get down to you country - seat , where , -- as you Honou take so much pleasure in fortification , we could manage this matter to a t . I must here inform you , that this servant of my uncle 's , who go by the name of , have be a corporal in my uncle 's own company , -- he real name be , -- but have get the nick - name of , in the regiment , my uncle , unless when he happen to be very angry with he , would never call he by any other name . the poor fellow have be disable for the service , by a wound on he left knee by a musket - bullet , at the battle of , which
which be two year before the affair of ;-- and as the fellow be well - belove in the regiment , and a handy fellow into the bargain , my uncle take he for he servant ; and of a excellent use be he , attend my uncle in the camp and in he quarter as a valet , groom , barber , cook , sempster , and nurse ; and indeed , from first to last , wait upon he and serve he with great fidelity and affection . my uncle love the man in return , and what attach he more to he still , be the similitude of they knowledge .-- for , ( for so , for the future , I shall call he ) by four year occasional attention to he master 's discourse upon fortified town , and the advantage of prying and pee continually into he master 's plan , & c. exclusive and besides what he gain - Horsically , as a body - servant , Horsical per se ; -- have become no mean proficient in the science ; and be think , by the cook and chamber-maid , to know as much of the nature of strong - hold as my uncle himself . I have but one more stroke to give to finish 's character , -- and it be the only dark line in it .-- the fellow love to advise , -- or rather to hear himself talk ; he carriage , however , be so perfectly respectful , ' twas easy to keep he silent when you have he so ; but set he tongue a - go , -- you have no hold of he -- he be voluble ; -- the eternal interlarding of you Honour , with the respectfulness of 's manner , interceding so strong in behalf of he elocution , -- that though you might have be incommod , -- you could not well be angry . my uncle be seldom either the one or the other with he , -- or , at least , this fault , in , break no square with they . my uncle , as I say , love the man ; -- and beside , as he ever look upon a faithful servant , -- but as a humble friend , -- he could not bear to stop he mouth .-- such be . if I durst presume , continue , to give you my advice , and speak my opinion in this matter .-- Thou art welcome , , quoth my uncle -- speak , -- speak what thou thinkest upon the subject , man , without fear .-- why then , reply , ( not hang he ear and scratch he head like a country - lout , but ) strok he hair back from he forehead , and stand erect as before he division ,-- I think , quoth , advance he left , which be he lame leg , a little forward , -- and point with he right hand open towards a map of , which be pin against the hanging , -- I think , quoth , with humble submission to you Honour 's better judgment , -- that these ravelin , bastion , curtin , and hornwork , make but a poor , contemptible , fiddle - faddle piece of work of it here upon paper , compare to what you and I could make of it be we in the country by ourselves , and have but a rood , or a rood and a half of ground to do what we pleas with : as summer be come on , continue , you Honou might sit out of door , and give I the nography --( call it ichnography , quoth my uncle , ) -- of the town or citadel , you Honou be pleased to sit down before , -- and I will be shoot by you Honour upon the glacis of it , if I do not fortify it to you Honour 's mind .-- I dare say thou would 'st , , quoth my uncle .-- for if you , continue the , could but mark I the polygon , with its exact line and angles -- that I could do very well , quoth my uncle .-- I would begin with the fosse , and if you Honou could tell I the proper depth and breadth -- I can to a hair 's breadth , , reply my uncle .-- I would throw out the earth upon this hand towards the town for the scarp , -- and on that hand towards the campaign for the counterscarp .-- very right , , quoth my uncle when I have slop they to you mind , -- an' please you Honour , I would face the glacis , as the finest fortification be do in Flanders , with sod , -- and as you know they should be , -- and I would make the wall and parapet with sod too .-- the best engineers call they gazon , , say my uncle .-- whether they be gazon or sod , be not much matter , reply ; you Honou know they be ten time beyond a facing either of brick or stone .-- I know they be , Trim in some respects , -- quoth my uncle , nodd he head ; -- for a cannon - ball enter into the gazon right onwards , without bring any rubbish down with it , which might fill the fosse , ( as be the case at 's gate ) and facilitate the passage over it . you Honou understand these matters , reply , better than any officer in he Majesty 's service ; -- but would you Honour please to let the bespeaking of the table alone , and let we but
but go into the country , I would work under you Honour 's direction like a horse , and make fortification for you something like a tansy , with all they battery , saps , ditch , and palisadoe , that it should be worth all the world 's ride twenty mile to go and see it . my uncle blush as red as scarlet as go on ; -- but it be not a blush of guilt , -- of modesty , -- or of anger , -- it be a blush of joy ; -- he be fire with 's project and description .-- ! say my uncle , thou hast say enough . -- we might begin the campaign , continue , on the very day that he and the take the field , and demolish they town by town as fast as -- , quoth my uncle , say no more . you Honour , continue , might sit in you arm -chair ( point to it ) this fine weather , give I you order , and I would -- say no more , , quoth my uncle -- , you Honou would get not only pleasure and good pastime -- but good air , and good exercise , and good health , -- and you Honour 's wound would be well in a month . thou hast say enough , , -- quoth my uncle ( put he hand into he breech - pocket ) -- I like thy project mightily . -- and if you Honour pleasis , I will this moment go and buy a pioneer 's spade to take down with we , and I will bespeak a shovel and a pick - axe , and a couple of -- no more , , quoth my uncle , leap up upon one leg , quite overcome with rapture , -- and thrust a guinea into 's hand ,-- , say my uncle , say no more ; -- but go down , , this moment , my lad , and bring up my supper this instant . Tre run down and bring up he master 's supper , -- to no purpose :-- 's plan of operation run so in my uncle 's head , he could not taste it .-- , quoth my uncle , get I to be .--'Twas all one .--Corporal 's description have fire he imagination , -- my uncle could not shut he eye .-- the more he consider it , the more bewitch the scene appear to he ; -- so that , two full hour before day - light , he have come to a final determination and have concert the whole plan of he and 's decampment . my uncle have a little neat country - house of he own , in the village where my father 's estate lay at , which have be leave he by a old uncle , with a small estate of about one hundred pound a - year . behind this house , and contiguous to it , be a kitchen - garden of about half a acre , and at the bottom of the garden , and cut off from it by a tall yew hedge , be a bowling - green , contain just about as much ground as wish for ; -- so that as Tre utter the word , 'A rood and a half of ground to do what they would with , '-- this identical bowling - green instantly present itself , and become curiously paint all at once , upon the retina of my uncle 's fancy ; -- which be the physical cause of make he change colour , or at least of heighten he blush , to that immoderate degree I speak of . never do lover post down to a beloved mistress with more heat and expectation , than my uncle do , to enjoy this self - same thing in private ;-- I say in private ; -- for it be shelter from the house , as I tell you , by a tall yew hedge , and be cover on the other three side , from mortal sight , by rough holly and thick - set flowering shrubs :-- so that the idea of not be see , do not a little contribute to the idea of pleasure pre-conceive in my uncle 's mind .-- thought ! however thick it be plan about , -- or private soever it might seem , -- to think , dear uncle , of enjoy a thing which take up a whole rood and a half of ground ,- - and not have it know ! how my uncle and manage this matter , -- with the history of they campaigns , which be no way bar of event ,-- may make no uninteresting under - plot in the epitasis and work - up of this drama .-- at present the scene must drop , -- and change for the parlour fire - side . . -- what can they be do ? brother , say my father .-- I think , reply my uncle , -- take , as I tell you , he pipe from he mouth , and strike the ash out of it as he begin he sentence ;-- I think , reply he , -- it would not be amiss , brother , if we ring the bell . pray , what be all that racket over we head , Obadiah ?-- quoth my father ; --my brother and I can scarce hear ourselves speak . , answer , make a bow towards he left shoulder , -- my be take very badly . -- and where be run down the garden there , as if they be go to ravish she ?--Sir , she be run the shortest cut into the town , reply ,
, to fetch the old midwife .-- then saddle a horse , quoth my father , and do you go directly for , the man - midwife , with all we service , -- and let he know you mistress be fall into labour -- and that I desire he will return with you with all speed . it be very strange , say my father , address himself to my uncle , as shut the door , -- as there be so exper a operator as so near , -- that my wife should persist to the very last in this obstinate humour of hers , in trust the life of my child , who have have one misfortune already , to the ignorance of a old woman ; -- and not only the life of my child , brother , -- but she own life , and with it the life of all the child I might , peradventure , have beget out of she hereafter . Mayhap , brother , reply my uncle , my sister do it to save the expence :-- a pudding 's end ,-- reply my father , -- the Doctor must be pay the same for inaction as action , -- if not better , -- to keep he in temper . -- then it can be out of nothing in the whole world , quoth my uncle , in the simplicity of he heart , -- but .-- my sister , I dare say , add he , do not care to let a man come so near she . . .. I will not say whether my uncle have complete the sentence or not ;--' tis for he advantage to suppose he have , -- as , I think , he could have add no one which would have improve it . if , on the contrary , my uncle have not fully arrive at the period 's end -- then the world stand indebt to the sudden snapping of my father 's tobacco - pipe for one of the neatest example of that ornamental figure in oratory , which stile the .-- Just Heaven ! how do the piu and the meno of the italian artist ; -- the insensible more or less , determine the precise line of beauty in the sentence , as well as in the statue ! how do the slight touch of the chisel , the pencil , the pen , the fiddle - stick , et caetera , -- give the true swell , which give the true pleasure !-- of my countryman :-- be nice ; be cautious of you language ; and never , o ! never let it be forgote upon what small particle you eloquence and you fame depend . --'My sister , mayhap , ' quoth my uncle , ' do not choose to let a man come so near she . . .. ' make this dash ,--'ti a Aposiopesis ,-- take the dash away , and write backside ,--'tis .-- out , and put cover have way in , ' ttis a Metaphor ; -- and , I dare say , as fortification run so much in my uncle 's head , that if he have be leave to have add one word to the sentence , -- that word be it . but whether that be the case or not the case ; -- or whether the snapping of my father 's tobacco - pipe , so critically , happen through accident or anger , will be see in due time . . ' my father be a good natural philosopher , -- yet he be something of a moral philosopher too ; for which reason , when he tobacco - pipe snapp would short in the middle , -- he have nothing to do , as such , but to have take hold of the two piece , and throw they gently upon the back of the fire .-- he do no such thing ; -- he throw they with all the violence in the world ; -- and , to give the action still more emphasis , -- he start upon both he leg to do it . this look something like heat ; -- and the manner of he reply to what my uncle be say , prove it be so . --' not choose , ' quoth my father , ( repeat my uncle 's word ) 'to let a man come so near she !'-- by , brother ! you would try the patience of ;-- and I think I have the plague of one already without it .-- why ?--Where ?-- wherein ?--Wherefore ?-- upon what account ? reply my uncle : in the utmost astonishment .-- to think , say my father , of a man live to you age , brother , and know so little about woman !-- I know nothing at all about they , -- reply my uncle : and I think , continue he , that the shock I receive the year after the demolition of , in my affair with widow ;-- which shock you know I should not have receive , but from my total ignorance of the sex , -- have give I just cause to say , that I neither know nor do pretend to know any thing about th'ey or they concern either .-- , brother , reply my father , you might , at least , know so much as the right end of a woman from the wrong . it be say in 's , ' that when a man doth think of any thing which be past , -- he looketh down upon the ground ; -- but that when he thinketh of something that be to come , he looketh up towards the heaven . ' my uncle , I suppose , think of neither
neither , for he look would horizontally .-- right end ! quoth my uncle , mutter the two word low to himself , and fix he two eye insensibly as he mutter they , upon a small crevice , form by a bad joint in the chimney - piece -- right end of a woman !-- I declare , quoth my uncle , I know no more which it be than the man in the moon ; -- and if I be to think , continue my uncle ( keep he eye still fix upon the bad joint ) this month together , I be sure I should not be able to find it out . then , brother , reply my father , I will tell you . every thing in this world , continue my father ( fill a fresh pipe ) -- every thing in this world , my dear brother , have two handle .-- not always , quoth my uncle .-- at least , reply my father , every one have two hand , -- which come to the same thing .-- now , if a man be to sit down coolly , and consider within himself the make , the shape , the construction , come - at - ability , and convenience of all the part which constitute the whole of that animal , call , and compare they analogically -- I never understand rightly the meaning of that word , -- quoth my uncle .-- Analogy , reply my father , be the certain relation and agreement which different -- here a devil of a rap at the door snap my father 's definition ( like he tobacco - pipe ) in two , -- and , at the same time , crush the head of as notable and curiious a dissertation as ever be engender in the womb of speculation ; -- it be some month before my father could get a opportunity to be safely deliver of it :-- and , at this hour , it be a thing full as problematical as the subject of the dissertation itself , --( consider the confusion and distress of we domestick misadventure , which be now come thick one upon the back of another ) whether I shall be able to find a place for it in the third volume or not . . it be about a hour and a half 's tolerable good reading since my uncle Toby ring the bell , when be order to saddle a horse , and go for , the man-midwife ; -- so that no one can say , with reason , that I have not allow time enough , poetically speak , and consider the emergency too , both to go and come ;-- though , morally and truly speak , the man perhaps have scarce have time to get on he boot . if the hypercritick will go upon this ; and be resolve after all to take a pendulum , and measure the true distance betwixt the ringing of the bell , and the rap at the door ; -- and , after find it to be no more than two minute , thirteen seconds , and three - fifth , -- should take upon he to insult over I for such a breach in the unity , or rather probability of time ;-- I would remind he , that the idea of duration , and of its simple modes , be get merely from the train and succession of we idea -- and be the true scholastic pendulum , -- and by which , as a scholar , I will be try in this matter ,-- abjur and detest the jurisdiction of all other pendulum whatever . I would therefore desire he to consider that it be but poor eight mile from - to , the man - midwife 's house :-- and that whilst have be go those say mile and back , I have bring my uncle from , quite across all Flander , into :-- that I have have he ill upon my hand near four year ; -- and have since travel he and in a chariot - and - four , a journey of near two hundred mile down into .-- all which put together , must have prepare the reader 's imagination for the entrance of upon the stage , -- as much , at least ( I hope ) as a dance , a song , or a concerto between the act . if my hypercritick be intractable , alledge , that two minute and thirteen seconds be no more than two minute and thirteen seconds , -- when I have say all I can about they ; and that this plea , though it might save I dramatically , will damn I biographically , render my book from this very moment , a profess romance , which , before , be a book apocryphal :--If I be thus press -- I then put a end to the whole objection and controversy about it all at once , -- by acquaint he , that have not get above threescore yard from the stable - yard , before he meet with ; -- and indeed he give a dirty proof that he have meet with he , and be within a ace of give a tragical one too . imagine to yourself ; -- but this have better begin a new chapter . . imagine to yourself a little squat , uncourtly figure of a , of about four foot and a half perpendicular height , with a breadth of back , and a sesquipedality of belly , which might have do honou to a serjeant in the horse - guard . such be the out - line of 's figure , which -- if you have read 's analysis of beauty , and if
if you have not , I wish you would ; -- you must know , may as certainly be caricature , and convey to the mind by three stroke as three hundred . imagine such a one , -- for such , I say , be the outline of 's figure , come slowly along , foot by foot , waddl thro ' the dirt upon the vertebra of a little diminutive pony , of a pretty colour -- but of strength ,-- alack !--scarce able to have make a amble of it , under such a fardel , have the roads be in a ambling condition .-- they be not .-- imagine to yourself , mount upon a strong monster of a coach - horse , prick into a full gallop , and make all practicable speed the adverse way . , , let I interest you a moment in this description . have beheld a mile off , post in a narrow lane directly towards he , at that monstrous rate ,-- splash and plunge like a thro ' thick and thing , as he approach , would not such a phaenomenon , with such a vortex of mud and water move along with it , round its axis , -- have be a subject of juster apprehension to in he situation , than the worst of 's comet ?-- to say nothing of the Nucleus ; that be , of and the coach - horse .-- in my idea , the vortex alone of th'ey be enough to have involv and carry , if not the doctor , at least the doctor 's pony , quite away with it . what then do you think must the terror and hydrophobia of have be , when you read ( which you be just go to do ) that he be advancing thus warily along towards - , and have approach to within sixty yard of it , and within five yard of a sudden turn , make by a acute angle of the garden - wall , -- and in the dirtiest part of a dirty lane , -- when and he coach - horse turn the corner , rapid , furious , -- pop ,-- full upon he !-- nothing , I think , in nature , can be suppose more terrible than such a rencounter , -- so imprompt ! so ill prepare to stand the shock of it as be . what could do ?--o cross himself + -- !-- but the doctor , , be a Papist .-- no matter ; he have better have keep hold of the pummel .-- he have so ;--nay , as it happen , he have better have do nothing at all ; for in crossing himself he let go he whip , -- and in attempting to save he whip betwixt he knee and he saddle 's skirt , as it slipp , he lose he stirrup , -- in losing which he lose he seat ; -- and in the multitude of all these loss ( which , by the bye , shew what little advantage there be in crossing ) the unfortunate doctor lose he presence of mind . so that without wait for 's onset , he leave he pony to its destiny , tumbl off it diagonally , something in the stile and manner of a pack of wool , and without any other consequence from the fall , save that of be leave ( as it would have be ) with the broadest part of he sink about twelve inch deep in the mire . Obadiah pull would off he cap twice to ; -- once as he be fall , -- and then again when he see he seat .-- - time complaisance ; -- have not the fellow better have stop he horse , and get off and help would he ? --Sir , he do all that he situation would allow ; -- but the Momentum of the coach - horse be so great , that could not do it all at once ; he ride in a circle three time round , before he could fully accomplish it any how ; -- and at the last , when he do stop he beast , ' tbe do with such a explosion of mud , that have better have be a off . in short , never be a so belute , and so transubstantiate , since that affair come into fashion . . when enter the back parlour , where my father and my uncle be discourse upon the nature of woman , -- it be hard to determine whether 's figure , or 's presence , occasion more surprize to they ; for as the accident happen so near the house , as not to make it worth while for to remount he ,-- Obadiah have lead he in as he be , unwiped , unappointed , unannealed , with all he stain and blotch on he .- - he stand like 's ghost , motionless and speechless , for a full minute and a half at the parlour - door ( Obadiah still hold he hand ) with all the majesty of mud . he hinder part , upon which he have receive he fall , totally besmeared , -- and in every other part of he , blotch over in such a manner with 's explosion , that you would have swear ( without mental reservation ) that every grain of it have take effect . here be a fair opportunity for my uncle to have triumph over my father in he turn ; -- for no mortal , who have beheld in that pickle , could have dissent from so much , at least , of my uncle 's opinion , ' that mayhap he sister might not care to let such a come so
so near she . . .. ' but it be the ad hominem ; and if my uncle be not very expert at it , you may think , he might not care to use it .-- no ; the reason be ,--'twas not he nature to insult . 's presence at that time , be no less problematical than the mode of it ; though ' it be certain , one moment 's reflexion in my father might have solve it ; for he have apprize but the week before , that my mother be at she full reckoning ; and as the doctor have hear nothing since , ' twa natural and very political too in he , to have take a ride to - , as he do , merely to see how matter go on . but my father 's mind take unfortunately a wrong turn in the investigation ; run , like the hypercritick 's , altogether upon the ringing of the bell and the rap upon the door ,-- measure they distance , and keep he mind so intent upon the operation , as to have power to think of nothing else , -- common - place infirmity of the greatest mathematician ! work with might and main at the demonstration , and so waste all they strength upon it , that they have none leave in they to draw the corollary , to do good with . the ringing of the bell , and the rap upon the door , struck likewise strong upon the sensorium of my uncle , -- but it excite a very different train of thought ; -- the two irreconcileable pulsation instantly bring , the great engineer , along with they , into my uncle 's mind . what business have in this affair , -- be the greatest problem of all :-- it shall be solve , -- but not in the next chapter . . , when properly manage ( as you may be sure I think mine be ) be but a different name for conversation . as no one , who know what he be about in good company , would venture to talk all ; -- so no author , who understand the just boundary of decorum and good - breeding , would presume to think all : the truest respect which you can pay to the reader 's understanding , be to halve this matter amicably , and leave he something to imagine , in he turn , as well as yourself . for my own part , I be eternally pay he compliment of this kind , and do all that lie in my power to keep he imagination as busy as my own . ' tTis he turn now ;-- I have give a ample description of 's sad overthrow , and of he sad appearance in the back - parlour ; -- he imagination must now go on with it for a while . let the reader imagine then , that have tell he tale -- and in what word , and with what aggravation , he fancy choose ;-- let he suppose , that have tell he tale also , and with such rueful look of affect concern , as he think best will contrast the two figure as they stand by each other .-- let he imagine , that my father have step up stair to see my mother . -- and , to conclude this work of imagination , -- let he imagine the doctor wash , -- rub down , and condo , -- felicitate , -- get into a pair of 's pumps , step forwards towards the door , upon the very point of entering upon action . Truce !--truce , good !--stay thy obstetrick hand ; -- return it safe into thy bosom to keep it warm ;--litle dost thou know what obstacle , -- little dost thou think what hide cause , retard its operation !-- Hast thou , , -- hast thou be entrust with the secret article of the solemn treaty which have bring thee into this place ?-- thou aware that at this instant , a daughter of be put obstetrically over thy head ? Alas !--'tis too true .-- besides , great son of ! what canst thou do ?- - thou hast come forth unarmhave ; -- thou hast leave thy tire - tete , -- thy new - invent forcep , -- thy crotchet , -- thy squirt , and all thy instrument of salvation and deliverance , behind thee , -- by ! at this moment they be hang up in a green bay bag , betwixt thy two pistol , at the bed 's head !--R ;--call ;--send Obadiah back upon the coach - horse to bring they with all speed . -- make great haste , , quoth my father , and I will give thee a crown ! and quoth my uncle , I will give he another . . you sudden and unexpected arrival , quoth my uncle , address himself to , ( all three of they sit down to the fire together , as my uncle begin to speak ) --instantly bring the great into my head , who , you must know , be a favourite author with I .-- then , add my father , make use of the argument ,-- I will lay twenty guinea to a single crown - piece ( which will serve to give away to when he get back ) that this same Stevinus be some engineer or other -- or have write something or other , either directly or indirectly , upon the science of fortification . he have so , -- reply my uncle .-- I know it , say my father , though , for the soul of I , I can not see what kind of connection there
there can be betwixt 's sudden come , and a discourse upon fortification ; --yet I fear would it .-- talk of what we will , brother , -- or let the occasion be never so foreign or unfit for the subject , -- you be sure to bring it in . I would not , brother , continue my father , -- I declare I would not have my head so full of curtin and horn -work .-- that I dare say you would not , quoth , interrupt he , and laugh most immoderately at he pun . the critic could not detest and abhor a pun , or the insinuation of a pun , more cordially than my father ; -- he would grow testy upon it at any time ; -- but to be break in upon by one , in a serious discourse , be as bad , he would say , as a fillip upon the nose ; -- he see no difference . , quoth my uncle , address himself to , -- the curtin my brother Shandy mention here , have nothing to do with beadstead ; -- tho ' , I know say , ' that be -curtain , in all probability , have take they name from they ;' -- nor have the horn - work he speak of , any thing in the world to do with the horn - work of cuckoldom : but the Curtin , , be the word we use in fortification , for that part of the wall or rampart which lie between the two bastion and join they -- seldom offer to carry on they attack directly against the curtin , for this reason , because they be so well flank . ( 'Ti the case of other curtain , quoth , laugh . ) however , continue my uncle , to make they sure , we generally choose to place ravelin before they , take care only to extend they beyond the fosse or ditch :-- the common man , who know very little of fortification , confound the ravelin and the half - moon together , -- tho ' they be very different thing ; -- not in they figure or construction , for we make they exactly alike , in all point ; for they always consist of two face , make a salient angle , with the gorge , not straight , but in form of a crescent ;-- where then lie the difference ? ( quoth my father , a little testily . ) -- in they situation , answer my uncle :-- for when a ravelin , brother , stand before the curtin , it be a ravelin ; and when a ravelin stand before a bastion , then the ravelin be not a ravelin ; --it be a half - moon ;--a half - moon likewise be a half - moon , and no more , so long as it stand before its bastion ; -- but be it to change place , and get before the curtin ,--'twould be no longer a half - moon ; a half - moon , in that case , be not a half - moon ;--'tis no more than a ravelin .-- I think , quoth my father , that the noble science of defence have its weak side -- as well as other . as for the horn - work ( high ! ho ! sigh would my father ) which , continue my uncle , my brother be speak of , they be a very considerable part of a outwork ; -- they be call by the french engineers , a corne , and we generally make they to cover such place as we suspect to be weaker than the rest ;--'tis form by two epaulment or demi -bastion -- they be very pretty , -- and if you will take a walk , I will engage to show you one well worth you trouble .-- I own , continue my uncle , when we cry they , -- they be much stronger , but then they be very expensive , and take up a great deal of ground , so that , in my opinion , they be most of use to cover or defend the head of a camp ; otherwise the double tenaille -- by the mother who bear we !-- brother , quoth my father , not able to hold out any longer , -- you would provoke a saint ; --here have you get we , I know not how , not only souse into the middle of the old subject again :-- but so full be you head of these confound work , that though my wife be this moment in the pain of labour , and you hear she cry out , yet nothing will serve you but to carry off the man-midwife .-- Accoucheur , -- if you please , quoth .-- with all my heart , reply my father , I do not care what they call you , -- but I wish the whole science of fortification , with all its inventor , at the devil ; -- it have be the death of thousand , -- and it will be mine in the end .-- I would not , I would not , brother , have my brain so full of sap , mine , blind , gabion , pallisadoe , ravelin , half - moons , and such trumpery , to be proprietor of , and of all the town in Flanders with it . my uncle be a man patient of injuries ;-- not from want of courage ,-- I have tell you in a former chapter , ' that he be a man of courage :'-- and will add here , that where just occasion present , or call it forth , -- I
I know no man under whose arm I would have sooner take shelter ; -- nor do this arise from any insensibility or obtuseness of he intellectual part ;- - for he feel this insult of my father 's as feelingly as a man could do ;-- but he be of a peaceful , placid nature , -- no jarring element in it , -- all be mix up so kindly within he ; my uncle have scarce a heart to retaliate upon a fly . -- -- say he , one day at dinner , to a over -grown one which have buzze about he nose , and torment he cruelly all dinner - time , -- and which after infinite attempt , he have catch at last , as it fly by he ;-- I will not hurt thee , say my uncle , rise from he chair , and go across the room , with the fly in he hand ,-- I will not hurt a hair of thy head :-- , say he , lift up the sash , and open he hand as he speak , to let it escape ;-- go , poor devil , get thee gone , why should I hurt thee ?-- this world surly be wide enough to hold both thee and I . I be but ten year old when this happen : but whether it be , that the action itself be more in unison to my nerve at that age of pity , which instantly set my whole frame into one vibration of most pleasurable sensation ; -- or how far the manner and expression of it might go towards it ; -- or in what degree , or by what secret magick , -- a tone of voice and harmony of movement , attune by mercy , might find a passage to my heart , I know not ;-- this I know , that the lesson of universal good - will then teach and imprint by my uncle , have never since be wear out of my mind : and tho ' I would not depreciate what the study of the humaniore , at the university , have do for I in that respect , or discredit the other help of a expensive education bestow upon I , both at home and abroad since ; -- yet I often think that I owe one half of my philanthropy to that one accidental impression . this be to serve for parent and governors instead of a whole volume upon the subject . I could not give the reader this stroke in my uncle 's picture , by the instrument with which I draw the other part of it , -- that take in no more than the mere - Horsical likeness :-- this be a part of he moral character . my father , in this patient endurance of wrong , which I mention , be very different , as the reader must long ago have not ; he have a much more acute and quick sensibility of nature , attend with a little soreness of temper ; tho ' this never transport he to any thing which look like malignancy :-- yet in the little rub and vexation of life , ' tbe apt to show itself in a drollish and witty kind of peevishness :-- he be , however , frank and generous in he nature ; -- at all time open to conviction ; and in the little ebullition of this subacid humour towards other , but particularly towards my uncle , whom he truly love :-- he would feel more pain , ten time tell ( except in the affair of my aunt , or where a hypothesis be concerned ) than what he ever give . the characters of the two brother , in this view of they , reflect light upon each other , and appear with great advantage in this affair which arise about . I need not tell the reader , if he keep a hobby - horse , -- that a man 's hobby - horse be as tender a part as he have about he ; and that these unprovoked stroke at my uncle 's could not be unfelt by he .-- no :-- as I say above , my uncle do feel they , and very sensibly too . , , what say he ?--How do he behave , !-- it be great : for as soon as my father have do insult he hobby - horse , -- he turn he head without the least emotion , from , to whom he be address he discourse , and look up into my father 's face , with a countenance spread over with so much good - nature ; -- so placid ;--so fraternal ; -- so inexpressibly tender towards he :-- it penetrat my father to he heart : he rise up hastily from he chair , and seize hold of both my uncle 's hand as he speak :-- , say he :-- I beg thy pardon ;--forgive , I pray thee , this rash humour which my mother give I .-- my dear , dear brother , answer my uncle , rise up by my father 's help , say no more about it ;-- you be heartily welcome , have it be ten time as much , brother . but ' tis ungenerous , reply my father , to hurt any man ;-- a brother worse ; -- but to hurt a brother of such gentle manners , -- so unprovoking , -- and so unresenting ;--'tis base :-- by , ' tis cowardly .-- you be heartily welcome , brother , quoth my uncle , -- have it be fifty time as much .-- , what have I to do , my dear , cry my father , either with you amusement
amusement or you pleasure , unless it be in my power ( which it be not ) to increase they measure ? -- , answer my uncle , look wistfully in he face , -- you be much mistaken in this point :-- for you do increase my pleasure very much , in begetting child for the Shandy family at you time of life .-- but , by that , , quoth , increase he own .-- not a jot , quoth my father . . my brother do it , quoth my uncle , out of principle .-- in a family way , I suppose , quoth .-- !--say my father ,--'tis not worth talk of . . at the end of the last chapter , my father and my uncle be leave both stand , like and , at the close of the scene , make up they account . as my father speak the three last word , -- he sit down ; -- my uncle exactly follow he example , only , that before he take he chair , he ring the bell , to order , who be in waiting , to step home for :--my uncle 's house be no farther off than the opposite side of the way . some man would have drop the subject of ; -- but my uncle have no resentment in he heart , and he go on with the subject , to show my father that he have none . you sudden appearance , , quoth my uncle , resume the discourse , instantly bring into my head . ( my father , you may be sure , do not offer to lay any more wager upon 's head .) -- because , continue my uncle , the celebrate sailing chariot , which belong to , and be of such wonderful contrivance and velocity , as to carry half a dozen people thirty german mile , in I do not know how few minute , -- be invent by , that great mathematician and engineer . you might have spare you servant the trouble , quoth ( as the fellow be lame ) of go for 's account of it , because in my return from thro ' the , I walk as far as Schevling , which be two long mile , on purpose to take a view of it . that be nothing , reply my uncle , to what the learn do , who walk a matter of five hundred mile , reckon from to , and from Schevling to back again , in order to see it , and nothing else . some man can not bear to be out - gone . the more fool , reply . but , ' tbe out of no contempt of at all ; -- but that 's indefatigable labour in trudging so far on foot , out of love for the sciences , reduce the exploit of , in that affair , to nothing :-- the more fool , say he again .-- why so ?--reply my father , take he brother 's part , not only to make reparation as fast as he could for the insult he have give he , which sit still upon my father 's mind ; -- but partly , that my father begin really to interest himself in the discourse .-- why so ?--said he . why be , or any man else , to be abuse for a appetite for that , or any other morsel of sound knowledge : for notwithstanding I know nothing of the chariot in question , continue he , the inventor of it must have have a very mechanical head ; and tho' I can not guess upon what principle of philosophy he have atchieve it ; -- yet certainly he machine have be construct upon solid one , be they what they will , or it could not have answer at the rate my brother mention . it answer , reply my uncle , as well , if not better ; for , as elegantly express it , speak of the velocity of its motion , citus erat , qube erat ventus ; which , unless I have forget my , be , that it be as swift as the wind itself . but pray , , quoth my father , interrupt my uncle ( tho ' not without begge pardon for it at the same time ) upon what principle be this self - same chariot set a - go ?-- upon very pretty principle to be sure , reply :-- and I have often wonder , continue he , evad the question , why none of we gentry , who live upon large plain like this of ours , --( especially they whose wife be not past child - bear ) attempt nothing of this kind ; for it would not only be infinitely expeditious upon sudden call , to which the sex be subject , -- if the wind only serve , -- but would be excellent good husbandry to make use of the wind , which cost nothing , and which eat nothing , rather than horse , which ( the devil take th'ey ) both cost and eat a great deal . for that very reason , reply my father , ' because they cost nothing , and because they eat nothing , '-- the scheme be bad ; -- it be the consumption of we product , as well as the manufacture of they , which give bread to the hungry , circulate trade , -- bring in money , and support the value of we lands ; -- and tho ' , I own , if I be a , I would generously recompense the scientifick head which bring forth such contrivance ; -- yet I would as peremptorily suppress the use of they .
. my father here have get into he element , -- and be go on as prosperously with he dissertation upon trade , as my uncle have before , upon he of fortification ; --but to the loss of much sound knowledge , the destiny in the morning have decree that no dissertation of any kind should be spun by my father that day , -- for as he open he mouth to begin the next sentence , . in popped with :-- but ' tbe too late , -- all the discourse have be exhaust without he , and be run into a new channel . -- you may take the book home again , , say my uncle , nodd to he . but prithee , , quoth my father , droll , -- look first into it , and see if thou canst spy atch of a sailing chariot in it . , by be in the service , have learn to obey , -- and not to remonstrate , -- so take the book to a side - table , and run over the leave ; a ' please you , say , I can see no such thing ; -- however , continue the , droll a little in he turn , I will make sure work of it , a ' please you Honour ; -- so take hold of the two cover of the book , one in each hand , and let the leave fall down as he bend the cover back , he give the book a good sound shake . there be something fall out , however , say , an' please you Honour ; -- but it be not a chariot , or any thing like one :-- Prithee , , say my father , smile , what be it then ?-- I think , answer , stoop to take it up ,--'tis more like a sermon , -- for it begin with a text of scripture , and the chapter and verse ; -- and then go on , not as a chariot , but like a sermon directly . the company smile . I can not conceive how it be possible , quoth my uncle , for such a thing as a sermon to have get into my . I think ' tis a sermon , reply Trim :-- but if it please you Honour , as it be a fair hand , I will read you a page ;-- for , you must know , love to hear himself read almost as well as talk . I have ever a strong propensity , say my father , to look into thing which cross my way , by such strange fatality as these ; -- and as we have nothing better to do , at least till get back , I shall be oblige to you , brother , if have no objection to it , to order the to give we a page or two of it , -- if he be as able to do it , as he seem willing . a ' please you honour , quoth , I officiat two whole campaigns , in Flander , as clerk to the chaplain of the regiment .-- he can read it , quoth my uncle , as well as I can .-- Trim , I assure you , be the best scholar in my company , and should have have the next halberd , but for the poor fellow 's misfortune . lay he hand upon he heart , and make a humble bow to he master ; then lay down he hat upon the floor , and take up the sermon in he left hand , in order to have he right at liberty , -- he advance , nothing doubt , into the middle of the room , where he could best see , and be best see by he audience . . -- if you have any objection , -- say my father , address himself to . not in the least , reply ; -- for it do not appear on which side of the question it be write , -- it may be a composition of a divine of we church , as well as yours , -- so that we run equal risque .--'Tis write upon neither side , quoth , for ' tis only upon , an' please you Honour . 's reason put he audience into good humour , -- all but , who turn he head about towards , look a little angry . , , -- and read distinctly , quoth my father .-- I will , a ' please you , reply the , make a bow , and bespeak attention with a slight movement of he right hand . . -- but before the , I must first give you a description of he attitude ;-- otherwise he will naturally stand represent , by you imagination , in a uneasy posture ,-- stiff ,--perpendicular ,--divid the weight of he body equally upon both leg ; -- he eye fix , as if on duty ; -- he look determined , -- clench the sermon in he left hand , like he firelock .-- in a word , you would be apt to paint , as if he be stand in he platoon ready for action ,-- he attitude be as unlike all this as you can conceive . he stand before they with he body sway , and bend forwards just so far , as to make a angle of 85 degree and a half upon the plain of the horizon ; -- which sound orator , to whom I address this , know very well to be the true persuasive angle of incidence ; -- in any other angle you may talk and preach ;--'tis certain ; -- and it be do
do every day ; -- but with what effect ,-- I leave the world to judge ! the necessity of this precise angle of 85 degree and a half to a mathematical exactness , -- do it not show we , by the way , how the art and sciences mutually befriend each other ? how the duce , who know not so much as a acute angle from a obtuse one , come to hit it so exactly ; -- or whether it be chance or nature , or good sense or imitation , & c. shall be comment upon in that part of the cyclopaedia of art and sciences , where the instrumental part of the eloquence of the senate , the pulpit , and the bar , the coffee - house , the bed - chamber , and fire - side , fall under consideration . he stood , -- for I repeat it , to take the picture of he in at one view , with he body sway , and somewhat bent forward , -- he right leg from under he , sustain seven - eighth of he whole weight , -- the foot of he left leg , the defect of which be no disadvantage to he attitude , advance a little , -- not laterally , nor forwards , but in a line betwixt they ; -- he knee bent , but that not violently , -- but so as to fall within the limit of the line of beauty ; -- and I add , of the line of science too ;--for consider , it have one eighth part of he body to bear up ; -- so that in this case the position of the leg be determined , -- because the foot could be no farther advanced , or the knee more bent , than what would allow he , mechanically to receive a eighth part of he whole weight under it , and to carry it too . > this I recommend to painter ; -- need I add , -- to orator !-- I think not ; for unless they practise it , -- they must fall upon they nos . so much for 's body and leg .-- he hold the sermon loosely , not carelessly , in he left hand , raise something above he stomach , and detach a little from he breast ; -- he right arm fall negligently by he side , as nature and the law of gravity order it , -- but with the palm of it open and turn towards he audience , ready to aid the sentiment in case it stand in need . 's eye and the muscle of he face be in full harmony with the other part of he ; -- he look frank ,-- unconstrained , -- something assure , -- but not border upon assurance . let not the critic ask how Corporal Tre could come by all this . -- I have tell he it should be explain ; -- but so he stand before my father , my uncle , and ,-- so sway he body , so contrast he limb , and with such a oratorical sweep throughout the whole figure , -- a statuary might have model from it ;-- nay , I doubt whether the oldest fellow of a College , -- or the himself , could have much mende it . Tre make a bow , and read as follow : the Sermon . Hebrew xiii . 18 . -- for we trust we have a good conscience . ' trust !-- trust we have a good conscience ! ' ( certainly , , quoth my father , interrupt he , you give that sentence a very improper accent ; for you curl up you nose , man , and read it with such a sneer tone , as if the be go to abuse the . he be , a ' please you , reply . Pugh ! say my father , smile . , quoth , be certainly in the right ; for the writer ( who I perceive be a protestant ) by the snappish manner in which he take up the apostle , be certainly go to abuse he ; -- if this treatment of he have not do it already . but from whence , reply my father , have you conclude so soon , , that the writer be of we church ?-- for atch I can see yet , -- he may be of any church .-- because , answer , if he be of ours , -- he durst no more take such a licence , -- than a bear by he beard :-- if , in we communion , , a man be to insult a apostle , -- a saint , -- or even the paring of a saint 's nail , -- he would have he eye scratch out .-- what , by the saint ? quoth my uncle . no , reply , he would have a old house over he head . be the Inquisition a ancient building , answer my uncle , or be it a modern one ?-- I know nothing of architecture , reply .-- a ' please you Honour , quoth , the Inquisition be the vilest -- Prithee spare thy description , Trim , I hate the very name of it , say my father .-- no matter for that , answer , -- it have its use ; for tho ' I be no great advocate for it , yet , in such a case as this , he would soon be teach better manners ; and I can tell he , if he go on at that rate , would be fling into the Inquisition for he pain . God help he then , quoth my uncle . amen
amen , add Trim ; for above , I have a poor brother who have be fourteen year a captive in it .-- I never hear one word of it before , say my uncle , hastily :-- how come he there , , , the story will make you heart bleed , -- as it have make mine a thousand time ; -- but it be too long to be tell now ;-- you Honour shall hear it from first to last some day when I be work beside you in we fortification ; -- but the short of the story be this ; -- that my brother go over a servant to , -- and then marry a 's widow , who keep a small shop , and sell sausage , which somehow or other , be the cause of he be take in the middle of the night out of he bed , where he be lie with he wife and two small child , and carry directly to the Inquisition , where , help he , continue , fetch a sigh from the bottom of he heart , -- the poor honest lad lie confin at this hour ; he be as honest a soul , add Trim , ( pull out he handkerchief ) as ever blood warm .-- -- the tear trickle down 's cheek faster than he could well wipe they away .-- a dead silence in the room ensue for some minute .-- certain proof of pity ! , quoth my father , after he see the poor fellow 's grief have get a little vent ,--read on , -- and put this melancholy story out of thy head :-- I grieve that I interrupt thee ; but prithee begin the sermon again ; -- for if the first sentence in it be matter of abuse , as thou sayest , I have a great desire to know what kind of provocation the apostle have give . wip he face , and return he handkerchief into he pocket , and , make a bow as he do it , -- he begin again . ) the Sermon . Hebrew xiii . 18 . -- for we trust we have a good conscience .-- ' trust ! trust we have a good conscience ! surely if there be any thing in this life which a man may depend upon , and to the knowledge of which he be capable of arrive upon the most indisputable evidence , it must be this very thing ,-- whether he have a good conscience or no . ' ( I be positive I be right , quoth . ) ' if a man think at all , he can not well be a stranger to the true state of this account :-- he must be privy to he own thought and desire ; -- he must remember he past pursuit , and know certainly the true spring and motive , which , in general , have govern the action of he life . ' ( I defy he , without a assistant , quoth . ) 'In other matter we may be deceive by false appearance ; and , as the wise man complain , hardly do we guess aright at the thing that be upon the earth , and with labou do we find the thing that be before we . but here the mind have all the evidence and fact within herself ; -- be conscious of the web she have wove ;-- know its texture and fineness , and the exact share which every passion have have in work upon the several design which virtue or vice have plan before she . ' ( the language be good , and I declare read very well , quoth my father . ) ' now , -- as conscience be nothing else but the knowledge which the mind have within herself of this ; and the judgment , either of approbation or censure , which it unavoidably make upon the successive action of we life ; ' tis plain you will say , from the very term of the proposition ,-- whenever this inward testimony go against a man , and he stand self - accuse , that he must necessarily be a guilty man .-- and , on the contrary , when the report be favourable on he side , and he heart condemn he not :-- that it be not a matter of trust , as the apostle intimate , but a matter of certainty and fact , that the conscience be good , and that the man must be good also . ' ( then the apostle be altogether in the wrong , I suppose , quoth , and the Protestant divine be in the right . , have patience , reply my father , for I think it will presently appear that and the Protestant divine be both of a opinion .-- as nearly so , quoth , as east be to west ; -- but this , continue he , lift both hand , come from the liberty of the press . it be no more at the worst , reply my uncle , than the liberty of the pulpit ; for it do not appear that the sermon be print , or ever likely to be . go on , , quoth my father . ) ' at first sight this may seem to be a true state of the case : and I make no doubt but the knowledge of right and wrong be so truly impress upon the mind of man , -- that do no such thing ever happen , as that the conscience of a man , by long habits of sin , might ( as the scripture assure it may ) insensibly become hard ; -- and , like some tender part of he body ,
, by much stress and continual hard usage , lose by degree that nice sense and perception with which and nature endow it :-- do this never happen ; -- or be it certain that self - love could never hang the least bia upon the judgment ; -- or that the little interest below could rise up and perplex the faculty of we upper region , and encompass they about with cloud and thick darkness :-- could no such thing as favour and affection enter this sacr -- do disdain to take a bribe in it ; -- or be asham to show it be face as a advocate for a unwarrantable enjoyment : or , lastly , be we assure that stand always unconcerned whilst the cause be hear -- and that passion never get into the judgment - seat , and pronounce sentence in the stead of , which be suppose always to preside and determine upon the case :-- be this truly so , as the objection must suppose ; -- no doubt then the religious and moral state of a man would be exactly what he himself esteem it :-- and the guilt or innocence of every man 's life could be know , in general , by no better measure , than the degree of he own approbation and censure . 'i own , in one case , whenever a man 's conscience do accuse he ( as it seldom err on that side ) that he be guilty ; -- and unless in melancholy and hypocondriac case , we may safely pronounce upon it , that there be always sufficient grounds for the accusation . ' but the converse of the proposition will not hold true ;-- namely , that whenever there be guilt , the conscience must accuse ; and if it do not , that a man be therefore innocent .-- this be not fact -- so that the common consolation which some good christian or other be hourly administer to himself , -- that he thanks God he mind do not misgive he ; and that , consequently , he have a good conscience , because he hath a quiet one , -- be fallacious ; -- and as current as the inference be , and as infallible as the rule appear at first sight , yet when you look nearer to it , and try the truth of this rule upon plain fact , -- you see it liable to so much error from a false application ; -- the principle upon which it go so often pervert ; -- the whole force of it lose , and sometimes so vilely cast away , that it be painful to produce the common example from human life , which confirm the account . 'a man shall be vicious and utterly debauch in he principle ;-- exceptionable in he conduct to the world ; shall live shameless , in the open commission of a sin which no reason or pretence can justify , -- a sin by which , contrary to all the workings of humanity , he shall ruin for ever the delude partner of he guilt ;-- rob she of she best dowry ; and not only cover she own head with dishonour ; -- but involve a whole virtuous family in shame and sorrow for she sake . surely , you will think conscience must lead such a man a troublesome life ; he can have no rest night and day from its reproach . ' ! conscience have something else to do all this time , than break in upon he ; as reproach the , -- this domestic god be either talk , or pursue , or be in a journey , or peradventure he sleep and could not be awoke . ' perhaps he be go out in company with to fight a duel : to pay off some debt at play ; -- or dirty annuity , the bargain of he lust ; perhaps conscience all this time be engage at home , talk aloud against petty larceny , and execute vengeance upon some such puny crime as he fortune and rank of life secure he against all temptation of committing ; so that he live as merrily ; '--( if he be of we church , tho ' , quoth , he could not ) --'sleep as soundly in he bed ; -- and at last meet death unconcernedly ; -- perhaps much more so , than a much better man . ' ( all this be impossible with we , quoth , turn to my father , -- the case could not happen in we church .-- it happen in ours , however , reply my father , but too often .-- I own , quoth , ( strike a little with my father 's frank acknowledgment ) -- that a man in the Romish church may live as badly ; -- but then he can not easily die so t.--'Tis little matter , reply my father , with a air of indifference , -- how a rascal die .-- I mean , answer , he would be deny the benefit of the last sacrament .-- pray how many have you in all , say my uncle , -- for I always forget ?-- , answer !--say my uncle ; tho ' not accent as a note of acquiescence , -- but as a interjection of that particular species of surprize , when a man in look into a drawer , find more of a thing than he expect .-- Humph ! reply my uncle . , who have a ear , understood my uncle as well as if he have write a whole volume against the seven sacrament .-- Humph ! reply , ( state my uncle 's argument over again to he ) -- why , , be there not seven
seven cardinal virtue ? -- mortal sins ? -- golden candlestick ? -- heaven ?-- ' Tis more than I know , reply my uncle .-- be there not seven wonder of the world ? -- day of the creation ?-- seven planet ?--Seven plagu ?- - that there be , quoth my father with a most affect gravity . but prithee , continue he , go on with the rest of thy character , . ) 'Another be sordid , unmerciful , ' ( here wav he right hand ) 'a strait - hear , selfish wretch , incapable either of private friendship or public spirit . take notice how he pass by the widow and orphan in they distress , and see all the misery incident to human life without a sigh or a prayer . ' ( a ' please you honour , cry , I think this a viler man than the other . ) ' shall not conscience rise up and s he on such occasion ?-- no ; thank there be no occasion , I pay every man he own ;-- I have no fornication to answer to my conscience ; -- no faithless vow or promise to make up ;-- I have debauch no man 's wife or child ; thank , I be not as other man , adulterer , unjust , or even as this libertine , who stand before I . 'a third be crafty and design in he nature . View he whole life ;--'tis nothing but a cunn contexture of dark art and unequitable subterfuge , basely to defeat the true intent of all law , -- aplain deal and the safe enjoyment of we several property .-- you will see such a one work out a frame of little design upon the ignorance and perplexity of the poor and needy man ; -- shall raise a fortune upon the inexperience of a youth , or the unsuspecting temper of he friend , who would have trust he with he life . ' when old age come on , and repentance call he to look back upon this black account , and state it over again with he conscience -- conscience look into the at ;-- find no express law break by what he have do ;-- perceive no penalty or forfeiture of good and chattel incur ; -- see no scourge waive over he head , or prison open he gate upon he :-- what be there to affright he conscience ?--Conscience have get safely entrench behind the of the law ; sit there invulnerable , fortify with case and report so strongly on all side ; -- that it be not preach can dispossess it of its hold . ' ( here and my uncle exchange look with each other .-- aye , aye , ! quoth my uncle , shak he head ,-- these be but sorry fortification , .-- o ! very poor work , answer , to what you and I make of it .-- the character of this last man , say , interrupt , be more detestable than all the rest ; and seem to have be take from some pettifogge lawyer amongst you :-- amongst we , a man 's conscience could not possibly continue so long blinded , -- three time in a year , at least , he must go to confession . will that restore it to sight ? quoth my uncle , -- go on , , quoth my father , or will have get back before thou have get to the end of thy sermon .--'Tis a very short one , reply Trim .-- I wish it be longer , quoth my uncle , for I like it hugely .-- Tre go on . ) 'a fourth man shall want even this refuge ; -- shall break through all they ceremony of slow chicane ; -- scorn the doubtful workings of secret plot and cautious train to bring about he purpose :-- see the bare - face villain , how he cheat , lie , perjure , rob , murder !--Horrid !--but indeed much better be not to be expect , in the present case -- the poor man be in the dark !-- he priest have get the keeping of he conscience ; -- and all he would let he know of it , be , that he must believe in the Pope ; -- go to ;-- cross himself ; -- tell he bead ; -- be a good catholic , and that this , in all conscience , be enough to carry he to heaven . what ; -- if he perjure ?-- why ; -- he have a mental reservation in it . -- but if he be so wicked and abandon a wretch as you represent he ; -- if he rob , -- if he stab , will not conscience , on every such act , receive a wound itself ? -- aye , -- but the man have carry it to confession ; -- the wound digest there , and will do well enough , and in a short time be quite heale up by absolution . of ! what hast thou to answer for !-- when not content with the too many natural and fatal way , thro ' which the heart of man be every day thus treacherous to itself above all thing ; -- thou hast wilfully set open the wide gate of deceit before the face of this unwary traveller , too apt , know , to go astray of himself , and confidently speak peace to himself , when there be no peace . ' of this the common instance which I have draw out of life , be too notorious to require much evidence . if any man doubt the reality of they , or think it impossible for a man to be
be such a bubble to himself , -- I must refer he a moment to he own reflection , and will then venture to trust my appeal with he own heart . ' let he consider in how different a degree of detestation , number of wicked action stand there , tho ' equally bad and vicious in they own nature ; -- he will soon find , that such of they as strong inclination and custom have prompt he to commit , be generally dress out and paint with all the false beautie which a soft and a flattering hand can give they ; -- and that the other , to which he feel no propensity , appear , at once , naked and deform , surround with all the true circumstance of folly and dishonour . ' when surprize Saul sleep in the cave , and cut off the skirt of he robe -- we read he heart smote he for what he have do :-- but in the matter of , where a faithful and gallant servant , whom he ought to have loved and honoured , fell to make way for he lust , -- where conscience have so much greater reason to take the alarm , he heart smote he not . a whole year have almost pass from first commission of that crime , to the time be send to reprove he ; and we read not once of the least sorrow or compunction of heart which he testify , during all that time , for what he have do . ' thus conscience , this once able monitor , -- place on high as a judge within we , and intend by we maker as a just and equitable one too , -- by a unhappy train of cause and impediment , take often such imperfect cognizance of what pass , -- do it be office so negligently ,-- sometimes so corruptly , -- that it be not to be trust alone ; and therefore we find there be a necessity , a absolute necessity , of join another principle with it , to aid , if not govern , its determination . ' so that if you would form a just judgment of what be of infinite importance to you not to be misl in , -- namely , in what degree of real merit you stand either as a honest man , a useful citizen , a faithful subject to you king , or a good servant to you God ,-- call in religion and morality .-- look , what be write in the law of ?-- how readest thou ?-- consult calm reason and the unchangeable obligation of justice and truth ;- - what say they ? ' let determine the matter upon these report ; -- and then if thy heart condemn thee not , which be the case the apostle suppose , -- the rule will be infallible ; '--( here fell asleep ) --'thou will have confidence towards ; -- that be , have just ground to believe the judgment thou hast past upon thyself , be the judgment of ; and nothing else but a anticipation of that righteous sentence which will be pronounce upon thee hereafter by that , to whom thou be finally to give a account of thy action . ' be the man , indeed , then , as the author of the book of express it , who be not prick with the multitude of he sins : be the man whose heart hath not condemn he ; whether he be rich , or whether he be poor , if he have a good heart ( a heart thus guide and inform ) he shall at all time rejoice in a chearful countenance ; he mind shall tell he more than seven watch - man that sit above upon a tower on high . ' -- ( a tower have no strength , quoth my uncle , unless ' ttis flank have . ) --'in the darkest doubt it shall conduct he safer than a thousand casuist , and give the state he live in , a better security for he behaviour than all the cause and restriction put together , which law - maker be force to multiply :-- force , I say , as thing stand ; human law not be a matter of original choice , but of pure necessity , bring in to fence against the mischievous effect of those conscience which be no law unto themselves ; well intend , by the many provision make , -- that in all such corrupt and misguided case , where principle and the check of conscience will not make we upright , -- to supply they force , and , by the terror of gaol and halter , oblige we to it . ' ( I see plainly , say my father , that this sermon have be compose to be preach at the Temple , -- or at some Assize .-- I like the reasoning , -- and be sorry that have fall asleep before the time of he conviction :-- for it be now clear , that the Parson , as I think at first , never insult in the least ; -- nor have there been , brother , the least difference between they .-- a great matter , if they have differ , reply my uncle , -- the best friend in the world may differ sometimes .-- true ,-- brother quoth my father , shak hand with he , -- we will fill we pipe , brother , and then Tre shall go on . well , -- what dost thou think of it ? say my father , speak to , as he reach he tobacco - box . I think , answer the , that the seven watch - man upon the tower
tower , who , I suppose , be all centinel there , -- be more , a ' please you Honour , than be necessary ; -- and , to go on at that rate , would harrass a regiment all to piece , which a command officer , who love he man , will never do , if he can help it , because two centinel , add the , be as good as twenty .-- I have be a commanding officer myself in the a hundred time , continue , rise a inch higher in he figure , as he speak , -- and all the time I have the honour to serve he , in relieive the most considerable post , I never leave more than two in my life .-- very right , , quoth my uncle , -- but you do not consider , , that the towers , in 's day , be not such thing as we bastion , flank and defend by other work ; -- this , , be a invention since 's death ; nor have they horn - work , or ravelin before the curtin , in he time ; -- or such a fosse as we make with a cuvette in the middle of it , and with covered way and counterscarps pallisado along it , to guard against a coup de main :-- so that the seven man upon the tower be a party , I dare say , from the , set there , not only to look out , but to defend it .-- they could be no more , a ' please you Honour , than a 's .-- my father smile inwardly , but not outwardly -- the subject be rather too serious , consider what have happen , to make a jest of .-- so put he pipe into he mouth , which he have just lighted , -- he contente himself with order to read on . he read on as follow : 'To have the fear of before we eye , and , in we mutual dealings with each other , to govern we action by the eternal measure of right and wrong :-- the first of these will comprehend the duty of religion ; -- the second , those of morality , which be so inseparably connect together , that you can not divide these two table , even in imagination , ( tho ' the attempt be often make in practice ) without breaking and mutually destroy they both . I say the attempt be often make ; and so it be ; -- there be nothing more common than to see a man who have no sense at all of religion , and indeed have so much honesty as to pretend to none , who would take it as the bitterest affront , should you but hind at a suspicion of he moral character , -- or imagine he be not conscientiously just and scrupulous to the uttermost mite . ' when there be some appearance that it be so , -- thog one be unwilling even to suspect the appearance of so amiable a virtue as moral honesty , yet be we to look into the grounds of it , in the present case , I be persuade we should find little reason to envy such a one the honour of he motive . ' let he declaim as pompously as he choose upon the subject , it will be find to rest upon no better foundation than either he interest , he pride , he ease , or some such little and changeable passion as will give we but small dependence upon he action in matter of great distress . 'I will illustrate this by a example . 'I know the banker I deal with , or the physician I usually call in , '-- ( there be no need , cry , ( wake ) to call in any physician in this case ) -- 'too be neither of they man of much religion : I hear they make a jest of it every day , and treat all its sanction with so much scorn , as to put the matter past doubt . well ;--notwithstand this , I put my fortune into the hand of the one :-- and what be dearer still to I , I trust my life to the honest skill of the other . ' now let I examine what be my reason for this great confidence . why , in the first place , I believe there be no probability that either of they will employ the power I put into they hand to my disadvantage ;-- I consider that honesty serve the purpose of this life :-- I know they success in the world depend upon the fairness of they character .-- in a word , I be persuade that they can not hurt I without hurt themselves more . ' but put it otherwise , namely , that interest lay , for once , on the other side ; that a case should happen , wherein the one , without stain to he reputation , could secrete my fortune , and leave I nake in the world ; -- or that the other could send I out of it , and enjoy a estate by my death , without dishonour to himself or he art :-- in this case , what hold have I of either of they ? -- , the strongest of all motive , be out of the question ;-- , the next most powerful motive in the world , be strongly against I :-- what have I leave to cast into the opposite scale to balance this temptation ?-- Alas ! I have nothing ,-- nothing but what be lighter than a bubble -- I must lie at the mercy of , or
or some such capricious principle -- security for two of the most valuable blessing !--my property and myself . 'as , therefore , we can have no dependence upon morality without religion ;-- so , on the other hand , there be nothing better to be expect from religion without morality ; nevertheless , ' ti no prodigy to see a man whose real moral character stand very low , who yet entertain the highest notion of himself in the light of a religious man . ' he shall not only be covetous , revengeful , implacable , -- but even want in point of common honesty ; yet inasmuch as he talk aloud against the infidelity of the age , -- be zealous for some point of religion , -- go twice a day to church ,-- attend the sacrament , -- and amuse himself with a few instrumental part of religion , -- shall cheat he conscience into a judgment , that , for this , he be a religious man , and have discharge truly he duty to : and you will find that such a man , through force of this delusion , generally look down with spiritual pride upon every other man who have less affectation of piety , -- though , perhaps , ten time more real honesty than himself . ' this likewise be a sore evil under the sun ; and I believe , there be no one mistake principle , which , for its time , have wrotch more serious mischief .-- for a general proof of this ,-- examine the history of the church ; '--( well what can you make of that ? cry ) --'see what scene of cruelty , murder , rapine , bloodsh , '--( they may thank they own obstinacy , cry ) -- have all be sanctify by a religion not strictly govern by morality . ' in how many kingdom of the world ' -- ( Here keep wave he right - hand from the sermon to the extent of he arm , return it backwards and forward to the conclusion of the paragraph . ) ' in how many kingdom of the world have the crusading sword of this misguided saint - errant , spared neither age or merit , or sex , or condition ?- - and , as he fight under the banners of a religion which set he loose from justice and humanity , he shew none ; mercilessly trample upon both , -- hear neither the cry of the unfortunate , nor pitie they distress . ' ( I have be in many a battle , a ' please you Honour , quoth Trim , sigh , but never in so melancholy a one as this , -- I would not have draw a tricker in it against these poor soul , -- to have be make a general officer .-- why ? what do you understand of the affair ? say , look towards , with something more of contempt than the 's honest heart deserve .- - what do you know , friend , about this battle you talk of ?-- I know , reply , that I never refuse quarter in my life to any man who cry out for it ; -- but to a woman or a child , continue , before I would level my musket at they , I would loose my life a thousand time .-- here be a crown for thee , , to drink with to - night , quoth my uncle , and I will give another too .--God bless you Honour , reply Trim ,-- I have rather these poor woman and child have it .-- thou be a honest fellow , quoth my uncle .-- my father nod he head , as much as to say -- and so he be .-- but prithee , , say my father , make a end ,-- for I see thou hast but a leaf or two leave . read on . ) ' if the testimony of past century in this matter be not sufficient , -- consider at this instant , how the votary of that religion be every day think to do service and honour to , by action which be a dishonour and scandal to themselves . 'To be convince of this , go with I for a moment into the prison of the Inquisition .' --( God help my poor brother .) --' , with and chain down under she foot , -- there sit ghastly upon a black tribunal , prop up with rack and instrument of torment . !- - hark ! what a piteous groan ! ' --( Here 's face turn as pale as ash . ) --' see the melancholy wretch who uttere it '--( here the tear begin to trickle down ) --'just bring forth to undergo the anguish of a mock trial , and endure the utmost pain that a study system of cruelty have be able to invent .' --( D..n they all , quoth , he colour return into he face as red as blood .) --' behold this helpless victim deliver up to he tormentor , -- he body so waste with sorrow and confinement . ' --( oh ! ' ti my brother , cry poor Trim in a most passionate exclamation , drop the sermon upon the ground , and clapp he hand together -- I fear ' ttis poor Tom . my father 's and my uncle 's heart year with sympathy for the poor fellow 's distress ; even himself acknowledge pity for he .-- why , , say my father , this be not a history ,--'ti a sermon thou be read ; prithee begin the sentence again .) --' behold this helpless victim deliver up to he tormentor , -- he body so waste with sorrow and confinement
confinement , you will see every nerve and muscle as it suffer . ' observe the last movement of that horrid engine !' -- ( I would rather face a cannon , quoth Trim , stampe .) --' see what convulsion it have throw he into !-- consider the nature of the posture in which he how lie stretch , -- what exquisite torture he endure by it !' -- ( I hope ' tis not in .)- -''Tis all nature can bear ! ! see how it keep he weary soul hang upon he trembling lip ! ' ( I would not read another line of it , quoth for all this world ; -- I fear , an' please you Honour , all this be in , where my poor brother be . I tell thee , Trim , again , quoth my father , ' ti not a historical account ,--'ti a description .--'Tis only a description , honest man , quoth , there be not a word of truth in it .-- that be another story , reply my father .-- however , as Trim read it with so much concern ,--'tis cruelty to force he to go on with it .-- give I hold of the sermon , ,-- I will finish it for thee , and thou may 'st go . I must stay and hear it too , reply , if you Honou will allow I ; -- tho' I would not read it myself for a 's pay .-- poor Trim ! quoth my uncle . my father go on . ) ' -- consider the nature of the posture in which he now lie stretch , -- what exquisite torture he endure by it !--'Tis all nature can bear ! ! see how it keep he weary soul hang upon he trembling lip , -- willing to take its leave , -- but not suffer to depart !-- behold the unhappy wretch lead back to he cell !' -- ( then , thank , however , quoth , they have not kill he . ) --' see he drag out of it again to meet the flame , and the insult in he last agony , which this principle , -- this principle , that there can be religion without mercy , have prepare for he . ' -- ( then , thank , -- he be dead , quoth , -- he be out of he pain , -- and they have do they worst at he sirs !-- hold you peace , , say my father , go on with the sermon , lest Tre should incense , -- we shall never have do at this rate . ) ' the surest way to try the merit of any dispute notion be , to trace down the consequence such a notion have produce , and compare they with the spirit of ;--'ti the short and decisive rule which we saviour hath leave we , for these and such like case , and it be worth a thousand argument -- by they fruit ye shall know they . 'I will add no farther to the length of this sermon , than by two or three short and independent rule deducible from it . ' first , whenever a man talk loudly against religion , always suspect that it be not he reason , but he passion , which have get the better of he Creed . a bad life and a good belief be disagreeable and troublesome neighbour , and where they separate , depend upon it , ' tis for no other cause but quietness sake . ' secondly , when a man , thus represent , tell you in any particular instance ,-- that such a thing go against he conscience , -- always believe he mean exactly the same thing , as when he tell you such a thing go against he stomach ;-- a present want of appetite be generally the true cause of both . 'In a word , -- trust that man in nothing , who have not a conscience in every thing . ' and , in you own case , remember this plain distinction , a mistake in which have ruin thousand , -- that you conscience be not a law ;-- no , and reason make the law , and have place conscience within you to determine ; -- not , like a Asiatic Cadi , accord to the ebb and flow of he own passion , -- but like a british judge in this land of liberty and good sense , who make no new law , but faithfully declare that law which he know already write . ' Finis . thou hast read the sermon extremely well , , quoth my father . -- if he have spa he comment , reply , -- he would have read it much better . I should have read it ten time better , , answer , but that my heart be so full .-- that be the very reason , , reply my father , which have make thee read the sermon as well as thou hast do ; and if the clergy of we church , continue my father , address himself to , would take part in what they deliver as deeply as this poor fellow have do , -- as they composition be fine ; --( I deny it , quoth ) -- I maintain it , -- that the eloquence of we pulpit , with such subject to enflame it , would be a model for the whole world :-- but alas ! continue my father , and I own it , , with sorrow , that , like french politician in this respect , what they gain in the cabinet they lose in the field .--' Twere a pity , quoth my uncle , that this should
should be lose . I like the sermon well , reply my father ,--'tis dramatick , -- and there be something in that way of write , when skilfully manage , which catch the attention .-- we preach much in that way with we , say .-- I know that very well , say my father , -- but in a tone and manner which disgust , full as much as he assent , simply , could have pleas he . -- but in this , add , a little pique , -- we sermon have greatly the advantage , that we never introduce any character into they below a patriarch or a patriarch 's wife , or a martyr or a saint .-- there be some very bad character in this , however , say my father , and I do not think the sermon a jot the worse for th'ey . -- but pray , quoth my uncle , -- who be can this be ?--How could it get into my ? a man must be as great a conjurer as , say my father , to resolve the second question :-- the first , I think , be not so difficult ; -- for unless my judgment greatly deceive I ,-- I know the author , for ' tis write , certainly , by the parson of the parish . the similitude of the stile and manner of it , with those my father constantly have hear preach in he parish - church , be the ground of he conjecture ,-- prove it as strongly , as a argument a priori could prove such a thing to a philosophic mind , that it be 's and no one 's else :-- it be prove to be so , a posteriori , the day after , when send a servant to my uncle 's house to enquire after it . it seem that , who be inquisitive after all kind of knowledge , have borrowed Stevinus of my uncle , and have carelesly pop he sermon , as soon as he have make it , into the middle of ; and by a act of forgetfulness , to which he be ever subject , he have send home , and he sermon to keep he company . Ill - fated sermon ! thou wast lose , after this recovery of thee , a second time , drop through ' a unsuspected fissure in thy master 's pocket , down into a treacherous and a tatter lining , -- trod deep into the dirt by the left hind - foot of he Rosinante inhumanly step upon thee as thou falledst ; -- bury ten day in the mire ,-- raise up out of it by a beggar , -- sell for a halfpenny to a parish - clerk ,-- transfer to he parson , -- lose for ever to thy own , the remainder of he day , -- nor restore to he restless Mane till this very moment , that I tell the world the story . can the reader believe , that this sermon of 's be preach at a assize , in the cathedral of , before a thousand witness , ready to give oath of it , by a certain prebendary of that church , and actually print by he when he have do , -- and within so short a space as two year and three month after 's death indeed , be never better serve in he life ; -- but it be a little hard to maltreat he after , and plunder he after he be laid in he grave . however , as the gentleman who do it be in perfect charity with , -- and , in conscious justice , print but a few copy to give away ; -- and that I be tell he could moreover have make as good a one himself , have he think fit ,-- I declare I would not have publish this anecdote to the world ; -- nor do I publish it with a intent to hurt he character and advancement in the church ;-- I leave that to other ; -- but I find myself impell by two reason , which I can not withstand . the first be , that in do justice , I may give rest to 's ghost ; -- which -- as the country - people , and some other believe , -- still walk . the second reason be , that , by lay open this story to the world , I gain a opportunity of inform it ,-- that in case the character of parson , and this sample of he sermon , be like , -- there be now in the possession of the family , as many as will make a handsome volume , at the world 's service , -- and much good may they do it . . gain the two crown without dispute ; -- for he come in jingling , with all the instrument in the green baize bag we speak of , flng across he body , just as go out of the room . it be now proper , I think , quoth , ( clear up he look ) as we be in a condition to be of some service to . , to send up stair to know how she go on . I have order , answer my father , the old midwife to come down to we upon the least difficulty ; -- for you must know , , continue my father , with a perplex kind of a smile upon he countenance , that by express treaty , solemnly ratify between I and my wife , you be no more than a auxiliary in this affair , -- and not so much as that ,-- unless the lean old mother of a
a midwife above stair can not do without you .-- women have they particular fancie , and in point of this nature , continue my father , where they bear the whole burden , and suffer so much acute pain for the advantage of we family , and the good of the species , -- they claim a right of deciding , en , in whose hand , and in what fashion , they choose to undergo it . they be in the right of it , -- quoth my uncle . but , reply , not take notice of my uncle 's opinion , but turn to my father , -- they have better govern in other point ; -- and a father of a family , who wish its perpetuity , in my opinion , have better exchange this prerogative with they , and give up some other rights in lieu of it .-- I know not , quoth my father , answer a letter too testily , to be quite dispassionate in what he say , -- I know not , quoth he , what we have leave to give up , in lieu of who shall bring we child into the world , unless that , -- of who shall beget they .-- one would almost give up any thing , reply .-- I beg you pardon ,-- answer my uncle , reply , it would astonish you to know what improvement we have make of late year in all branch of obstetrical knowledge , but particularly in that one single point of the safe and expeditious extraction of the foetus , -- which have receive such light , that , for my part ( hold up he hand ) I declare I wonder how the world have -- I wish , quoth my uncle , you have see what prodigious army we have in Flander . . I have drop the curtain over this scene for a minute , -- to remind you of one thing , -- and to inform you of another . what I have to inform you , come , I own , a little out of its due course ; -- for it should have be tell a hundred and fifty page ago , but that I foresee then ' twould come in pat hereafter , and be of more advantage here than elsewhere .-- Writers have need look before they , to keep up the spirit and connection of what they have in hand . when these two thing be done , -- the curtain shall be draw up again , and my uncle , my father , and , shall go on with they discourse , without any more interruption . first , then , the matter which I have to remind you of , be this ; -- that from the specimen of singularity in my father 's notion in the point of - name , and that other previous point theretoo , -- you be lead , I think , into a opinion , --( and I be sure I say as much ) that my father be a gentleman altogether as odd and whimsical in fifty other opinion . in truth , there be not a stage in the life of man , from the very first act of he begett , -- down to the lean and slipper pantaloon in he second childishness , but he have some favourite notion to himself , spring out of it , as sceptical , and as far out of the high - way of thinking , as these two which have be explain . -- . Shandy , my father , , would see nothing in the light in which other place it ; -- he place thing in he own light ; -- he would weigh nothing in common scale ; -- no , he be too refin a researcher to lie open to so gross a imposition .-- to come at the exact weight of thing in the scientific steel - yard , the fulcrum , he would say , should be almost invisible , to avoid all friction from popular tenet ;--without this the minutia of philosophy , which would always turn the balance , will have no weight at all . , like matter , he would affirm , be divisible in infinitum ; -- that the grain and scruple be as much a part of it , as the gravitation of the whole world .-- in a word , he would say , error be error ,- - no matter where it fall , -- whether in a fraction , -- or a pound ,--'tbe alike fatal to truth , and she be keep down at the bottom of she well , as inevitably by a mistake in the dust of a butterfly 's wing , -- as in the disk of the sun , the moon , and all the star of heaven put together . he would often lament that it be for want of consider this properly , and of apply it skilfully to civil matter , as well as to speculative truth , that so many thing in this world be out of joint ; -- that the political arch be give way ; -- and that the very foundation of we excellent constitution in church and state , be so sapped as estimator have report . you cry out , he would say , we be a ruined , undone people . why ? he would ask , make use of the sorite or syllogism of and , without know it belong to they .-- why ? why be we a ruin people ?-- because we be corrupt .-- Whence be it , dear , that we be corrupt ?-- because we be needy ; -- we poverty , and not we will , consent . -- and
and wherefore , he would add , be we needy ?-- from the neglect , he would answer , of we pence and we halfpence :-- we bank note , , we guinea , -- nay we shilling take care of themselves . ' tTis the same , he would say , throughout the whole circle of the sciences ;-- the great , the establish point of they , be not to be break in .-- the law of nature will defend themselves ; -- but error --( he would add , look earnestly at my mother ) -- error , Sir , creep in thro ' the minute hole and small crevice which human nature leave unguarded . this turn of think in my father , be what I have to remind you of :-- the point you be to be inform of , and which I have reserve for this place , be as follow . amongst the many and excellent reason , with which my father have urge my mother to accept of 's assistance preferably to that of the old woman , -- there be one of a very singular nature ; which , when he have do argue the matter with she as a , and come to argue it over again with she as a philosopher , he have put he whole strength to , depend indeed upon it as he sheet - anchor .-- it fail he , tho ' from no defect in the argument itself ; but that , do what he could , he be not able for he soul to make she comprehend the drift of it . -- Curs luck !--say he to himself , one afternoon , as he walk out of the room , after he have be sta it for a hour and a half to she , to no manner of purpose ;-- curse luck ! say he , bite he lip as he shut the door , -- for a man to be master of one of the finest chain of reasoning in nature , -- and have a wife at the same time with such a head - piece , that he can not hang up a single inference within side of it , to save he soul from destruction . this argument , though it be entirely lose upon my mother , -- have more weight with he , than all he other argument join together :-- I will therefore endeaavor to do it justice , -- and set it forth with all the perspicuity I be master of . my father set out upon the strength of these two follow axiom : first , that a ounce of a man 's own wit , be worth a ton of other people 's ; and , Secondly , ( which by the bye , be the ground - work of the first axiom , -- though ' it come last ) that every man 's wit must come from every man 's own soul , -- and no other body 's . now , as it be plain to my father , that all soul be by nature equal , -- and that the great difference between the most acute and the most obtuse understanding -- be from no original sharpness or bluntness of one think substance above or below another , -- but arise merely from the lucky or unlucky organization of the body , in that part where the soul principally take up she residence ,-- he have make it the subject of he enquiry to find out the identical place . now , from the best account he have be able to get of this matter , he be satisfied it could not be where have fix it , upon the top of the pineal gland of the brain ; which , as he philosophize , form a cushion for she about the size of a marrow pea ; tho ' to speak the truth , as so many nerves do terminate all in that one place ,--'twas no bad conjecture ; -- and my father have certainly fall with that great philosopher plumb into the centre of the mistake , have it not be for my uncle , who rescue he out of it , by a story he tell he of a officer at the battle of , who have one part of he brain shot away by a musket - ball , -- and another part of it take out after by a french surgeon ; and after all , recover , and do he duty very well without it . if death , say my father , reason with himself , be nothing but the separation of the soul from the body ; -- and if it be true that people can walk about and do they business without brain , -- then certe the soul do not inhabit there . Q.e.d . as for that certain , very thin , subtle and very fragrant juice which , the great Milaneze physician affirm , in a letter to , to have discover in the cellula of the occipital part of the cerebellum , and which he likewise affirms to be the principal seat of the reasonable soul , ( for , you must know , in these latter and more enlightened ag , there be two soul in every man live , -- the one , accord to the great , be call the , the other , the ;) -- as for the opinion , I say of ,--my father could never subscribe to it by any means ; the very idea of so noble , so refin , so immaterial , and so exalt a being as the , or even the Animus , take up she residence , and sit dabbling , like a tad - pole all day long , both
both summer and winter , in a puddle , -- or in a liquid of any kind , how thick or thin soever , he would say , shock he imagination ; he would scarce give the doctrine a hearing . what , therefore , seem the least liable to objection of any , be that the chief sensorium , or head - quarter of the soul , and to which place all intelligence be refer , and from whence all she mandate be issue ,- - be in , or near , the cerebellum , -- or rather somewhere about the medulla oblongato , wherein it be generally agree by Dutch anatomist , that all the minute nerve from all the organ of the seven sense concenter , like street and win alley , into a square . so far there be nothing singular in my father 's opinion , -- he have the best of philosopher , of all age and climates , to go along with he . -- but here he take a road of he own , set up another Shandean hypothesis upon these corner - stone they have laid for he ; -- and which say hypothesis equally stand its ground ; whether the subtilty and fineness of the soul depend upon the temperature and clearness of the say liquor , or of the finer net - work and texture in the cerebellum itself ; which opinion he favour . he maintain , that next to the due care to be take in the act of propagation of each individual , which require all the thought in the world , as it lay the foundation of this incomprehensible contexture , in which wit , memory , fancy , eloquence , and what be usually mean by the name of good natural part , do consist ; -- that next to this and he Christian - name , which be the two original and most efficacious cause of all ; -- that the third cause , or rather what logician call the sina qua non , and without which all that be done be of no manner of significance , -- be the preservation of this delicate and fine - spun web , from the havock which be generally make in it by the violent compression and crush which the head be make to undergo , by the nonsensical method of bring we into the world by that foremost . -- this require explanation . my father , who dip into all kind of book , upon look into difficili , ( the author be here twice mistaken ; for should be write thus , . the second mistake be , that this Lithopaedus be not a author , but a draw of a petrify child . the account of this , publish by 1580 , may be see at the end of 's work in . have be lead into this error , either from see 's name of late in a catalogue of learn writer in . . , or by mistak for , -- from the too great similitude of the name . ) publish by , have find out , that the lax and pliable state of a child 's head in parturition , the bone of the cranium have no suture at that time , be such , -- that by force of the woman 's effort , which , in strong labour - pain , be equal , upon a average , to the weight of 470 pound avoirdupois act perpendicularly upon it ; -- it so happen , that in 49 instance out of 50 , the say head be compress and mould into the shape of a oblong conical piece of dough , such as a pastry - cook generally roll up in order to make a pye of .-- ! cry my father , what havock and destruction must this make in the infinitely fine and tender texture of the cerebellum ! -- or if there be such a juice as Borri pretend -- be it not enough to make the clearest liquid in the world both seculent and mothery ? but how great be he apprehension , when he farther understood , that this force act upon the very vertex of the head , not only injure the brain itself , or cerebrum , -- but that it necessarily squeeze and propel the cerebrum towards the cerebellum , which be the immediate seat of the understanding !-- angel and ministers of defend we ! cry my father , -- can any soul withstand this shock ?-- no wonder the intellectual web be so rent and tatter as we see it ; and that so many of we best head be no better than a puzzl skein of silk , -- all perplexity , -- all confusion within - side . but when my father read on , and be let into the secret , that when a child be turn topsy - turvy , which be easy for a operator to do , and be extract by the foot ; -- that instead of the cerebrum be propel towards the cerebellum , the cerebellum , on the contrary , be propel simply towards the cerebrum , where it could do no manner of hurt :-- by heaven ! cry he , the world be in conspiracy to drive out what little wit have give we , -- and the professor of the obstetric art be list into the same conspiracy .-- what be it to I which end of my son come foremost into the world , provide all go right after , and he cerebellum escape uncrushed ? it be the nature of a hypothesis , when once a man have conceive it , that it assimilate every thing to itself , as proper nourishment ; and , from the first moment of you begett
begett it , it generally grow the stronger by every thing you see , hear , read , or understand . this be of great use . when my father be go with this about a month , there be scarce a phaenomenon of stupidity or of genius , which he could not readily solve by it ;-- it account for the eldest son be the greatest blockhead in the family .-- poor devil , he would say , -- he make way for the capacity of he younger brothers .-- it unriddle the observation of driveller and monstrous head , -- shew a priori , it could not be otherwise ,-- unless . . . I do not know what . it wonderfully explain and account for the acuman of the , and that sprightlier turn , and a more penetrating intuition of mind , in warmer climates ; not from the loose and common - place solution of a clearer sky , and a more perpetual sunshine , &c .-- which for atch he know , might as well rarefy and dilute the faculty of the soul into nothing , by one extreme , -- as they be condense in colder climates by the other ; -- but he trace the affair up to its spring - head ; -- shew that , in warmer climates , nature have lay a lighter tax upon the fairest part of the creation ; -- they pleasure more ; -- the necessity of they pain less , insomuch that the pressure and resistance upon the vertex be so slight , that the whole organization of the cerebellum be preserve ; -- nay , he do not believe , in natural birth , that so much as a single thread of the net - work be break or displace , -- so that the soul might just act as she like . when my father have get so far , -- what a blaze of light do the account of the section , and of the towering geniuse who have come safe into the world by it , cast upon this hypothesis ? here you see , he would say , there be no injury do to the sensorium ; -- no pressure of the head against the pelvis ; --no propulsion of the cerebrum towards the cerebellum , either by the os pubi on this side , or os coxygis on that ; -- and pray , what be the happy consequence ? why , , you , who give the operation a name ; -- and you , who be bear so before ever the operation have a name ;-- you ; you ; we the , -- who , have he live , would have do the same honour to the hypothesis :-- these , and many more who figure high in the annal of fame , -- all come side - way , , into the world . the incision of the abdoman and uterus run for six week together in my father 's head ; -- he have read , and be satisfied , that wound in the epigastrium , and those in the matrix , be not mortal ; -- so that the belly of the mother might be open extremely well to give a passage to the child . -- he mention the thing one afternoon to my mother ,-- merely as a matter of fact ; but see she turn as pale as ash at the very mention of it , as much as the operation flatter he hope , -- he think it as well to say no more of it , -- contente himself with admiring , -- what he think be to no purpose to propose . this be my father 's hypothesis ; concern which I have only to add , that my brother do as great honour to it ( whatever he do to the family ) as any one of the great heroe we speak of : for happen not only to be christen , as I tell you , but to be bear too , when my father be at , -- be moreover my mother 's first child , -- come into the world with he head foremost , -- and turn out afterwards a lad of wonderful slow part , -- my father spelt all these together into he opinion : and as he have fail at one end ,-- he be determined to try the other . this be not to be expect from one of the sisterhood , who be not easily to be put out of they way , -- and be therefore one of my father 's great reason in favour of a man of science , whom he could better deal with . of all man in the world , be the fittest for my father 's purpose ;- - for though this new -invented forcep be the armour he have prove , and what he maintain to be the safest instrument of deliverance , yet , it seem , he have scatter a word or two in he book , in favour of the very thing which run in my father 's fancy ; -- tho ' not with a view to the soul 's good in extract by the foot , as be my father 's system , -- but for reason merely obstetrical . this will account for the coalition betwixt my father and , in the ensue discourse , which go a little hard against my uncle .-- in what manner a plain man , with nothing but common sense , could bear up against two such ally in science , -- be hard to conceive .-- you may conjecture upon it , if you please , -- and whilst you imagination be in motion , you may encourage it to go on , and discover by
by what cause and effect in nature it could come to pass , that my uncle get he modesty by the wound he receive upon he groin .-- you may raise a system to account for the loss of my nose by marriage - article , -- and show the world how it could happen , that I should have the misfortune to be call , in opposition to my father 's hypothesis , and the wish of the whole family , Godfathers and Godmothers not accept .-- these , with fifty other point leave yet unravelled , you may endeaavor to solve if you have time ; -- but I tell you beforehand it will be in vain , for not the sage Alquise , the magician in of , nor the no less famous , the sorceress he wife , ( be they alive ) could pretend to come within a league of the truth . the reader will be content to wait for a full explanation of these matters till the next year , -- when a series of thing will be laid open which he little expect . . --'i wish , , ' quoth my uncle , ( repeat he wish for a second time , and with a degree of more zeal and earnestness in he manner of wishing , than he have wish at first ( .) ) --'i wish , , ' quoth my uncle , ' you have see what prodigious army we have in Flander . ' my uncle 's wish do Slop a disservice which he heart never intend any man ,-- , it confound he -- and thereby put he idea first into confusion , and then to flight , he could not rally they again for the soul of he . in all dispute ,-- male or female , -- whether for honour , for profit , or for love , -- it make no difference in the case ;-- nothing be more dangerous , madam , than a wish come sideways in this unexpected manner upon a man : the safest way in general to take off the force of the wish , be for the party wish would at , instantly to get upon he leg -- and wish the wisher something in return , of pretty near the same value , -- so balance the account upon the spot , you stand as you be -- nay sometimes gain the advantage of the attack by it . this will be fully illustrate to the world in my chapter of wish .-- do not understand the nature of this defence ; -- he be puzzl with it , and it put a entire stop to the dispute for four minute and a half ; -- five have be fatal to it :--my father see the danger -- the dispute be one of the most interesting dispute in the world , ' whether the child of he prayer and endeavour should be bear without a head or with one :' -- he wait to the last moment , to allow , in whose behalf the wish be make , he right of return it ; but perceive , I say , that he be confound , and continue look with that perplex vacuity of eye which puzzl soul generally stare with -- first in my uncle 's face -- then in he -- then up -- then down -- then east -- east and by east , and so on , -- coaste it along by the plinth of the wainscot till he have get to the opposite point of the compass , -- and that he have actually begin to count the brass nail upon the arm of he chair , -- my father think there be no time to be lose with my uncle , so take up the discourse as follow . . ' -- what prodigious armie you have in Flander !'-- , reply my father , take he wig from off he head with he right hand , and with he left pull out a stripe handkerchief from he right coat pocket , in order to rub he head , as he argu the point with my uncle .-- -- now , in this I think my father be much to blame ; and I will give you my reasons for it . matter of no more seem consequence in themselves than , ' whether my father should have take off he wig with he right hand or with he left , ' -- have divide the greatest kingdom , and make the crown of the monarch who govern they , to totter upon they head .-- but need I tell you , , that the circumstance with which every thing in this world be begirt , give every thing in this world its size and shape !-- and by tighten it , or relax it , this way or that , make the thing to be , what it be -- great --litle --good --bad--indifferent or not indifferent , just as the case happen ? as my father 's handkerchief be in he right coat pocket , he should by no means have suffer he right hand to have get engage : on the contrary , instead of take off he wig with it , as he do , he ought to have commit that entirely to the left ; and then , when the natural exigency my father be under of rub he head , call out for he handkerchief , he would have have nothing in the world to have do , but to have put he right hand into he right coat pocket and take it out ;--which he might have do without any violence , or the least ungraceful twist in any one tendon or muscle of he whole body . in this case , ( unless
unless , indeed , my father have be resolve to make a fool of himself by hold the wig stiff in he left hand -- or by make some nonsensical angle or other at he elbow - joint , or armpit ) -- he whole attitude have be easy -- natural --unforce : Reynold himself , as great and gracefully as he paint , might have paint he as he sit . now as my father manage this matter , -- consider what a devil of a figure my father make of himself . in the latter end of 's reign , and in the beginning of the reign of the first --' coat pockets be cut very low down in the skirt . '-- I need say no more -- the father of mischief , have he be hammere at it a month , could not have contrive a worse fashion for one in my father 's situation . . it be not a easy matter in any king 's reign ( unless you be as lean a subject as myself ) to have force you hand diagonally , quite across you whole body , so as to gain the bottom of you opposite coat pocket .-- in the year one thousand seven hundred and eighteen , when this happen , it be extremely difficult ; so that when my uncle discover the transverse zig - zaggery of my father 's approaches towards it , it instantly bring into he mind those he have do duty in , before the gate of ; -- the idea of which draw off he attention so intirely from the subject in debate , that he have get he right hand to the bell to ring up to go and fetch he map of , and he compass and sector along with it , to measure the return angles of the traverse of that attack , -- but particularly of that one , where he receive he wound upon he groin . my father knit he brows , and as he knit they , all the blood in he body seem to rush up into he face -- my uncle dismount immediately . -- I do not apprehend you uncle be o'horseback .-- chapter 1.XLVIII . a man 's body and he mind , with the utmost reverence to both I speak it , be exactly like a jerkin , and a jerkin 's line ;--rumple the one , -- you rumple the other . there be one certain exception however in this case , and that be , when you be so fortunate a fellow , as to have have you jerkin make of gum -taffeta , and the body - line to it of a sarcenet , or thin persian . , , , , , , , and amongst the ;-- and and amongst the ;-- and and amongst the ; and a score and a half of good , honest , unthinking Shandean people as ever liv , whose name I can not recollect , -- all pretend that they jerkin be make after this fashion , -- you might have rumple and crumple , and double and crease , and fret and fridge the outside of they all to piece ; -- in short , you might have play the very devil with they , and at the same time , not one of the inside of they would have be one button the worse , for all you have do to they . I believe in my conscience that mine be make up somewhat after this sort :-- for never poor jerkin have be tick off at such a rate as it have be these last nine month together , -- and yet I declare , the lining to it , -- as far as I be a judge of the matter , -- be not a three - penny piece the worse ; -- pell-mell , helter - skelter , ding - dong , cut and thrust , back stroke and fore stroke , side way and long - way , have they be trimm it for I :-- have there be the least gumminess in my lining , -- by heaven ! it have all of it long ago be fray and fret to a thread . -- you Messrs . the !-- how could you cut and slash my jerkin as you do ?--how do you know but you would cut my lining too ? Heartily and from my soul , to the protection of that who will injure none of we , do I recommend you and you affair , -- so bless you ; -- only next month , if any one of you should gnash he tooth , and storm and rage at I , as some of you do last ( in which I remember the weather be very hot ) -- do not be exasperate , if I pass it by again with good temper , -- be determined as long as I live or write ) which in my case mean the same thing ) never to give the honest gentleman a worse word or a worse wish than my uncle give the fly which buzz would about he nose all dinner - time ,-- ' go , -- go , poor devil , ' quoth he ,--'get thee gone , -- why should I hurt thee ! this world be surely wide enough to hold both thee and I . ' . any man , madam , reason upward , and observe the prodigious suffusion of blood in my father 's countenance , -- by means of which ( as all the blood in he body seem to rush into he face , as I tell you ) he must have redden , pictorically and scientifically speak , six whole tints and a half , if not a
a full octave above he natural colour :-- any man , madam , but my uncle , who have observe this , together with the violent knitting of my father 's brows , and the extravagant contortion of he body during the whole affair ,-- would have conclude my father in a rage ; and take that for grant , -- have he be a lover of such kind of concord as arise from two such instrument be put in exact tune , -- he would instantly have skrow ' up he , to the same pitch ; -- and then the devil and all have broke loose -- the whole piece , Madam , must have be play off like the sixth of -- con furia , -- like mad .-- grant I patience ! -- what have con furia , -- con strepito , -- or any other hurly burly whatever to do with harmony ? any man , I say , Madam , but my uncle , the benignity of whose heart interpret every motion of the body in the kindest sense the motion would admit of , would have conclude my father angry , and blame he too . my uncle blame nothing but the taylor who cut the pocket - hole ; -- so sit still till my father have get he handkerchief out of it , and look all the time up in he face with inexpressible good - will -- my father , at length , go on as follow . . ' what prodigious armie you have in Flander ! ' -- , quoth my father , I do believe thee to be as honest a man , and with as good and as upright a heart as ever create ; -- nor be it thy fault , if all the child which have be , may , can , shall , will , or ought to be beget , come with they head foremost into the world :-- but believe I , dear , the accident which unavoidably way - lay they , not only in the article of we begett 'em -- though these , in my opinion , be well worth consider , -- but the dangers and difficulty we child be beset with , after they be get forth into the world , be enow -- little need be there to expose they to unnecessary one in they passage to it .-- be these dangers , quoth my uncle , lay he hand upon my father 's knee , and look up seriously in he face for a answer , -- be these dangers greater now o' day , brother , than in time past ? , answer my father , if a child be but fairly begot , and bear alive , and healthy , and the mother do well after it , -- we forefather never look farther .-- my uncle instantly withdraw he hand from off my father 's knee , recline he body gently back in he chair , raise he head till he could just see the cornice of the room , and then direct the buccinatory muscle along he cheek , and the orbicular muscle around he lip to do they duty -- he whistle . . whilst my uncle be whistl to my father , -- . be stamp , and curse and damne at at a most dreadful rate , -- it would have do you heart good , and cure you , , for ever of the vile sin of swear , to have hear he , I be determine therefore to relate the whole affair to you . when 's maid deliver the green baize bag with she master 's instrument in it , to , she very sensibly exhort he to put he head and one arm through the string , and ride with it sling across he body : so undo the bow - knot , to lengthen the string for he , without any more ado , she help he on with it . however , as this , in some measure , unguard the mouth of the bag , lest any thing should bolt out in galloping back , at the speed Obadiah threaten , they consult to take it off again : and in the great care and caution of they heart , they have take the two string and tie they close ( purse up the mouth of the bag first ) with half a dozen hard knot , each of which , to make all safe , have twitch and draw together with all the strength of he body . this answer all that and the maid intend ; but be no remedy against some evils which neither he or she foresee . the instrument , it seem , as tight as the bag be tie above , have so much room to play in it , towards the bottom ( the shape of the bag be conical ) that could not make a trot of it , but with such a terrible jingle , what with the tire tete , forcep , and squirt , as would have be enough , have Hymen be take a jaunt that way , to have frightene he out of the country ; but when accelerate he motion , and from a plain trot assay to prick he coach - horse into a full gallop -- by ! , the jingle be incredible . as have a wife and three child -- the turpitude of fornication , and the many other political ill consequence of this jingling , never once enter he brain , -- he have however he objection , which come home to himself , and weigh with he , as it have oft -time do with the greatest patriot .--' the poor fellow , , be not able to hear himself whisle
whisle . ' . as love wind - music preferably to all the instrumental music he carry with he , -- he very considerately set he imagination to work , to contrive and to invent by what mean he should put himself in a condition of enjoy it . in all distress ( except musical ) where small cord be want , nothing be so apt to enter a man 's head as he hat - band :-- the philosophy of this be so near the surface -- I scorn to enter into it . as 's be a mixed case -- , ,-- I say , a mix case ; for it be obstetrical ,-- scrip -tical , squirtical , papistical -- and as far as the coach - horse be concerned in it ,-- caballistical -- and only partly musical ;-- Obadiah make no scruple of avail himself of the first expedient which offer ; so take hold of the bag and instrument , and grip they hard together with one hand , and with the finger and thumb of the other put the end of the hat - band betwixt he tooth , and then slipp he hand down to the middle of it , -- he tie and cross -tie they all fast together from one end to the other ( as you would cord a trunk ) with such a multiplicity of round - abouts and intricate cross turn , with a hard knot at every intersection or point where the string meet , -- that must have have three fifth of 's patience at least to have unloose they .-- I think in my conscience , that have be in one of she nimble mood , and in humour for such a contest -- and she and both fairly start together -- there be no man living which have see the bag with all that have do to it , -- and know likewise the great speed the can make when she think proper , who would have have the least doubt remain in he mind -- which of the two would have carry off the prize . my mother , madam , have be deliver sooner than the green bag infallibly -- at least by twenty knot .-- Sport of small accident , ! that thout art , and ever will be ! have that trial be for thee , and it be fifty to one but it have , -- thy affair have not be so depress would --( at least by the depression of thy nose ) as they have be ; nor have the fortune of thy house and the occasion of make they , which have so often present themselves in the course of thy life , to thee , be so often , so vexatiously , so tamely , so irrecoverably abandon -- as thou hast be force to leave they ; -- but ' tis over ,-- all but the account of 'em , which can not be give to the curiious till I be get out into the world . end of the first volume . the Life and opinion of , . volume the imperitae non formidue judicia , meis taman , rogo , parcant opusculis -- in quibus fuit proposito semper , a jocis ad seria , in tseriis vicissim ad joco transire . . , . . great wit jump : for the moment cast he eye upon he bag ( which he have not do till the dispute with my uncle about mid-wifery put he in mind of it ) -- the very same thought occur 's mercy , quoth he ( to himself ) that . have have so bad a time of it ,-- else she might have be bring to be seven time tell , before one half of these knot could have get untied . -- but here you must distinguish -- the thought float only in 's mind , without sail or ballast to it , as a simple proposition ; million of which , as you worship know , be every day swimm quietly in the middle of the thin juice of a man 's understanding , without be carry backward or forward , till some little gust of passion or interest drive they to one side . a sudden trampling in the room above , near my mother 's bed , do the proposition the very service I be speak of . by all that be unfortunate , quoth , unless I make haste , the thing will actually befall I as it be . . in the case of knot , -- by which , in the first place , I would not be understand to mean slip - knot -- because in the course of my life and opinion -- my opinion concern they will come in more properly when I mention the catastrophe of my great uncle , -- a little man , -- but of high fancy :-- he rush into the duke of 's affair :-- nor , secondly , in this place , do I mean that particular species of knot call bow - knot ; -- there be so little address , or skill , or patience require in the unloose they , that they be below my give any opinion at all about they . -- but by the knot I be speak of , may it please you reverence to believe , that I mean good , honest , devilish tight , hard knot , make bona fide , as make he ; -- in which there be no quibbling provision make by the duplication and return of the two end of the string thro ' the annulus or noose make by the second implication of they -- to get they slipphave and undone by .-- I hope you apprehend I . in the case of these
these knot then , and of the several obstruction , which , may it please you reverence , such knot cast in we way in get through life -- every hasty man can whip out he pen-knife and cut through they .--' Tis wrong . believe I , , the most virtuous way , and which both reason and conscience dictate -- be to take we tooth or we finger to they .-- Dr . have lose he tooth -- he favourite instrument , by extract in a wrong direction , or by some misapplication of it , unfortunately slippe , he have formerly , in a hard labour , knock would out three of the best of they with the handle of it :-- he try he finger -- ala ; the nail of he finger and thumb be cut close .-- the duce take it ! I can make nothing of it either way , cry .-- the trampling over head near my mother 's bed - side increase .-- take the fellow ! I shall never get the knot untied as long as I live .-- my mother give a groan . -- Lend I you penknife -- I must e'en cut the knot at last --pugh !--psha !--Lord ! I have cut my thumb quite across to the very bone -- curse the fellow -- if there be not another man-midwife within fifty mile -- I be undone for this bout -- I wish the scoundrel hang ' -- I wish he be shoot -- I wish all the devils in hell have he for a blockhead !-- my father have a great respect for , and could not bear to hear he dispose of in such a manner -- he have moreover some little respect for himself -- and could as ill bear with the indignity offer to himself in it . have cut any part about he , but he thumb -- my father have pass ' it by -- he prudence have triumph : as it be , he be determined to have he revenge . small curse , , upon great occasion , quoth my father ( condol with he first upon the accident ) be but so much waste of we strength and soul 's health to no manner of purpose .-- I own it , reply .-- they be like sparrow - shot , quoth my uncle ( suspend he whistling ) fire against a bastion .-- they serve , continue my father , to stir the humours -- but carry off none of they acrimony :-- for my own part , I seldom swear or curse at all -- I hold it bad -- but if I fall into it by surprize , I generally retain so much presence of mind ( right , quoth my uncle ) as to make it answer my purpose -- that be , I swear on till I find myself easy . a wife and a just man however would always endeaavor to proportion the vent give to these humours , not only to the degree of they stirr within himself -- but to the size and ill intent of the offence upon which they be to fall .-- ' injuries come only from the heart , '-- quoth my uncle . for this reason , continue my father , with the most Cervantick gravity , I have the greatest veneration in the world for that gentleman , who , in distrust of he own discretion in this point , sit down and compose ( that be at he leisure ) fit form of swear suitable to all case , from the lowest to the highest provocation which could possibly happen to he -- which form be well consider by he , and such moreover as he could stand to , he keep they ever by he on the chimney - piece , within he reach , ready for use .-- I never apprehend , reply , that such a thing be ever think of -- much less execute . I beg you pardon , answer my father ; I be read , though not use , one of they to my brother Toby this morning , whilst he pour would out the tea --'tis here upon the shelf over my head ; -- but if I remember right , ' ti too violent for a cut of the thumb .-- not at all , quoth -- the take the fellow .-- then , answer my father , ' Tis much at you service , -- on condition you will read it aloud ;-- so rise up and reach down a form of excommunication of the church of , a copy of which , my father ( who be curiious in he collection ) have procure out of the leger - book of the church of , writ by the bishop -- with a most affected seriousness of look and voice , which might have cajol Ernulphus himself -- he put it into 's hand .-- wrapt he thumb up in the corner of he handkerchief , and with a wry face , though without any suspicion , read aloud , as follow -- my uncle Toby whistl as loud as he could all the time . ( as the geniuneness of the consultation of the upon the question of baptism , be doubt by some , and deny by other --'tbe think proper to print the original of this excommunication ; for the copy of which return thanks to the chapter clerk of the dean and chapter of . ) , per cap . 2.iii . Ex auctoritate omnipotentis , , et , et , et sanctorum canonum , sanctaeque et entemerata genetricis ,-- -- Atque omnium coelestium virtutum , angelorum , archangelorum , thronorum , dominationum , potestatuum , cherubin ac seraphing , & sanctorum patriarchum , prophetarum , & omnium apolstolorum
apolstolorum & evangelistarum , & sanctorum innocentum , qui in conspectu Agni soli digni inventi sunt canticum cantare novum , et sanctorum martyrum et sanctorum confessorum , et sanctarum virginum , atque omnium simul sanctorum et electorum Dei,-- Excommunicamus , et vel os s vel os anathematizamus hunc furem , vel hunc 's malefactorem , et a liminibus sancta ecclesia sequestramus , et taeternis vel I not supplicii excruciandus , mancipetur , cum Dathan et Abiram , et cum he qui dixerunt , Recede a nobis , scientiam viarum tuarum nolumus : et ficut aqua ignis extinguatur lu - vel eorum cerna ejus in secula seculorum nisi resque - n and rit , et ad satisfactionem venerit . Amen. os qui homi - os nem creavit . qui pro homine passus est . Maledicat os illum qui in baptismo ef - os fusus est . Maledicat illum sancta crux , qube Christus pro nostra salute hostem triumphan ascendit . os Maledicat illum sancta Dei genetrix et os perpetua . Maledicat illum sanctus , animarum susceptor sa - os crarum . Maledicant illum omnes angeli et archangeli , principatus et potestate , omnisque militia coelestis . os Maledicat illum patriarcharum et prophetarum laudabilis numerus . Maledicat os illum sanctus et , et sanctus , et sanctus , atque sanctus Andreas , omnesque apostoli , simul et caeteri discipuli , quatuor quoque evangelista , qui sua praedicatione mundum universum converte - os runt . Maledicat illum cuneus martyrum et confessorum mirificus , qui bonis operibus placitus inventus est os Maledicant illum sacrarum virginum chori , quae mundi vana causa honoris respuenda contempserunt . male - os dicant illum omnes sancti qui ab initio mundi usque in finem dilecto inveniuntur . os Maledicant illum coeli et terra , et omnia sancta in eis manentia . I and not sit ubicunque , fuerit , sive in domo , sive in agro , sive in via , sive in semita , sive in silva , sive in aqua , sive in ecclesia . I n sit vivendo , moriendo , --- manducando , bibendo , esuriendo , sitiendo , jejunando , dormitando , dormiendo , vigilando , ambulando , stando , sedendo , jacendo , operando , quiescendo , mingendo , cacando , flebotomando . I n sit in totis viribus corporis . I not sit intus et exterius . I and I sit in capillis ; maledictus and I not sit in cerebro . Maledictus sit in vertice , in temporibus , in fronte , in auriculis , in superciliis , in oculis , in genis , in maxillis , in naribus , in dentibus , mordacibus , in tlabris sive molibus , in labiis , in guttere , in humeris , in harnis , in brachiis , in manubus , in digitis , in pectore , in corde , et in omnibus interioribus stomacho tenus , in renibus , in inguinibus , in femore , in genitalibus , in coxis , in genubus , in cruribus , in pedibus , et in unguibus . Maledictus sit in ttotis compagibus membrorum , a vertice capitis , usque ad plantam pedi -- non sit in eo sanita . vivi toto suae majestatis imperio -- -- et insurgat adversus illum coelum cum omnibus virtutibus qua in eo moventur ad damnandum eum , nisi penituerit et ad satisfactionem venerit . amen . Fiat , fiat . amen . . ' by the authority of , the , , and Holy Ghost , and of the holy canons , and of the undefiled , mother and patroness of we saviour . ' I think there be no necessity , quoth , drop the paper down to he knee , and address himself to my father -- as you have read it over , , so lately , to read it aloud -- and as seem to have no great inclination to hear it -- I may as well read it to myself . that be contrary to treaty , reply my father :-- beside , there be something so whimsical , especially in the latter part of it , I should grieve to lose the pleasure of a second reading . do not altogether like it , -- but my uncle Toby offer at that instant to give over whistling , and read it himself to they ;-- . think he might as well read it under the cover of my uncle 's whistling -- as suffer my uncle to read it alone ; -- so raise up the paper to he face , and hold it quite parallel to it , in order to hide he chagrin -- he read it aloud as follow -- my uncle Toby whistl , though not quite so loud as before . ' by the authority of , the , , and Holy Ghost , and of the undefiled , mother and patroness of we saviour , and of all the celestial virtue , angel , archangel , throne , dominion , power , cherubin and seraphin , and of all the holy patriarch , prophet , and of all the apostle and evangelist , and of the holy innocent , who in the sight of the , be find worthy to s the new song of the holy martyr and holy confessor , and of the holy virgin , and of all the saint together , with the holy and elect of ,-- he ' ( ) ' be damn ' ' ( for tie these knot ) --'we excommunicate , and anathematize he , and from the threshold of the holy church of we sequester he , that he may be torment , dispose , and deliver over with and , and with those who say unto the , from we , we desire none of thy way . and as fire be quench with water , so let the light of he be put out for evermore , unless
unless it shall repent he ' ( Obadiah , of the knot which he have tie ) 'and make satisfaction ' ( for they ) ' . ' may the who create man , curse he .-- may the who suffer for we curse he .-- may the holy Ghost , who be give to we in baptism , curse he ' ( Obadiah ) --' May the holy cross which , for we salvation triumph over he enemy , ascend , curse he . ' may the holy and eternal , mother of , curse he .-- , the advocate of holy soul , curse he .-- all the angels and archangel , principality and power , and all the heavenly armie , curse he . ' ( we armie swore terribly in , cry my uncle , -- but nothing to this .-- for my own part I could not have a heart to curse my dog so . ) ' , the Praecursor , and the , and and , and , and all other 's apostle , together curse he . and may the rest of he disciple and four evangelist , who by they preaching convert the universal world , and may the holy and wonderful company of martyr and confessor who by they holy work be find pleasing to , curse he ' ( . ) ' may the holy choir of the holy virgin , who for the honour of have despise the thing of the world , damn he -- all the saint , who from the beginning of the world to everlast ag be find to be belove of , damn he -- may the heaven and earth , and all the holy thing remain therein , damn he , ' ( Obadiah ) 'or she ,' ( or whoever else have a hand in tie these knot . ) ' may he ( Obadiah ) be damn have wherever he be -- whether in the house or the stable , the garden or the field , or the highway , or in the path , or in the wood , or in the water , or in the church .-- may he be curse in living , in dying . ' ( here my uncle , take the advantage of a minim in the second bar of he tune , keep whistl one continue note to the end of the sentence .-- , with he division of curse move under he , like a run bass all the way . ) ' may he be curse in eating and drink , in be hungry , in be thirsty , in fasting , in sleeping , in slumbering , in walking , in standing , in , in lie , in work , in resting , in pissing , in shitting , and in blood - letting ! ' may he ' ( ) ' be curse in all the faculty of he body ! ' may he be curse inwardly and outwardly !-- may he be curse in the hair of he head !-- may he be curse in he brain , and in he vertex ,' ( that be a sad curse , quoth my father ) 'in he temple , in he forehead , in he ear , in he eye - brows , in he cheek , in he jaw - bone , in he nostril , in he fore - tooth and grinders , in he lip , in he throat , in he shoulders , in he wrist , in he arm , in he hand , in he finger ! ' may he be damn have in he mouth , in he breast , in he heart and purtenance , down to the very stomach ! ' may he be curse in he reins , and in he groin ,' ( God in heaven forbid ! quoth my uncle ) 'in he thigh , in he genitals ,' ( my father shook he head ) ' and in he hip , and in he knee , he leg , and foot , and toe - nail ! ' may he be curse in all the joint and articulation of the member , from the top of he head to the sole of he foot ! may there be no soundness in he ! ' may the son of the live , with all the glory of he Majesty ' --( here my uncle , throw back he head , give a monstrous , long , loud Whew -- with --w -- something betwixt the interjectional whistle of - day ! and the word itself .-- -- by the golden beard of -- and of ( if she majesty wore one ) and by the beard of the rest of you heathan worship , which by the bye be no small number , since what with the beard of you celestial gods , and god aerial and aquatick -- to say nothing of the beard of town - god and country - gods , or of the celestial goddess you wife , or of the infernal goddess you whore and concubine ( that be in case they wear they ) -- all which beard , as tell I , upon he word and honour , when muster up together , make no less than thirty thousand effective beard upon the establishment ;-- every beard of which claim the rights and privileges of be stroken and swear by -- by all these beard together then -- I vow and protest , that of the two bad cassock I be worth in the world , I would have give the better of they , as freely as ever offer he -- to have stand by , and hear my uncle 's accompanyment . --' curse he !'-- continue ,--'and may heave , with all the power which move
move therein , rise up against he , curse and damn he ' ( Obadiah ) ' unless he repent and make satisfaction ! amen . so be it , -- so be it . amen . ' I declare , quoth my uncle , my heart would not let I curse the himself with so much bitterness . -- he be the father of curse , reply .-- so be not I , reply my uncle .-- but he be curse , and damn would already , to all eternity , reply . I be sorry for it , quoth my uncle . draw up he mouth , and be just begin to return my uncle Toby the compliment of he --u --u -- or interjectional whistle -- when the door hastily open in the next chapter but one -- put a end to the affair . . now do not let we give ourselves a parcel of air , and pretend that the oath we make free with in this land of liberty of ours be we own ; and because we have the spirit to swear they ,-- imagine that we have have the wit to invent they too . I will undertake this moment to prove it to any man in the world , except to a connoisseur :-- though I declare I object only to a connoisseur in swear ,- - as I would do to a connoisseur in painting , &c . & c. the whole set of th'ey be so hung round and befetish would with the bobs and trinket of criticism , -- or to drop my metaphor , which by the bye be a pity -- for I have fetch ' it as far as from the coast of ; -- they head , , be stuck so full of rule and compass , and have that eternal propensity to apply they upon all occasion , that a work of genius have better go to the devil at once , than stand to be prick ' and torture to death by th'ey . -- and how do speak the soliloquy last night ? -- oh , against all rule , my lord , -- most ungrammatically ! betwixt the substantive and the adjective , which should agree together in number , case , and gender , he make a breach thus , -- stop , as if the point want settling ; -- and betwixt the nominative case , which you lordship know should govern the verb , he suspend he voice in the epilogue a dozen time three seconds and three fifth by a stop watch , my lord , each time .-- Admirable grammarian ! --but in suspend he voice -- be the sense suspend likewise ? do no expression of attitude or countenance fill up the chasm ?-- be the eye silent ? do you narrowly look ?--i look would only at the stop - watch , my lord .-- excellent observer ! and what of this new book the whole world make such a rout about ?-- oh ! ' ti out of all plumb , my lord , -- quite a irregular thing !-- not one of the angles at the four corner be a right angle .-- I have my rule and compass , &c. my lord , in my pocket .-- excellent critick ! -- and for the epick poem you lordship bid I look at -- upon take the length , breadth , height , and depth of it , and try they at home upon a exact scale of 's --' ti out , my lord , in every one of its dimension .- - Admirable connoisseur ! -- and do you step in , to take a look at the grand picture in you way back ?--'Tis a melancholy daub ! my lord ; not one principle of the pyramid in any one group !-- and what a price !-- for there be nothing of the colouring of -- the expression of Rubens -- the grace of -- the purity of -- the corregiescity of -- the learning of -- the air of -- the taste of the -- or the grand contour of .- - grant I patience , just Heaven ! -- of all the cant which be cant in this canting world -- though the cant of hypocrite may be the worst -- the cant of criticism be the most tormenting ! I would go fifty mile on foot , for I have not a horse worth ride on , to kiss the hand of that man whose generous heart will give up the rein of he imagination into he author 's hand -- be pleased he know not why , and care not wherefore . great ! if thou be in a give humour -- give I -- I ask no more , but one stroke of native humour , with a single spark of thy own fire along with it -- and send , with the rule and compass , if he can be spare , with my compliment to -- no matter . now to any one else I will undertake to prove , that all the oath and imprecation which we have be puffe off upon the world for these two hundred and fifty year last past as original -- except 's -- 's flesh and 's fish , which be oath monarchical , and , consider who make they , not much amiss ; and as king oath , ' tis not much matter whether they be fish or flesh ;-- else I say , there be not a oath , or at least a curse amongst they , which have not be copy over and over again out of a thousand time : but , like all other copy , how infinitely short of the force and spirit of the original !-- it
it be think to be no bad oath -- and by itself pass very well --'g - would damn you .' -- set it beside 's --' almighty the damn you -- the damn you -- the Ghost damn you '-- you see ' ti nothing .-- there be a orientality in he , we can not rise up to : besides , he be more copious in he invention --possess would more of the excellency of a swearer -- have such a thorough knowledge of the human frame , its membrane , nerve , ligament , knitting of the joint , and articulation , -- that when curse -- no part escape he t.--'Tis true there be something of a hardness in he manner -- and , as in , a want of -- but then there be such a greatness of gusto ! my father , who generally look would upon every thing in a light very different from all mankind , would , after all , never allow this to be a original . -- he consider rather 's anathema , as a institute of swear , in which , as he suspect , upon the decline of swear in some milder pontificate , , by order of the succeed pope , have with great learning and diligence collect together all the law of it ; -- for the same reason that , in the decline of the empire , have order he chancellor Tribonian to collect the or civil law all together into one code or digest -- lest , through the rust of time -- and the fatality of all thing commit to oral tradition -- they should be lose to the world for ever . for this reason my father would oft -time affirm , there be not a oath from the great and tremendous oath of the conqueror ( by the splendour of ) down to the lowest oath of a scavenger ( damn you eye ) which be not to be find in .-- in short , he would add -- I defy a man to swear out of it . the hypothesis be , like most of my father 's , singular and ingenious too ;-- nor have I any objection to it , but that it overturn my own . . -- bless my soul !--my poor mistress be ready to faint -- and she pain be gone -- and the drop be do -- and the bottle of julap be broke -- and the nurse have cut she arm --( and I , my thumb , cry , ) and the child be where it be , continue , -- and the midwife have fall backwards upon the edge of the fender , and bruise she hip as black as you hat .-- I will look at it , quoth .-- there be no need of that , reply , -- you have better look at my mistress -- but the midwife would gladly first give you a account how thing be , so desire you would go up stair and speak to she this moment . human nature be the same in all profession . the midwife have just before be put over 's head -- he have not digest it .-- no , reply , ' twould be full as proper if the midwife come down to I .-- I like subordination , quoth my uncle , -- and but for it , after the reduction of , I know not what might have become of the garrison of , in the mutiny for bread , in the year ten .-- , reply , ( parody my uncle 's hobby - horsical reflection ; though full as hobby - horsical himself ) -- do I know , , what might have become of the garrison above stair , in the mutiny and confusion I find all thing be in at present , but for the subordination of finger and thumb to . . .-- the application of which , , under this accident of mine , come in so a propo , that without it , the cut upon my thumb might have be feel by the Shandy family , as long as the family have a name . . let we go back to the . . .-- in the last chapter . it be a singular stroke of eloquence ( at least it be so , when eloquence flourish at and , and would be so now , do orator wear mantle ) not to mention the name of a thing , when you have the thing about you in petto , ready to produce , pop , in the place you want it . a scar , a axe , a sword , a pink would doublet , a rusty helmet , a pound and a half of pot - ash in a urn , or a three - halfpenny pickle pot -- but above all , a tender infant royally accour .-- ' if it be too young , and the oration as long as 's second -- it must certainly have beshin the orator 's mantle . -- and then again , if too old , -- it must have be unwieldly and incommodious to he action -- so as to make he lose by he child almost as much as he could gain by it .-- otherwise , when a state orator have hit the precise age to a minute -- hide he in he mantle so cunningly that no mortal could smell it -- and produce it so critically , that no soul could say , it come in by head and shoulders -- oh ! it have do wonder -- it have open have the sluice , and turn would the brain , and shake the principle , and unhinge the politick of half a nation . these feat however
however be not to be do , except in those states and time , I say , where orator wear mantle -- and pretty large one too , my breth , with some twenty or five - and - twenty yard of good purple , superfine , marketable cloth in they -- with large flowing fold and double , and in a great style of design .-- all which plainly shew , may it please you worship , that the decay of eloquence , and the little good service it do at present , both within and without door , be owe to nothing else in the world , but short coat , and the disuse of trunk -hose .-- we can conceal nothing under ours , Madam , worth shewing . . be within a ace of be a exception to all this argumentation : for happen to have he green baize bag upon he knee , when he begin to parody my uncle --'tbe as good as the best mantle in the world to he : for which purpose , when he foresee the sentence would end in he new - invent forcep , he thrust he hand into the bag in order to have they ready to clap in , when you reverence take so much notice of the . . . , which have he manage -- my uncle have certainly be overthrow : the sentence and the argument in that case jump closely in one point , so like the two line which form the salient angle of a ravelin , -- . would never have give they up ; -- and my uncle would as soon have think of fly , as take they by force : but fumble so vilely in pull they out , it take off the whole effect , and what be a ten time worse evil ( for they seldom come alone in this life ) in pull out he forcep , he forcep unfortunately draw out the squirt along with it . when a proposition can be take in two sense --'ti a law in disputation , that the respondent may reply to which of the two he please , or find most convenient for he .-- this throw the advantage of the argument quite on my uncle 's side .--' ! ' cry my uncle , ' be child bring into the world with a squirt ? ' . -- upon my honour , , you have tore every bit of skin quite off the back of both my hand with you forcep , cry my uncle -- and you have crush ' all my knuckle into the bargain with they to a jelly . ' Ti you own fault , say -- you should have clinch would you two fists together into the form of a child 's head as I tell you , and sit firm .-- I do so , answer my uncle .-- then the point of my forcep have not be sufficiently arm ' , or the rivet want closing -- or else the cut on my thumb have make I a little aukward -- or possibly --'Tis well , quoth my father , interrupt the detail of possibility -- that the experiment be not first make upon my child 's head - piece .-- it would not have be a cherry - sto the worse , answer .-- I maintain it , say my uncle , it would have break the cerebellum ( unless indeed the skull have be as hard as a granado ) and turn would it all into a perfect posset .-- Pshaw ! reply , a child 's head be naturally as soft as the pap of a apple ; -- the suture give way -- and besides , I could have extract by the foot after .-- not you , say she .-- I rather wish you would begin that way , quoth my father . pray do , add my uncle . . -- and pray , good woman , after all , will you take upon you to say , it may not be the child 's hip , as well as the child 's head ?--'Tis most certainly the head , reply the midwife . because , continue ( turn to my father ) as positive as these old lady generally be t--'tis a point very difficult to know -- and yet of the greatest consequence to be know ; -- because , , if the hip be mistaken for the head -- there be a possibility ( if it be a boy ) that the forcep . . .. -- what the possibility be , whisper very low to my father , and then to my uncle .-- there be no such danger , continue he , with the head .-- no , in truth quoth my father -- but when you possibility have take place at the hip -- you may as well take off the head too . -- it be morally impossible the reader should understand this --'tis enough understand it ;-- so take the green baize bag in he hand , with the help of 's pumps , he tripp would pretty nimbly , for a man of he size , across the room to the door -- and from the door be shew the way , by the good old midwife , to my mother 's apartment . . it be two hour , and ten minute -- and no more -- cry my father , look at he watch , since and arrive -- and I know not how it happen , -- but to my imagination it seem almost a age . -- here --pray , Sir , take hold of my cap -- nay , take the bell along with it , and my pantoufle too . now , , they be all at you
you service ; and I freely make you a present of th'ey , on condition you give I all you attention to this chapter . though my father say , ' he know not how it happe n' , '-- yet he know very well how it happen would ; -- and at the instant he speak it , be pre-determined in he mind to give my uncle a clear account of the matter by a metaphysical dissertation upon the subject of duration and its simple modes , in order to show my uncle by what mechanism and mensuration in the brain it come to pass , that the rapid succession of they idea , and the eternal scampering of the discourse from one thing to another , since have come into the room , have lengthen out so short a period to so inconceivable a extent .--'I know not how it happen -- cry my father , -- but it seem a age . ' --'Tis owe entirely , quoth my uncle , to the succession of we idea . my father , who have a itch , in common with all philosopher , of reasoning upon every thing which happen , and account for it too --propose infinite pleasure to himself in this , of the succession of idea , and have not the least apprehension of have it snatch ' out of he hand by my uncle , who ( honest man ! ) generally take every thing as it happen ; -- and who , of all thing in the world , trouble he brain the least with abstruse think ; -- the idea of time and space -- or how we come by those idea -- or of what stuff they be make -- or whether they be bear with we -- or we pick they up afterwards as we go along -- or whether we do it in frock -- or not till we have get into breech -- with a thousand other inquiry and dispute about , , , and so forth , upon whose desperate and unconquerable theory so many fine head have be turn and crack -- never do my uncle 's the least injury at all ; my father know it -- and be no less surprized than he be disappointed , with my uncle 's fortuitous solution . do you understand the theory of that affair ? reply my father . not I , quoth my uncle . -- but you have some idea , say my father , of what you talk about ? no more than my horse , reply my uncle . gracious heaven ! cry my father , look upward , and clasp he two hand together -- there be a worth in thy honest ignorance , brother -- ' twere almost a pity to exchange it for a knowledge . -- but I will tell thee .-- to understand what time be aright , without which we never can comprehend infinity , insomuch as one be a portion of the other -- we ought seriously to sit down and consider what idea it be we have of duration , so as to give a satisfactory account how we come by it .-- what be that to any body ? quoth my uncle . ( . ) for if you will turn you eye inwards upon you mind , continue my father , and observe attentively , you will perceive , brother , that whilst you and I be talk together , and think , and smoke we pipe , or whilst we receive successively idea in we minds , we know that we do exist , and so we estimate the existence , or the continuation of the existence of ourselves , or any thing else , commensurate to the succession of any idea in we minds , the duration of ourselves , or any such other thing co-exist with we thinking -- and so accord to that preconceive -- you puzzle I to death , cry my uncle . --'Tis owe to this , reply my father , that in we computation of time , we be so used to minute , hour , week , and month -- and of clock ( I wish there be not a clock in the kingdom ) to measure out they several portion to we , and to those who belong to we -- that 'twill be well , if in time to come , the succession of we idea be of any use or service to we at all . now , whether we observe it or no , continue my father , in every sound man 's head , there be a regular succession of idea of one sort or other , which follow each other in train just like -- a train of artillery ? say my uncle -- a train of a fiddle - stick !-- quoth my father -- which follow and succeed one another in we minds at certain distance , just like the image in the inside of a lanthorn turn round by the heat of a candle .-- I declare , quoth my uncle , mine be more like a smoke - jack ,-- then , brother , I have nothing more to say to you upon that subject , say my father . . -- what a conjuncture be here lose !-- my father in one of he best explanatory mood -- in eager pursuit of a metaphysical point into the very region , where cloud and thick darkness would soon have encompass it about ; -- my uncle in one of the finest disposition for it in the world ;--he head like a smoke - jack ; -- the funnel unswept , and the idea whir round and round about in it , all obfuscate and darken over with fuliginous matter !-- by the tomb - stone
stone of -- if it be in be -- if not , why then by he ash ! by the ash of my dear Rabelais , and dearer Cervantes ! --my father and my uncle 's discourse upon and - - be a discourse devoutly to be wish for ! and the petulancy of my father 's humour , in put a stop to it as he do , be a robbery of the Ontologic Treasury of such a jewel , as no coalition of great occasion and great man be ever likely to restore to it again . . ' my father persist in not go on with the discourse -- yet he could not get my uncle 's smoke - jack out of he head --pique as he be at first with it ;-- there be something in the comparison at the bottom , which hit he fancy ; for which purpose , rest he elbow upon the table , and recline the right side of he head upon the palm of he hand -- but look first stedfastly in the fire -- he begin to commune with himself , and philosophize about it : but he spirit be wear out with the fatigue of investigate new tract , and the constant exertion of he faculty upon that variety of subject which have take they turn in the discourse -- the idea of the smoke jack soon turn all he idea upside down -- so that he fall asleep almost before he know what he be about . as for my uncle , he smoke - jack have not make a dozen revolution , before he fall asleep also .-- peace be with they both !-- be engage with the midwife and my mother above stair .-- Tre be busy in turn a old pair of jack - boot into a couple of mortar , to be employ in the siege of next summer -- and be this instant bor the touch - hole with the point of a hot poker .-- all my heroe be off my hand ;--'ti the first time I have have a moment to spare -- and I will make use of it , and write my preface . the author 's Preface no , I will not say a word about it -- here it be ; -- in publishe it -- I have appeal to the world -- and to the world I leave it ; -- it must speak for itself . all I know of the matter be -- when I sit down , my intent be to write a good book ; and as far as the tenuity of my understanding would hold out -- a wise , aye , and a discreet -- take care only , as I go along , to put into it all the wit and the judgment ( be it more or less ) which the great author and Bestower of they have think fit originally to give I -- so that , as you worship see --'tis just as pleasis . now , ( speak dispraisingly ) sayeth , that there may be some wit in it , for atch he know -- but no judgment at all . and and agree theretoo , ask , how be it possible there should ? for that wit and judgament in this world never go together ; inasmuch as they be two operation differ from each other as wide as east from west -- so , say Locke -- so be fart and hickup , say I . but in answer to this , Didius the great church lawyer , in he code de fartendi et illustrandi fallaciis , doth maintain and make fully appear , that a illustration be no argument -- nor do I maintain the wiping of a look - glass clean to be a syllogism ; -- but you all , may it please you worship , see the better for it -- so that the main good these thing do be only to clarify the understanding , previous to the application of the argument itself , in order to free it from any little mote , or speck of opacular matter , which , if leave swimm therein , might hinder a conception and spoil all . now , my dear anti-Shandean , and thrice able critick , and fellow - labourer ( for to you I write this Preface ) -- and to you , most subtle statesman and discreet doctor ( do -- pull off you beard ) renowne for gravity and wisdom ;-- , my politician -- , my counsel ; , my friend ; -- , my guide ;-- Gastripheres , the preserver of my life ; , the balm and repose of it -- not forget all other , as well sleep as waking , ecclesiastical as civil , whom for brevity , but out of no resentment to you , I lump all together .-- believe I , right worthy , my most zealous wish and fervent prayer in you behalf , and in my own too , in case the thing be not do already for we -- be , that the great gift and endowment both of wit and judgment , with every thing which usually go along with they -- such as memory , fancy , genius , eloquence , quick part , and what not , may this precious moment , without stint or measure , let or hindrance , be pour down warm as each of we could bear it -- scum and sediment and all ( for I would not have a drop lose ) into the several receptacle , cell , cellule , domicile , dormitory , refectory , and spare place of we brain -- in such sort , that they might continue to be inject and tunn ' into , accord to the true
true intent and meaning of my wish , until every vessel of they , both great and small , be so replenish ' , saturate , and fill up therewith , that no more , would it save a man 's life , could possibly be get either in or out . bless we !-- what noble work we should make !-- how should I tickle it off !-- and what spirit should I find myself in , to be write away for such reader ! -- and you -- just heave !--with what rapture would you sit and read - - but oh !--'tis too much -- I be sick -- I faint away deliciously at the thought of it --'tis more than nature can bear !-- lay hold of I -- I be giddy -- I be sto blind -- I be die -- I be go .-- help ! help ! help !--but hold -- I grow something better again , for I be begin to foresee , when this be over , that as we shall all of we continue to be great wit -- we should never agree amongst ourselves , one day to a end :-- there would be so much satire and sarcasm -- scoffing and flout , with railly and repartee of it -- thrust and parry in one corner or another -- there would be nothing but mischief among we -- Chaste star ! what bite and scratch , and what a racket and a clatter we should make , what with breaking of head , rapping of knuckle , and hit of sore place -- there would be no such thing as live for we . but then again , as we should all of we be man of great judgament , we should make up matter as fast as ever they go wrong ; and though we should abominate each other ten time worse than so many devils or deviless , we should nevertheless , my dear creature , be all courtesy and kindness , milk and honey --'twould be a second land of promise -- a paradise upon earth , if there be such a thing to be have -- so that upon the whole we should have do well enough . all I fret and fume at , and what must distress my invention at present , be how to bring the point itself to bear ; for as you worship well know , that of these heavenly emanation of wit and judgment , which I have so bountifully wish both for you worship and myself -- there be but a certain quantum store up for we all , for the use and behoon of the whole race of mankind ; and such small modicum of th'ey be only send forth into this wide world , circulate here and there in one bye corner or another -- and in such narrow stream , and at such prodigious interval from each other , that one would wonder how it hold out , or could be sufficient for the want and emergency of so many great estate , and populious empire . indeed there be one thing to be consider , that in , , and in all those cold and dreary track of the globe , which lie more directly under the arctick and antartick circle , where the whole province of a man 's concernment lie for near nine month together within the narrow compass of he cave -- where the spirit be compress almost to nothing -- and where the passion of a man , with every thing which belong to they , be as frigid as the zone itself -- there the least quantity of judgment imaginable do the business -- and of wit -- there be a total and a absolute save -- for as not one spark be want -- so not one spark be give . angel and minister of defend we ! what a dismal thing would it have be to have govern a kingdom , to have fight a battle , or make a treaty , or run a match , or write a book , or get a child , or hold a provincial chapter there , with so plentiful a lack of wit and judgment about we ! for mercy 's sake , let we think no more about it , but travel on as fast as we can southward into -- cross over , if you please , through the small triangular province of to the lake of ; coaste along it through and , down to , and so on , through all those state and province which border upon the far side of the gulf of , and the north - east of the , up to , and just step into ; -- then stretch over directly from thence through the north part of the russian empire -- leave a little upon the left hand , till we get into the very heart of and . now through this long tour which I have lead you , you observe the good people be better off by far , than in the polar country which we have just leave :-- for if you hold you hand over you eye , and look very attentively , you may perceive some small glimmering ( as it be ) of wit , with a comfortable provision of good plain houshold judgment , which , take the quality and quantity of it together , they make a very good shift with -- and have they more of either the one or the other , it would destroy the proper balance betwixt they , and I be satisfy moreover they would want occasion to put they to use . now , , if I conduct you home again into this warmer and more luxuriant island , where you perceive the spring
spring - tide of we blood and humour run high -- where we have more ambition , and pride , and envy , and lechery , and other whoreson passion upon we hand to govern and subject to reason -- the height of we wit , and the depth of we judgment , you see , be exactly proportion to the length and breadth of we necessity -- and accordingly we have they send down amongst we in such a flow kind of decent and creditable plenty , that no one think he have any cause to complain . it must however be confess on this head , that , as we air blow hot and cold -- wet and dry , ten time in a day , we have they in no regular and settled way ; --so that sometimes for near half a century together , there shall be very little wit or judgment either to be see or hear of amongst we :-- the small channel of they shall seem quite dry up -- then all of a sudden the sluice shall break out , and take a fit of run again like fury -- you would think they would never stop :-- and then it be , that in writing , and fight , and twenty other gallant thing , we drive all the world before we . it be by these observation , and a wary reason by analogy in that kind of argumentative process , which call dialectick induction -- that I draw and set up this position as most true and veritable ; that of these two luminary so much of they irradiation be suffer from time to time to shine down upon we , as he , whose infinite wisdom which dispense every thing in exact weight and measure , knows will just serve to light we on we way in this night of we obscurity ; so that you reverence and worships now find out , nor be it a moment longer in my power to conceal it from you , that the fervent wish in you behalf with which I set out , be no more than the first insinuating how would 'ye of a caressing prefacer , stifle he reader , as a lover sometimes do a coy mistress , into silence . for ala ! could this effusion of light have be as easily procure , as the exordium wish it -- I tremble to think how many thousand for it , of benight traveller ( in the learn sciences at least ) must have grope and blundere on in the dark , all the night of they life -- run they head against post , and knock out they brain without ever get to they journy end ;-- some falling with they nos perpendicularly into sink -- other horizontally with they tail into kennel . here one half of a learn profession til full but against the other half of it , and then tumbl and roll one over the other in the dirt like hog .-- here the breth of another profession , who should have run in opposition to each other , fly on the contrary like a flock of wild geese , all in a row the same way .-- what confusion !-- what mistake !- -fiddler and painter judge by they eye and ears -- admirable !--trust to the passion excit -- in a air sung , or a story pain to the heart -- instead of measure they by a quadrant . in the fore - ground of this picture , a statesman turn the political wheel , like a brute , the wrong way round -- against the stream of corruption - - by !--instead of with it . in this corner , a son of the , write a book against predestination ; perhaps worse -- feel he patient 's pulse , instead of he apothecary 's -- a brother of the Faculty in the back - ground upon he knee in tear -- draw the curtain of a mang victim to beg he forgiveness ;-- offer a fee -- instead of take one . in that spacious Hall , a coalition of the gown , from all the bar of it , drive a damn have , dirty , vexatious cause before they , with all they might and main , the wrong way !--kick it out of the great door , instead of , in -- and with such fury in they look , and such a degree of inveteracy in they manner of kick it , as if the law have be originally make for the peace and preservation of mankind :-- perhaps a more enormous mistake commit by they still -- a litigated point fairly hang up ; -- for instance , o's he nose could stand in o'Stiles he face , without a trespass , or not -- rashly determine by they in five - and - twenty minute , which , with the cautious pro and con require in so intricate a proceeding , might have take up as many month -- and if carry on upon a military plan , as you honour know a action should be , with all the stratagem practicable therein , -- such as feint ,-- force march ,-- surprizes--ambuscade -- mask - battery , and a thousand other stroke of generalship , which consist in catching at all advantages on both side -- might reasonably have last they as many year , find food and raiment all that term for a centumvirate of the profession . as for the clergy -- no -- if I say a word against they , I will be shoot .-- I have no desire ; and beside , if I have -- I durst not for my soul touch upon the subject -- with such weak nerve and spirit , and in
in the condition I be in at present , ' twould be as much as my life be worth , to deject and contrist myself with so bad and melancholy a account -- and therefore ' tis safer to draw a curtain across , and hasten from it , as fast as I can , to the main and principal point I have undertake to clear up -- and that be , how it come to pass , that you man of least wit be report to be man of most judgment . -- but -- I say , report to be -- for it be no more , my dear Sirs , than a report , and which , like twenty other take up every day upon trust , I maintain to be a vile and a malicious report into the bargain . this by the help of the observation already premise , and I hope already weigh and perpend by you reverence and worship , I shall forthwith make appear . I hate set dissertation -- and above all thing in the world , ' tis one of the silliest thing in one of they , to darke you hypothesis by place a number of tall , opake word , one before another , in a right line , betwixt you own and you reader 's conception -- when in all likelihood , if you have look about , you might have see something stand , or hang up , which would have clear the point at once --' for what hindrance , hurt , or harm doth the laudable desire of knowledge bring to any man , if even from a sot , a pot , a fool , a stool , a winter-mittain , a truckle for a pully , the lid of a goldsmith 's crucible , a oil bottle , a old slipper , or a cane chair ? '-- I be this moment sit upon one . will you give I leave to illustrate this affair of wit and judgment , by the two knob on the top of the back of it ?- - they be fasten on , you see , with two peg stick slightly into two gimlet - hole , and will place what I have to say in so clear a light , as to let you see through the drift and meaning of my whole preface , as plainly as if every point and particle of it be make up of sun -beam . I enter now directly upon the point . -- here stand wit -- and there stand judgment , close beside it , just like the two knob I be speak of , upon the back of this self - same chair on which I be sitte . -- you see , they be the highest and most ornamental part of its frame -- as wit and judgment be of ours -- and like they too , indubitably both make and fit to go together , in order , as we say in all such case of duplicated embellishment -- to answer one another . now for the sake of a experiment , and for the clearer illustrate this matter -- let we for a moment take off one of these two curiious ornament ( I care not which ) from the point or pinnacle of the chair it now stand on -- nay , do not laugh at it , -- but do you ever see , in the whole course of you life , such a ridiculous business as this have make of it ?-- why , ' tis as miserable a sight as a sow with one ear ; and there be just as much sense and symmetry in the one as in the other :-- do --pray , get off you seat only to take a view of it , -- now would any man who value he character a straw , have turn a piece of work out of he hand in such a condition ?--nay , lay you hand upon you heart , and answer this plain question , whether this one single knob , which now stand here like a blockhead by itself , can serve any purpose upon earth , but to put one in mind of the want of the other ?-- and let I farther ask , in case the chair be you own , if you would not in you conscience think , rather than be as it be , that it would be ten time better without any knob at all ? now these two knob -- or top ornament of the mind of man , which cry the whole entablature -- be , as I say , wit and judgment , which of all other , as I have prove it , be the most needful -- the most priz ' -- the most calamitous to be without , and consequently the hardest to come at -- for all these reason put together , there be not a mortal among we , so destitute of a love of good fame or feeding -- or so ignorant of what will do he good therein -- who do not wish and stedfastly resolve in he own mind , to be , or to be think at least , master of the one or the other , and indeed of both of they , if the thing seem any way feasible , or likely to be bring to pass . now you graver gentry have little or no kind of chance in aim at the one -- unless they lay hold of the other ,-- pray what do you think would become of they ?-- why , Sirs , in spite of all they gravity , they must e'en have be contente to have go with they insides naked -- this be not to be
be borne , but by a effort of philosophy not to be suppose in the case we be upon -- so that no one could well have be angry with they , have they be satisfied with what little they could have snatch up and secret under they cloak and great perriwig , have they not raise a hue and cry at the same time against the lawful owner . I need not tell you worship , that this be do with so much cunning and artifice -- that the great Locke , who be seldom outwit by false sound -- be nevertheless bubble here . the cry , it seem , be so deep and solemn a one , and what with the help of great wig , grave face , and other implement of deceit , be render so general a one against the poor wit in this matter , that the philosopher himself be deceive by it -- it be he glory to free the world from the lumber of a thousand vulgar error ; -- but this be not of the number ; so that instead of sit down coolly , as such a philosopher should have do , to have examine the matter of fact before he philosophise upon it -- on the contrary he take the fact for grant , and so join in with the cry , and halloo would it as boisterously as the rest . this have be make the of stupidity ever since -- but you reverence plainly see , it have be obtain in such a manner , that the title to it be not worth a groat :-- which by - the - bye be one of the many and vile imposition which gravity and grave folk have to answer for hereafter . as for great wig , upon which I may be think to have speak my mind too freely -- I beg leave to qualify whatever have be unguardedly say to they dispraise or prejudice , by one general declaration -- that I have no abhorrence whatever , nor do I detest and abjure either great wig or long beard , any farther than when I see they be bespeak and let grow on purpose to carry on this self - same imposture -- for any purpose -- peace be with they !--> mark only -- I write not for they . . every day for at least ten year together do my father resolve to have it mende --'tis not mende yet ; -- no family but ours would have borne with it a hour -- and what be most astonishing , there be not a subject in the world upon which my father be so eloquent , as upon that of door -hinge .-- and yet at the same time , he be certainly one of the greatest bubble to they , I think , that history can produce : he rhetorick and conduct be at perpetual handy -cuff .-- never do the parlour - door open -- but he philosophy or he principle fall a victim to it ;-- three drop of oil with a feather , and a smart stroke of a hammer , have save he honour for ever . -- Inconsistent soul that man be !-- languish under wound , which he have the power to heal !-- he whole life a contradiction to he knowledge !-- he reason , that precious gift of to he --( instead of pouring in oil ) serving but to sharpen he sensibility -- to multiply he pain , and render he more melancholy and uneasy under they ! -- poor unhappy creature , that he should do so !-- be not the necessary cause of misery in this life enow , but he must add voluntary one to he stock of sorrow ; -- struggle against evils which can not be avoid , and submit to other , which a tenth part of the trouble they create he would remove from he heart for ever ? by all that be good and virtuous , if there be three drop of oil to be get , and a hammer to be find within ten mile of -- the parlour door hinge shall be mende this reign . . when have bring he two mortar to bear , he be delighted with he handy - work above measure ; and know what a pleasure it would be to he master to see they , he be not able to resist the desire he have of carry they directly into he parlour . now next to the moral lesson I have in view in mention the affair of hinge , I have a speculative consideration arise out of it , and it be this . have the parlour door open and turn would upon its hinge , as a door should do -- or for example , as cleverly as we government have be turn upon its hinge --( that be , in case thing have all along go well with you worship ,--otherwise I give up my simile ) -- in this case , I say , there have be no danger either to master or man , in corporal 's peeping in : the moment he have beheld my father and my uncle fast asleep -- the respectfulness of he carriage be such , he would have retire as silent as death , and leave they both in they arm -chair , dream as happy as he have find they : but the thing be , morally speak , so very impracticable , that for the many year in which this hinge be suffer to be out of order , and amongst the hourly grievance my father submit to upon its account -- this be one ; that he never fold he arm to take he nap after dinner , but the thought of be
be unavoidably awaken by the first person who should open the door , be always uppermost in he imagination , and so incessantly stepp would in betwixt he and the first balmy presage of he repose , as to rob he , as he often declare , of the whole sweet of it . ' when thing move upon bad hinge , a ' please you lordship , how can it be otherwise ? ' pray what be the matter ? who be there ? cry my father , wake , the moment the door begin to creak .-- I wish the smith would give a peep at that confound hinge .--'Tis nothing , a please you honour , say , but two mortar I be bring in .-- they sha not make a clatter with they here , cry my father hastily .-- if have any drug to pound , let he do it in the kitchen .-- May it please you honour , cry Trim , they be two mortar - piece for a siege next summer , which I have be make out of a pair of jack - boot , which tell I you honour have leave off wear .-- by ! cry my father , spring out of he chair , as he swore -- I have not one appointment belong to I , which I set so much store by as I do by these jack - boot -- they be we great grandfather 's brother -- they be hereditary . then I fear , quoth my uncle , have cut off the entail .-- I have only cut off the top , a ' please you honour , cry Trim -- I hate perpetuity as much as any man alive , cry my father -- but these jack - boot , continue he ( smile , though very angry at the same time ) have be in the family , brother , ever since the civil wars ;-- wear they at the battle of - .-- I declare I would not have take ten pound for they . -- I will pay you the money , brother , quoth my uncle , look at the two mortar with infinite pleasure , and put he hand into he breech pocket as he view they -- I will pay you the ten pound this moment with all my heart and soul .-- , reply my father , alte he tone , you care not what money you dissipate and throw away , provide , continue he , ' tis but upon a siege .-- have I not one hundred and twenty pound a year , besides my half pay ? cry my uncle .-- what be that -- reply my father hastily -- to ten pound for a pair of jack - boot ?-- twelve guinea for you pontoon ?--half as much for you draw - bridge ? -- to say nothing of the train of little brass artillery you bespeak last week , with twenty other preparation for the siege of : believe I , dear brother , continue my father , take he kindly by the hand -- these military operation of yours be above you strength ; -- you mean well brother -- but they carry you into greater expence than you be first aware of ; -- and take my word , dear , they will in the end quite ruin you fortune , and make a beggar of you .-- what signify it if they do , brother , reply my uncle , so long as we know ' tis for the good of the nation ?-- my father could not help smile for he soul -- he anger at the worst be never more than a spark ; -- and the zeal and simplicity of -- and the generous ( though hobby - horsical ) gallantry of my uncle , bring he into perfect good humour with they in a instant . generous soul !--God prosper you both , and you mortar -piece too ! quoth my father to himself . . all be quiet and hush , cry my father , at least above stair -- I hear not one foot stirring .-- , who be in the kitchen ? there be no one soul in the kitchen , answer , make a low bow as he speak , except ! cry my father ( get upon he leg a second time ) -- not one single thing have go right this day ! have I faith in astrology , brother , ( which , by the bye , my father have ) I would have swear some retrograde planet be hang over this unfortunate house of mine , and turn every individual thing in it out of its place .-- why , I think have be above stair with my wife , and so say you .-- what can the fellow be puzzl about in the kitchen ! -- he be busy , a ' please you honour , reply , in make a bridge .--'Tis very obliging in he , quoth my uncle :--pray , give my humble service to , , and tell he I thank he heartily . you must know , my uncle mistake the bridge -- as widely as my father mistake the mortar :-- but to understand how my uncle could mistake the bridge -- I fear I must give you a exact account of the road which lead to it ; -- or to drop my metaphor ( for there be nothing more dishonest in a historian than the use of one ) -- in order to conceive the probability of this error in my uncle aright , I must give you some account of a adventure of 's , though much against my will , I say much against my will , only because the story , in one sense
sense , be certainly out of it be place here ; for by right it should come in , either amongst the anecdote of my uncle 's amour with widow , in which corporal Trim be no mean actor -- or else in the middle of he and my uncle 's campaigns on the bowling - green -- for it will do very well in either place ; -- but then if I reserve it for either of those part of my story -- I ruin the story I be upon ; -- and if I tell it here -- I anticipate matter , and ruin it there . -- what would you worship have I to do in this case ? -- tell it , , by all mean .-- you be a fool , Tristram , if you do . of ye powers ! ( for power ye be , and great one too ) --which enable mortal man to tell a story worth the hearing -- that kindly show he , where he be to begin it -- and where he be to end it -- what he be to put into it -- and what he be to leave out -- how much of it he be to cast into a shade -- and whereabouts he be to throw he light ! -- ye , who preside over this vast empire of biographical freebooter , and see how many scrape and plunge you subjects hourly fall into ; -- will you do one thing ? I beg and beseech you ( in case you will do nothing better for we ) that wherever in any part of you dominion it so fall out , that three several roads meet in one point , as they have do just here -- that at least you set up a guide - post in the centre of they , in mere charity , to direct a uncertain devil which of the three he be to take . . ' the shock my uncle receive the year after the demolition of , in he affair with widow , have fix he in a resolution never more to think of the sex -- or of atch which belong to it ;-- yet corporal have make no such bargain with himself . indeed in my uncle 's case there be a strange and unaccountable concurrence of circumstance , which insensibly draw he in , to lay siege to that fair and strong citadel .-- in 's case there be a concurrence of nothing in the world , but of he and in the kitchen ;-- though in truth , the love and veneration he bear he master be such , and so fond be he of imitat he in all he do , that have my uncle employ he time and genius in tagging of point -- I be persuade the honest corporal would have lay down he arm , and follow he example with pleasure . when therefore my uncle sit down before the mistress --corporal incontinently take ground before the maid . now , my dear friend , whom I have so much cause to esteem and honour --( why , or wherefore , ' tis no matter ) --can it escape you penetration -- I defy it -- that so many play-wright , and opificer of chit - chat have ever since be work upon 's and my uncle 's pattern.- - I care not what , or , or , or say --( though I never read one of they ) -- there be not a greater difference between a single - horse chair and madam Pompadour 's vis - a - vis ; than betwixt a single amour , and a amour thus nobly double , and go upon all four , prance throughout a grand drama -- , a simple , single , silly affair of that kind - - be quite lost in five act -- but that be neither here nor there . after a series of attack and repulse in a course of nine month on my uncle 's quarter , a most minute account of every particular of which shall be give in its proper place , my uncle , honest man ! find it necessary to draw off he force and raise the siege somewhat indignantly . , as I say , have make no such bargain either with himself -- or with any one else -- the fidelity however of he heart not suffer he to go into a house which he master have forsake with disgust -- he contente himself with turn he part of the siege into a blockade ; -- that be , he keep other off ; -- for though he never after go to the house , yet he never meet in the village , but he would either nod or wink , or smile , or look kindly at she -- or ( as circumstance direct ) he would shake she by the hand -- or ask she lovingly how she do -- or would give she a ribbon -- and now - and - then , though never but when it could be do with decorum , would give a . . .-- precisely in this situation , do these thing stand for five year ; that be from the demolition of in the year 13 , to the latter end of my uncle 's campaign in the year 18 , which be about six or seven week before the time I be speak of .-- when , as he custom be , after he have put my uncle to bed , go down one moon - shiny night to see that every thing be right at he fortification -- in the lane separate from the bowling - green with flowering shrub and hobably -- he espy he Bridget . as the corporal thought
thought there be nothing in the world so well worth shewing as the glorious work which he and my uncle have make , courteously and gallantly take she by the hand , and lead she in : this be not do so privately , but that the foul - mouth would trumpet of fame carry it from ear to ear , till at length it reach would my father 's , with this untoward circumstance along with it , that my uncle 's curiious draw - bridge , construct and pain after the fashion , and which go quite across the ditch -- be break down , and somehow or other crush all to piece that very night . my father , as you have observ , have no great esteem for my uncle 's hobby - horse ; he think it the most ridiculous horse that ever gentleman mount ; and indeed unless my uncle vex he about it , could never think of it once , without smile at it -- so that it could never get lame or happen any mischance , but it tick my father 's imagination beyond measure ; but this be a accident much more to he humour than any one which have yet befall and it , it prove a inexhaustible fund of entertainment to he -- well -- but dear ! my father would say , do tell I seriously how this affair of the bridge happen .-- how can you teaze I so much about it ? my uncle would reply -- I have tell it you twenty time , word for word as tell it I .-- Prithee , how be it then , corporal ? my father would cry , turn to .-- it be a mere misfortune , an' please you honour ;-- I be shew we fortification , and in go too near the edge of the fosse , I unfortunately slipp would in -- very well , ! my father would cry --( smile mysteriously , and give a nod -- but without interrupt he ) -- and be link have fast , an' please you honour , arm in arm with , I dragg ' she after I , by means of which she fall backwards soss against the bridge -- and 's foot ( my uncle would cry , take the story out of he mouth ) get into the cuvette , he tumble full against the bridge too .--It be a thousand to one , my uncle would add , that the poor fellow do not break he leg .-- Ay truly , my father would say -- a limb be soon broke , brother , in such encounter . -- and so , an' please you honour , the bridge , which you honour know be a very slight one , be break down betwixt we , and splinter all to piece . at other time , but especially when my uncle be so unfortunate as to say a syllable about cannon , bomb , or petard -- my father would exhaust all the store of he eloquence ( which indeed be very great ) in a panegyric upon the Battering - Rams of the ancient -- the Vinea which make use of at the siege of .-- he would tell my uncle of the Catapulta of the , which throw such monstrous stone so many hundred foot , and shake the strongest bulwark from they very foundation :- - he would go on and describe the wonderful mechanism of the which make so much rout about !-- the terrible effect of the , which cast fire ; -- the danger of the and , which cast javelin . -- but what be these , would he say , to the destructive machinery of corporal Trim ?-- believe I , brother , no bridge , or bastion , or sally - port , that ever be construct in this world , can hold out against such artillery . my uncle would never attempt any defence against the force of this ridicule , but that of redoubl the vehemence of smoak he pipe ; in do which , he raise so dense a vapour one night after supper , that it set my father , who be a little phthisical , into a suffocating fit of violent coughing : my uncle leap would up without feel the pain upon he groin -- and , with infinite pity , stand beside he brother 's chair , tap he back with one hand , and hold he head with the other , and from time to time wip he eye with a clean cambrick handkerchief , which he pull out of he pocket .-- the affectionate and endear manner in which my uncle do these little office -- cut my father thro ' he reins , for the pain he have just be give he .-- may my brain be knock have out with a battering - ram or a catapulta , I care not which , quoth my father to himself -- if ever I insult this worthy soul more ! . the draw - bridge be hold irreparable , be order directly to set about another -- but not upon the same model : for cardinal 's intrigue at that time be discover , and my uncle Toby rightly foresee that a flame would inevitably break out betwixt and the Empire , and that the operation of the ensuing campaign must in all likelihood be either in or -- he determine upon a italian bridge --( my uncle , by - the - bye , be not far out of he conjecture ) -- but my father , who be infinitely the better politician , and take the lead as far of my uncle in the cabinet , as my uncle take it of he in the field -- convince he , that
that if the king of and the emperor go together by the ear , and and , by force of they pre-engagement , all enter the list too ; --and if so , he would say , the combatant , brother , as sure as we be alive , will fall to it again , pell -mell , upon the old prize - fight stage of Flander ; -- then what will you do with you italian bridge ? -- we will go on with it then upon the old model , cry my uncle . when corporal Tre have about half finish it in that style -- my uncle find out a capital defect in it , which he have never thoroughly consider before . it turn , it seem , upon hinge at both end of it , open in the middle , one half of which turn to one side of the fosse , and the other to the other ; the advantage of which be this , that by divide the weight of the bridge into two equal portion , it impower my uncle to raise it up or let it down with the end of he crutch , and with one hand , which , as he garrison be weak , be as much as he could well spare -- but the disadvantage of such a construction be insurmountable ; -- for by this mean , he would say , I leave one half of my bridge in my enemy 's possession -- and pray of what use be the other ? the natural remedy for this be , no doubt , to have he bridge fast only at one end with hinge , so that the whole might be lift up together , and stand bolt upright -- but that be reject for the reason give above . for a whole week after he be determine in he mind to have one of that particular construction which be make to draw back horizontally , to hinder a passage ; and to thrust forwards again to gain a passage -- of which sort you worship might have see three famous one at Spires before its destruction -- and one now at , if I mistake not ; -- but my father advise my uncle , with great earnestness , to have nothing more to do with thrusting bridge -- and my uncle foresee moreover that it would but perpetuate the memory of the 's misfortune -- he change he mind for that of the marquis 's invention , which the have so well and learnedly describe , as you worship may see -- . . a . 1695 -- to these a lead weight be a eternal balance , and keep watch as well as a couple of centinel , inasmuch as the construction of they be a curve line approximate to a cycloid -- if not a cycloid itself . my uncle understand the nature of a parabola as well as any man in -- but be not quite such a master of the cycloid ; -- he talk however about it every day -- the bridge go not forwards .-- we will ask somebody about it , cry my uncle to . . when come in and tell my father , that be in the kitchen , and busy in make a bridge -- my uncle -- the affair of the jack - boot have just then raise a train of military idea in he brain -- take it instantly for grant that be make a model of the 's bridge .--'tis very obliging in he , quoth my uncle ;--pray give my humble service to , , and tell he I thank he heartily . have my uncle 's head be a 's box , and my father pee in all the time at one end of it -- it could not have give he a more distinct conception of the operation of my uncle 's imagination , than what he have ; so , notwithstand the catapulta and battering - ram , and he bitter imprecation about they , he be just begin to triumph -- when 's answer , in a instant , tore the laurel from he brows , and twist it to piece . . -- this unfortunate draw - bridge of yours , quoth my father -- bless you honour , cry , ' ti a bridge for master 's nose .-- in bring he into the world with he vile instrument , he have crush he nose , say , as flat as a pancake to he face , and he be make a false bridge with a piece of cotton and a thin piece of whalebone out of 's stay , to raise it up . -- lead I , brother , cry my father , to my room this instant . . from the first moment I sit down to write my life for the amusement of the world , and my opinion for its instruction , have a cloud insensibly be gather over my father .-- a tide of little evils and distress have be set in against he . -- not one thing , as he observ himself , have go right : and now be the storm thicken ' and go to break , and pour down full upon he head . I enter upon this part of my story in the most pensive and melancholy frame of mind that ever sympathetic breast be touch with .-- my nerf relax as I tell it .-- every line I write , I feel a abatement of the quickness of my pulse , and of that careless alacrity with it , which every day of my life prompt I to say and write a thousand thing I should not -- and this moment that I last dipp would my pen into my ink ,
, I could not help take notice what a cautious air of sad composure and solemnity there appear ' in my manner of do it . -- ! how different from the rash jernks and hair - brain would squirt thout art wont , Tristram , to transact it with in other humours -- drop thy pen--spurt thy ink about thy table and thy book -- as if thy pen and thy ink , thy book and furniture cost thee nothing ! . -- I will not go about to argue the point with you --'tis so -- and I be persuade of it , madam , as much as can be , ' that both man and woman bear pain or sorrow ( and , for atch I know , pleasure too ) best in a horizontal position . ' the moment my father get up into he chamber , he throw himself prostrate across he bed in the wildest disorder imaginable , but at the same time in the most lamentable attitude of a man borne down with sorrow , that ever the eye of pity dropp would a tear for .-- the palm of he right hand , as he fall upon the bed , receive he forehead , and cover the greatest part of both he eye , gently sunk down with he head ( he elbow give way backwards ) till he nose touch would the quilt ; -- he leave arm hang insensible over the side of the bed , he knuckle recline upon the handle of the chamber - pot , which peep would out beyond the valance -- he right leg ( he left be draw up towards he body ) hang half over the side of the bed , the edge of it press upon he shin bone -- he feel it not . a fix have , inflexible sorrow take possession of every line of he face . -- he sigh would once -- heav he breast often -- but utter not a word . a old set - stitch have chair , valance and fringe around with party colour worsted bobs , stand at the bed 's head , opposite to the side where my father 's head recline .-- my uncle sit he down in it . before a affliction be digested -- consolation ever come too soon ; -- and after it be digest -- it come too late : so that you see , madam , there be but a mark between these two , as fine almost as a hair , for a comforter to take aim at :--my uncle be always either on this side , or on that of it , and would often say , he believe in he heart he could as soon hit the longitude ; for this reason , when he sit down in the chair , he draw the curtain a little forward , and have a tear at every one 's service -- he pull would out a cambrick handkerchief -- give a low sigh -- but hold he peace . . --' all be not gain that be get into the purse .' -- so that notwithstand my father have the happiness of read the oddest book in the universe , and have moreover , in himself , the oddest way of think that ever man in it be bless ' with , yet it have this drawback upon he after all -- that it lay he open to some of the oddest and most whimsical distress ; of which this particular one , which he sunk under at present , be as strong a example as can be give . no doubt , the breaking down of the bridge of a child 's nose , by the edge of a pair of forcep -- however scientifically apply -- would vex any man in the world , who be at so much pain in begett a child , as my father be -- yet it will not account for the extravagance of he affliction , nor will it justify the un-christian manner he abandon and surrender himself up to . to explain this , I must leave he upon the bed for half a hour -- and my uncle in he old fringed chair sit beside he . . -- I think it a very unreasonable demand -- cry my great - grandfather , twiste up the paper , and throw it upon the table .-- by this account , madam , you have but two thousand pound fortune , and not a shilling more -- and you insist upon have three hundred pound a year jointure for it .-- --' because , ' reply my great - grandmother , ' you have little or no nose , . '-- now before I venture to make use of the word nose a second time -- to avoid all confusion in what will be say upon it , in this interesting part of my story , it may not be amiss to explain my own meaning , and define , with all possible exactness and precision , what I would willingly be understand to mean by the term : be of opinion , that ' tis owe to the negligence and perverseness of writer in despise this precaution , and to nothing else -- that all the polemical writing in divinity be not as clear and demonstrative as those upon a will of ' the , or any other sound part of philosophy , and natural pursuit ; in order to which , what have you to do , before you set out , unless you intend to go puzzl on to the day of judgment -- but to give the world a good definition , and stand to it , of the main word you have most occasion for -- change it , , as you would
would a guinea , into small coin ?-- which do -- let the father of confusion puzzle you , if he can ; or put a different idea either into you head , or you reader 's head , if he know how . in book of strict morality and close reasoning , such as I be engage in -- the neglect be inexcusable ; and be witness , how the world have revenge itself upon I for leave so many opening to equivocal stricture -- and for depending so much as I have do , all along , upon the cleanliness of my reader imagination . -- here be two sensis , cry , as we walk ' along , point with the fore finger of he right hand to the word Crevice , in the one hundred and seventy - eighth page of the first volume of this book of book , -- here be two sense -- quoth he .-- and here be two roads , reply I , turn short upon he - - a dirty and a clean one -- which shall we take ?-- the clean , by all means , reply . , say I , step before he , and lay my hand upon he breast -- to define -- be to distrust .-- thus I triumph would over ; but I triumph would over he as I always do , like a fool .--'Tis my comfort , however , I be not a obstinate one : therefore I define a nose as follow -- intreat only beforehand , and beseech my reader , both male and female , of what age , complexion , and condition soever , for the love of and they own soul , to guard against the temptation and suggestion of the devil , and suffer he by no art or wile to put any other idea into they minds , than what I put into my definition -- for by the word nose , throughout all this long chapter of nos , and in every other part of my work , where the word nose occur -- I declare , by that word I mean a nose , and nothing more , or less . . --' because , ' quoth my great grandmother , repeat the word again --' you have little or no nose , .'-- death ! cry my great - grandfather , clapp he hand upon he nose ,--'ti not so small as that come to ; --'ti a full inch longer than my father 's .-- now , my great - grandfather 's nose be for all the world like unto the nos of all the man , woman , and child , whom find dwell upon the island of .-- by the way , if you would know the strange way of get a - kin amongst so flat - nos a people -- you must read the book ; -- find it out yourself , you never can .-- --'Tbe shape , , like a ace of club . t--'Tis a full inch , continue my grandfather , press up the ridge of he nose with he finger and thumb ; and repeat he assertion --'ti a full inch longer , madam , than my father 's -- you must mean you uncle 's , reply my great- grandmother . -- my great - grandfather be convince . -- he untwist the paper , and sign the article . . -- what a unconscionable jointure , my dear , do we pay out of this small estate of ours , quoth my grandmother to my grandfather . my father , reply my grandfather , have no more nose , my dear , save the mark , than there be upon the back of my hand . -- now , you must know , that my great - grandmother outlive my grandfather twelve year ; so that my father have the jointure to pay , a hundred and fifty pound half - yearly --( on and lady - day , ) -- during all that time . no man discharge pecuniary obligation with a better grace than my father . -- and as far as a hundr pound go , he would fl it upon the table , guinea by guinea , with that spirit jerk of a honest welcome , which generous soul , and generous soul only , be able to fl down money : but as soon as ever he enter would upon the odd fifty -- he generally give a loud Hem ! rubb would the side of he nose leisurely with the flat part of he fore finger -- insert he hand cautiously betwixt he head and the cawl of he wig -- look would at both side of every guinea as he part with it - - and seldom could get to the end of the fifty pound , without pull out he handkerchief , and wip he temple . defend I , gracious Heaven ! from those persecut spirit who make no allowances for these workings within we .-- never -- of never may I lay down in they tent , who can not relax the engine , and feel pity for the force of education , and the prevalence of opinion long derive from ancestor ! for three generation at least this tenet in favour of long nose have gradually be take root in we family .-- tradition be all along on its side , and be every half - year stepping in to strengthen it ; so that the whimsicality of my father 's brain be far from have the whole honour of this , as it have of almost all he other strange notion .-- for in a great measure he might be say to have suck ' this in with he mother 's milk . he do he part however
however . -- if education plan the mistake ( in case it be one ) my father water it , and ripen it to perfection . he would often declare , in speak he thought upon the subject , that he do not conceive how the greatest family in could stand it out against a uninterrupted succession of six or seven short nos .-- and for the contrary reason , he would generally add , that it must be one of the greatest problem in civil life , where the same number of long and jolly nose , follow one another in a direct line , do not raise and hoist it up into the best vacancy in the kingdom .-- he would often boast that the Shandy family rank would very high in king the 's time , but owed it be rise to no state engine -- he would say -- but to that only ; -- but that , like other family , he would add -- it have feel the turn of the wheel , and have never recover the blow of my great - grandfather 's nose .-- it be a ace of club indeed , he would cry , shak he head -- and as vile a one for a unfortunate family as ever turn would up trump . -- fair and softly , gentle reader !-- where be thy fancy carry thee ! -- if there be truth in man , by my great - grandfather 's nose , I mean the external organ of smell , or that part of man which stand prominent in he face -- and which painter say , in good jolly nos and well - proportion face , should comprehend a full third -- that be , measure downward from the setting on of the hair . -- what a life of it have a author , at this pass ! . it be a singular blessing , that nature have form ' the mind of man with the same happy backwardness and renitency against conviction , which be observe in old dog -- 'have not learn new tricks . ' what a shuttlecock of a fellow would the greatest philosopher that ever exist be whis have into at once , do he read such book , and observe such fact , and think such thought , as would eternally be make he change sides ! now , my father , as I tell you last year , detest all this -- he pick would up a opinion , , as a man in a state of nature pick up a apple .-- it become he own -- and if he be a man of spirit , he would lose he life rather than give it up . I be aware that , the great civilian , will contest this point ; and cry out against I , Whence come this man 's right to this apple ? ex confesso , he will say -- thing be in a state of nature -- the apple , be as much 's apple as 's . , , what patent have he to show for it ? and how do it begin to be he ? be it , when he set he heart upon it ? or when he gather it ? or when he chew would it ? or when he roast it ? or when he peel ' , or when he bring it home ? or when he digest ? -- or when he --?-- for ' ttis plain , , if the first pick up of the apple , make it not he -- that no subsequent act could . , will answer --( now Tribonius the civilian and church lawyer 's beard be three inch and a half and three eighth longer than Didius he beard -- I be glad he take up the cudgel for I , so I give myself no farther trouble about the answer .)--Brother , will say , it be a decreed case , as you may find it in the fragment of and 's code , and in all the code from 's down to the code of and -- that the sweat of a man 's brows , and the exsudation of a man 's brain , be as much a man 's own property as the breech upon he backside ;-- which say exsudation , &c. be dropp ' upon the say apple by the labour of find it , and pick it up ; and be moreover indissolubly waste , and as indissolubly annex' , by the picker up , to the thing pick ' up , carry home , roast , peel ' , eat , digest , and so on ; --'tis evident that the gatherer of the apple , in so do , have mix would up something which be he own , with the apple which be not he own , by which mean he have acquire a property ; -- or , in other word , the apple be 's apple . by the same learn chain of reason my father stand up for all he opinion ; he have spare no pain in pick they up , and the more they lay out of the common way , the better still be he title .-- no mortal claim they ; they have cost he moreover as much labour in cooking and digest as in the case above , so that they might well and truly be say to be of he own goods and chattel .-- accordingly he hold fast by , both by tooth and claw -- would fly to whatever he could lay he hand on -- and , in a word , would intrench and fortify they round with as many circumvallation and breast - work , as my uncle would a citadel . there be
be one plaguy rub in the way of this -- the scarcity of material to make any thing of a defence with , in case of a smart attack ; inasmuch as few man of great genius have exercise they part in write book upon the subject of great nos : by the trotting of my lean horse , the thing be incredible ! and I be quite lose in my understanding , when I be consider what a treasure of precious time and talents together have be waste upon worse subject -- and how many million of book in all language and in all possible type and bindings , have be fabricate upon point 's not half so much ten to the unity and peace - making of the world . what be to be have , however , he set the greater store by ; and though my father would oft - time sport with my uncle 's library -- which , by - the - bye , be ridiculous enough -- yet at the very same time he do it , he collect every book and treatise which have be systematically write upon nos , with as much care as my honest uncle have do those upon military architecture .--'Tis true , a much less table would have hold they -- but that be not thy transgression , my dear uncle .-- here -- but why here -- rather than in any other part of my story -- I be not able to tell :-- but here it be -- my heart stop I to pay to thee , my dear uncle , once for all , the tribute I owe thy goodness .-- here let I thrust my chair aside , and kneel down upon the ground , whilst I be pour forth the warmest sentiment of love for thee , and veneration for the excellency of thy character , that ever virtue and nature kindle in a nephew 's bosom .-- peace and comfort rest for evermore upon thy head !-- thou enviedst no man 's comfort -- insultedst no man 's opinion -- thou blackenedst no man 's character -- devouredst no man 's bread : gently , with faithful behind thee , didst thou amble round the little circle of thy pleasure , jostl no creature in thy way :-- for each one 's sorrow , thou hadst a tear , -- for each man 's need , thou hadst a shilling . whilst I be worth one , to pay a weeder -- thy path from thy door to thy bowling - green shall never be grow up .-- whilst there be a rood and a half of land in the Shandy family , thy fortification , my dear uncle , shall never be demolish ' . . my father 's collection be not great , but to make amend , it be curiious ; and consequently he be some time in make it ; he have the great good fortune hewever , to set off well , in get 's prologue upon long nos , almost for nothing -- for he give no more for than three half - crown ; owe indeed to the strong fancy which the stall -man see my father have for the book the moment he lay he hand upon it .-- there be not three Bruscambille in -- say the stall -man , except what be achain ' up in the library of the curiious . my father fling down the money as quick as lightning -- take into he bosom -- hy home from to - street with it , as he would have hy home with a treasure , without take he hand once off from all the way . to those who do not yet know of which gender be -- inasmuch as a prologue upon long nos might easily be do by either --'twill be no objection against the simile -- to say , that when my father get home , he solace himself with after the manner in which , ' tis ten to one , you worship solace yourself with you first mistress -- that be , from morning even unto night : which , by - the - bye , how delightful soever it may prove to the inamorato -- be of little or no entertainment at all to by - stander .-- take notice , I go no farther with the simile -- my father 's eye be greater than he appetite -- he zeal greater than he knowledge -- he cool ' -- he affections become divided -- he get hold of -- purchase , , 's , and above all , the great and learn ; of which , as I shall have much to say by - and - bye -- I will say nothing now . . of all the tract my father be at the pain to procure and study in support of he hypothesis , there be not any one wherein he feel a more cruel disappointment at first , than in the celebrate dialogue between Pamphagus and Cocles , write by the chaste pen of the great and venerable , upon the various use and seasonable application of long nos .-- now do not let , my dear girl , in this chapter , take advantage of any one spot of rising ground to get astride of you imagination , if you can any way help it ; or if he be so nimble as to slip on -- let I beg of you , like a unback would filly , to frisk it , to squirt it , to jump it , to rear it , to bound it -- and to kick it , with long kick and short kick , till like 's mare , you break a strap or a crupper , and throw he worship into
into the dirt .-- you need not kill he .-- -- and pray who be 's mare ?--'tis just as discreditable and unscholar - like a question , Sir , as to have ask what year ( ab. urb. con . ) the second war break out .-- who be 's mare !--Read , read , read , read , my unlearned reader ! read -- or by the knowledge of the great saint Paraleipomenon -- I tell you before - hand , you have better throw down the book at once ; for without much reading , by which you reverence know I mean much knowledge , you will no more be able to penetrate the moral of the next marble page ( motley emblem of my work ! ) than the world with all its sagacity have be able to unravel the many opinion , transaction , and truth which still lie mystically hide under the dark veil of the black one . ( two marble plate ) . ' Nihil I paenitet hujus nasi , ' quoth Pamphagus ; -- that be --'My nose have be the making of I .' --' Nec est cur poeniteat , ' reply Cocle ; that be , ' how the duce should such a nose fail ? ' the doctrine , you see , be lay down by , as my father wish it , with the utmost plainness ; but my father 's disappointment be , in find nothing more from so able a pen , but the bare fact itself ; without any of that speculative subtilty or ambidexterity of argumentation upon it , which have bestow have upon man on purpose to investigate truth , and fight for she on all side .-- my father pish would and pugh would at first most terribly t--'tis worth something to have a good name . as the dialogue be of , my father soon come to himself , and read it over and over again with great application , study every word and every syllable of it thro ' and thro ' in its most strict and literal interpretation -- he could still make nothing of it , that way . Mayhap there be more meant , than be say in it , quoth my father . -- learn man , brother , do not write dialogue upon long nos for nothing . -- I will study the mystick and the allegorick sense -- here be some room to turn a man 's self in , brother . my father read on .-- now I find it needful to inform you reverence and worship , that besides the many nautical use of long nos enumerate by , the dialogist affirmeth that a long nose be not without its domestic convenience also ; for that in a case of distress -- and for want of a pair of bellow , it will do excellently well , ad ixcitandum focum ( to stir up the fire . ) nature have be prodigal in she gift to my father beyond measure , and have sow the seed of verbal criticism as deep within he , as she have do the seed of all other knowledge -- so that he have get out he penknife , and be try experiment upon the sentence , to see if he could not scratch some better sense into it .-- I have get within a single letter , brother , cry my father , of Erasmus he mystic meaning . -- you be near enough , brother , reply my uncle , in all conscience .-- Pshaw ! cry my father , scratch on -- I might as well be seven mile off .-- I have do it -- say my father , snapp he finger -- see , my dear brother , how I have mende the sense . -- but you have marr have a word , reply my uncle .-- my father put on he spectacle -- bit he lip -- and tore out the leaf in a passion . . of ! thou faithful analyzer of my Disgrazias -- thout sad foreteller of so many of the whip and short turn which on one stage or other of my life have come slap upon I from the shortness of my nose , and no other cause , that I be conscious of .-- tell I , ! what secret impulse be it ? what intonation of voice ? whence come it ? how do it sound in thy ear ? --be thou sure thou hear 'st it ?-- which first cry out to thee -- go -- go , ! dedicate the labour of thy life -- neglect thy pastime -- call forth all the power and faculty of thy nature -- macerate thyself in the service of mankind , and write a grand Folio for they , upon the subject of they nos . how the communication be convey into 's sensorium -- so that should know whose finger touch would the key -- and whose hand it be that blow the bellow -- as have be dead and laid in he grave above fourscore and ten year -- we can only raise conjecture . be play ' upon , for atch I know , like one of 's disciple -- that be , with such a distinct intelligence , , of which of the two master it be that have be practise upon he instrument -- as to make all reason upon it needless . -- for in the account which give the world of he motives and occasion for writing , and spend so many year of he life upon this one work -- towards the end of he prolegomena , which by - the - bye should have come first -- but the bookbinder have most injudiciously place it betwixt the analytical contents of the book , and the
the book itself -- he inform he reader , that ever since he have arrive at the age of discernment , and be able to sit down cooly , and consider within himself the true state and condition of man , and distinguish the main end and design of he be ; -- or -- to shorten my translation , for 's book be in , and not a little prolix in this passage -- ever since I understand , quoth , any thing -- or rather what be what -- and could perceive that the point of long nos have be too loosely handle by all who have go before ; -- have I , feel a strong impulse , with a mighty and unresistible call within I , to gird up myself to this undertaking . and to do justice to , he have enter the list with a stronger lance , and take a much larger career in it than any one man who have ever enter it before he -- and indeed , in many respects , deserve to be en-nich ' as a prototype for all writer , of voluminous work at least , to model they book by -- for he have take in , , the whole subject -- examine every part of it dialectically -- then bring it into full day ; dilucidat it with all the light which either the collision of he own natural part could strike -- or the profoundest knowledge of the sciences have impower he to cast upon it -- collat , collect , and compile -- begge , borrowe , and steal , as he go along , all that have be write or wrangle thereupon in the school and portico of the learn : so that he book may properly be consider , not only as a model -- but as a thorough - stitch and regular institute of nos , comprehend in it all that be or can be needful to be know about they . for this cause it be that I forbear to speak of so many ( otherwise ) valuable book and treatise of my father 's collecting , write either , plump upon nos -- or collaterally touch they ; -- such for instance as , now lie upon the table before I , who with infinite learning , and from the most candid and scholar - like examination of above four thousand different skull , in upward of twenty charnel - house in , which he have rummage -- have inform we , that the mensuration and configuration of the osseous or bony part of human nos , in any give tract of country , except , where they be all crush would down by the thumb , so that no judgment can be form upon they -- be much nearer alike , than the world imagine ; -- the difference amongst they being , he say , a mere trifle , not worth take notice of ; -- but that the size and jollity of every individual nose , and by which one nose rank above another , and bear a higher price , be owe to the cartilaginous and muscular part of it , into whose ducts and sinuse the blood and animal spirit be impell ' and drive by the warmth and force of the imagination , which be but a step from it ( bat the case of idiot , whom , who have liv many year in , suppose under the more immediate tutelage of ) -- it so happen , and ever must , say , that the excellency of the nose be in a direct arithmetical proportion to the excellency of the wearer 's fancy . it be for the same reason , that be , because ' tis all comprehend in , that I say nothing likewise of ( ) who , all the world know , set himself to oppugn Prignitz with great violence -- prove it in he own way , first logically , and then by a series of stubborn fact , ' that so far be from the truth , in affirming that the fancy begat the nose , that on the contrary -- the nose begat the fancy . ' -- the learn suspect Scroderus of a indecent sophism in this -- and cry out aloud in the dispute , that have shift the idea upon he -- but go on , maintain he thesis . my father be just balance within himself , which of the two side he should take in this affair ; when Ambrose Paraeus decide it in a moment , and by overthrow the system , both of and , drive my father out of both side of the controversy at once . be witness -- I do not acquaint the learn reader -- in say it , I mention it only to show the learn , I know the fact myself -- that this be chief surgeon and nose - mender to the ninth of , and in high credit with he and the two preceding , or succeed king ( I know not which ) -- and that , except in the slip he make in he story of 's nos , and he manner of set they on -- he be esteem by the whole college of physician at that time , as more know in matter of nos , than any one who have ever take they in hand . now convince my father , that the true and efficient cause of what have engage so much the attention of the world , and upon which and have waste so much learn and fine part -- be neither this nor that -- but that the length and goodness of the nose be owe simply to the softness and flaccidity in the nurse 's breast -- as the flatness
flatness and shortness of puisne nos be to the firmness and elastic repulsion of the same organ of nutrition in the hale and lively -- which , tho ' happy for the woman , be the undoing of the child , inasmuch as he nose be so snubb ' , so rebuff' , so rebate , and so refrigerate thereby , as never to arrive ad mensuram suam legitimam ; -- but that in case of the flaccidity and softness of the nurse or mother 's breast -- by sinke into it , quoth , as into so much butter , the nose be comfort , nourish ' , plump ' up , refresh ' , refocillate , and set a growing for ever . I have but two thing to observe of Paraeus ; first , that he prove and explain all this with the utmost chastity and decorum of expression :-- for which may he soul for ever rest in peace ! and , secondly , that besides the system of and , which Ambrise Paraeus he hypothesis effectually overthrew -- it overthrow at the same time the system of peace and harmony of we family ; and for three day together , not only embroil matter between my father and my mother , but turn would likewise the whole house and every thing in it , except my uncle , quite upside down . such a ridiculous tale of a dispute between a man and he wife , never surely in any age or country get vent through the key - hole of a street - door . my mother , you must know -- but I have fifty thing more necessary to let you know first -- I have a hundred difficulty which I have promise to clear up , and a thousand distress and domestick misadventure crowd in upon I thick and threefold , one upon the neck of another . a cow break in ( tomorrow morning ) to my uncle 's fortification , and eat up two ration and a half of dry grass , tear up the sod with it , which face he horn - work and cover way .-- Tre insist upon be try by a court - martial -- the cow to be shot -- to be crucifix ' -- myself to be tristram' and at my very baptism make a martyr of ; -- poor unhappy devils that we all be !-- I want swaddling -- but there be no time to be lose in exclamation -- I have leave my father lie across he bed , and my uncle in he old fringed chair , sit beside he , and promise I would go back to they in half a hour ; and five - and - thirty minute be laps have already .-- of all the perplexity a mortal author be ever see in -- this certainly be the greatest , for I have Hafen 's , , to finish -- a dialogue between my father and my uncle , upon the solution of , , , , and to relate -- a tale out of to translate , and all this in five minute less than no time at all ; -- such a head !--would to my enemy only see the inside of it ! . there be not any one scene more entertain in we family -- and to do it justice in this point ; -- and I here put off my cap and lay it upon the table close beside my ink - horn , on purpose to make my declaration to the world concern this one article the more solemn -- that I believe in my soul ( unless my love and partiality to my understanding blind I ) the hand of the supreme maker and first designer of all thing never make or put a family together ( in that period at least of it which I have sit down to write the story of ) -- where the character of it be cast or contrast with so dramatick a felicity as ours be , for this end ; or in which the capacity of afforde such exquisite scene , and the power of shift they perpetually from morning to night , be lod and intrust with so unlimited a confidence , as in the . not any one of these be more diverting , I say , in this whimsical theatre of ours -- than what frequently arise out of this self - same chapter of long nos -- especially when my father 's imagination be heat with the enquiry , and nothing would serve he but to heat my uncle 's too . my uncle would give my father all possible fair play in this attempt ; and with infinite patience would sit smoke he pipe for whole hour together , whilst my father be practise upon he head , and try every accessible avenue to drive and 's solution into it . whether they be above my uncle 's reason -- or contrary to it -- or that he brain be like damp timber , and no spark could possibly take hold -- or that it be so full of sap , mine , blind , curtin , and such military disqualification to he see clearly into and 's doctrine -- I say not -- let schoolman -- scullion , anatomist , and engineers , fight for it among themselves -- ' Tbe some misfortune , I make no doubt , in this affair , that my father have every word of it to translate for the benefit of my uncle , and render out of 's , of which , as he be no great master , he translation be not always of the purest -- and generally least so where ' tbe most want .-- this naturally open would a door to a second misfortune
misfortune ;-- that in the warmer paroxysm of he zeal to open my uncle 's eye -- my father 's idea run on as much faster than the translation , as the translation outmove my uncle 's -- neither the one or the other add much to the perspicuity of my father 's lecture . . the gift of ratiocination and make syllogism -- I mean in man -- for in superior class of be , such as angels and spirit --'tis all do , may it please you worship , as they tell I , by intuition ; -- and being inferior , as you worship all know -- syllogize by they nos : though there be a island swim in the sea ( though not altogether at its ease ) whose inhabitant , if my intelligence deceive I not , be so wonderfully gift , as to syllogize after the same fashion , and oft -time to make very well out too :-- but that be neither here nor there -- the gift of do it as it should be , amongst we , or -- the great and principal act of ratiocination in man , as logician tell we , be the finding out the agreement or disagreement of two idea one with another , by the intervention of a third ( call the medius terminus ) ; just as a man , as well observe , by a yard , find two mens nine - pin - alley to be of the same length , which could not be bring together , to measure they equality , by juxta -position . have the same great reasoner look on , as my father illustrate he system of nos , and observe my uncle 's deportment -- what great attention he give to every word -- and as oft as he take he pipe from he mouth , with what wonderful seriousness he contemplate the length of it -- survey it transversely as he hold it betwixt he finger and he thumb -- then fore - right -- then this way , and then that , in all its possible direction and fore - shortening -- he would have conclude my uncle have get hold of the medius terminus , and be syllogize and measure with it the truth of each hypothesis of long nos , in order , as my father lay they before he . this , by - the - bye , be more than my father want -- he aim in all the pain he be at in these philosophick lecture -- be to enable my uncle not to discuss -- but comprehend -- to hold the grain and scruple of learning -- not to weigh they .-- my uncle , as you will read in the next chapter , do neither the one or the other . . ' tTis a pity , cry my father one winter 's night , after a three hour painful translation of --' tis a pity , cry my father , put my mother 's threadpaper into the book for a mark , as he speak -- that truth , brother , should shut herself up in such impregnable fastness , and be so obstinate as not to surrender herself sometimes up upon the closest siege .-- now it happen then , as indeed it have often do before , that my uncle 's fancy , during the time of my father 's explanation of to he -- have nothing to stay it there , have take a short flight to the bowling - green ;--his body might as well have take a turn there too -- so that with all the semblance of a deep school -man intent upon the medius terminus -- my uncle be in fact as ignorant of the whole lecture , and all its pro and con , as if my father have be translat from the tongue into the . but the word siege , like a talismanic power , in my father 's metaphor , waft back my uncle 's fancy , quick as a note could follow the touch -- he open would he ear -- and my father observe that he take he pipe out of he mouth , and shuffle he chair nearer the table , as with a desire to profit --my father with great pleasure begin he sentence again -- change only the plan , and drop the metaphor of the siege of it , to keep clear of some dangers my father apprehend from it . ' tTis a pity , say my father , that truth can only be on one side , brother -- consider what ingenuity these learn man have all shewn in they solution of nos .-- Can nos be dissolve ? reply my uncle . -- my father thrust back he chair -- rise up -- put on he hat -- take four long stride to the door -- jerk it open -- thrust he head half way out -- shut the door again -- take no notice of the bad hinge -- return to the table -- pluck would my mother 's thread - paper out of 's book -- go hastily to he bureau -- walk slowly back -- twist my mother 's thread - paper about he thumb -- unbutton would he waistcoat -- throw my mother 's thread - paper into the fire -- bit she sattin pin-cushion in two , fill would he mouth with -- confound it ; -- but !-- the oath of confusion be levell ' at my uncle 's brain -- which be e'en confused enough already -- the curse come charge only with the bran -- the bran , may it please you honour , be no more than powder to the ball . ' Twas well my father 's passion last not long ; for so long as they
they do last , they lead he a busy life of n't ; and it be one of the most unaccountable problem that ever I meet with in my observation of human nature , that nothing should prove my father 's mettle so much , or make he passion go off so like gun - powder , as the unexpected stroke he science meet with from the quaint simplicity of my uncle 's question . -- have ten dozen of hornet sting he behind in so many different place all at one time -- he could not have exert more mechanical function in fewer seconds - - or start half so much , as with one single quaere of three word unseasonably pop in full upon he in he hobby - horsical career . ' Twas all one to my uncle -- he smoke he pipe on with unvaried composure -- he heart never intend offence to he brother -- and as he head could seldom find out where the sting of it lay -- he always give my father the credit of cooling by himself . -- he be five minute and thirty - five seconds about it in the present case . by all that be good ! say my father , swear , as he come to himself , and take the oath out of 's digest of curse --( though to do my father justice it be a fault ( as he tell in the affair of ) which he as seldom commit as any man upon earth ) -- by all that be good and great ! brother , say my father , if it be not for the aids of philosophy , which befriend one so much as they do -- you would put a man beside all temper .-- why , by the solution of nos , of which I be tell you , I mean , as you might have know , have you favour I with one grain of attention , the various account which learn man of different kind of knowledge have give the world of the cause of short and long nos .-- there be no cause but one , reply my uncle -- why one man 's nose be longer than another ' , but because that pleasis to have it so .- - that be 's solution , say my father he , continue my uncle , look up , and not regard my father 's interruption , who make we all , and frame and put we together in such form and proportion , and for such end , as be agreeable to he infinite wisdom , .-- ' tTis a pious account , cry my father , but not philosophical -- there be more religion in it than sound science . ' Twas no inconsistent part of my uncle 's character -- that he fear , and reverence religion .-- so the moment my father finish he remark -- my uncle fall a whistling Lillabullero with more zeal ( though more out of tune ) than usual .-- what be become of my wife 's thread - paper ? . no matter -- as a appendage to seamstressy , the thread - paper might be of some consequence to my mother -- of none to my father , as a mark in . Slawkenbergius in every page of he be a rich treasure of inexhaustible knowledge to my father -- he could not open he amiss ; and he would often say in close the book , that if all the art and sciences in the world , with the book which treat of they , be lose -- should the wisdom and policy of government , he would say , through disuse , ever happen to be forget , and all that statesman have write or cause to be write , upon the strong or the weak side of court and kingdom , should they be forget also -- and only leave -- there would be enough in he in all conscience , he would say , to set the world a - go again . a treasure therefore be he indeed ! a institute of all that be necessary to be know of nos , and every thing else -- at matin , noon , and vesper be he recreation and delight : ' twas for ever in he hand -- you would have swear , , it have be a 's prayer - book -- so worn , so glazed , so contrit and attrit be it with finger and with thumb in all its part , from one end even unto the other . I be not such a bigot to as my father ; -- there be a fund in he , no doubt : but in my opinion , the best , I do not say the most profitable , but the most amusing part of , be he tale -- and , consider he be a german , many of they tell not without fancy :-- these take up he second book , contain nearly one half of he folio , and be comprehend in ten decad , each decad contain ten tale - - be not build upon tale ; and therefore ' tbe certainly wrong in to send they into the world by that name !-- there be a few of they in he eighth , ninth , and tenth decad , which I own seem rather playful and sportive , than speculative -- but in general they be to be look upon by the learned as a detail of so many independent fact , all of they turn round somehow or other upon the main hinge of he subject , and add to he work as so many illustration upon the doctrine of nos . as we have leisure enough upon we hand -- if you
you give I leave , madam , I will tell you the ninth tale of he tenth decad . ( as be extremely scarce , it may not be unacceptable to the learn reader to see the specimen of a few page of he original ; I will make no reflection upon it , but that he story - tell be much more concise than he philosophic - - and , I think , have more of Latinity in it . ) , posteriori in parte mensis , peregrinus , mulo fusco colore inciden , mantica a tergo , pauci indusiis , bini calceis , braccisque sericis coccineis repleta , ingressus est . Militi eum percontanti , quum portus intraret dixit , se apud promontorium fuisse , proficisci , et , transitu ad fines mensis intervallo , reversurum . miles peregrini in faciem suspexit -- , nova forma nasi ! at multum mihi profuit , inquit peregrinus , carpum amento extrahen , e quo pependit acinace : Loculo manum inseruit ; et magna cum urbanitate , pilei parte anteriore tacof manu sinistra , ut extendit dextram , imilit florinum dedit et processit . Dolet mihi , ait mile , tympanistam nanum et valgum alloquen , virum adeo urbanum vaginam perdidisse : itinerari haud poterit nuda acinaci ; neque vaginam toto , habilem inveniet .-- Nullam unquam habui , respondit peregrinus respicien -- seque comiter inclinan -- hoc more gesto , nudam acinacem elevan , mulo lento progredient , ut nasum tuerus possim . non immeritoo , benigne peregrine , respondit mile . Nihili aestimo , ain ille tympanista , e pergamena factitius est . Prout christianus sum , inquit mile , nasus ille , ni sexty major fit , meo esset conformis . Crepitare audivi ait tympanista . ! sanguinem emisit , respondit mile . Miseret I , inquit tympanista , qui non ambo tetigimus ! Eodem temporis puncto , quo haec re argumentaof fuit inter thmilitey et tympanistam , disceptabatur thibidey tubicine et uxore sua qui tunc accesserunt , et peregrino praetereunt , restiterunt . Quantus nasus ! aeque longus est , ait tubicina , ac tuba . et ex eodem metallo , ait tubicen , velut sternutamento audias . Tantum abest , respondit illa , quod fistulam dulcedine vincit . Aeneus est , ait tubicen . Nequaquam , respondit uxor . Rursum affirmo , ait tubicen , quod aeneus est . Rem penitus explorabo ; prius , enim digito tangam , ait uxor , quam dormivero , peregrini gradu lento progressus est , ut unumquodque verbum controversia , non tantum inter militem et tympanistam , verum etiam inter tubicinem et uxorum ejus , audiret . Nequaquam , ain ille , in muli collum fraena demitten , et manibus ambabus in pectus positis , ( mulo lente progredient ) nequaquam , ain ille respicien , non necesse est ut re isthaec dilucidata foret . Minime gentium ! meus nasus nunquam tangetur , dum spiritus ho reget artus -- quid agendum ? air uxor burgomagistri . Peregrinus illi non respondit . faciebat tunc temporis sancto ; quo factoo , sinum dextrum inseren , e qua negligenter pependit acinace , lento grado processit per plateam latbe quae ad diversorium templo ex adversum ducit . Peregrinus mulo descendens stabulo includi , et manticam inferri jussit : qua aperta et coccineis sericis femoralibus textractis cum argento laciniato ( ) , he sese induit , statimque , acinaci in manu , ad forum deambulavit . Quod ubi peregrinus esset ingressus , thuxorey tubicini obviam euntem aspicin ; illico cursum flectit , metuen ne nasus suus exploraretur , atque ad diversorium regressus est --exuit se vestibus ; bracca coccinea serica mantica imposuin mulumque educi jussit . proficiscor , ait ille , et Argentoratum quatuor abhinc hebdomadi revertar . Bene curasto hoc jumentam ? ( ait ) muli faciem manu demulcen -- I , manticamque meam , plus sexcentis mille passibus portavit . vion est ! respondet hospe , nisi plurimum esset negoti .-- , ait peregrinus , a promontorio redii , et nasum speciosissimum , egregiosissimumque thquey unquam quisquam sortitus est , acquisivi ? Dum peregrinus hanc miram rationem de seipso reddit , hospe et uxor ejus , toculis intentis , peregrini nasum contemplantur -- sancto sanctasque omne , ait hospitis uxor , tnasis duodecim maximis in major est !--estne , ain illa marito in aurem insusurran , nonne est nasus praegrandi ? Dolus inest , anime mi , ait hospe -- nasus est falsus . Verus est , respondit uxor -- abiete factus est , ait ille , terebinthinum olet -- inest , ait uxor . Mortuus est nasus , respondit hospe . Vivus est ait illa , -- et si ipsa vivam tangam . , ait peregrinus , nasum meum intactum fore usque ad -- tempus ? illico respondit illa . tangetur , inquit ille ( manibus in pectus compositis ) usque ad illam horam -- horam ? ain illa -- Nullam , respondit peregrinus , donec pervenio ad -- ,-- obsecro ? ain illa -- responden mulo conscenso discessit . 's it be one cool refresh evening , at the close of a very sultry day , in the latter end of the month of , when a stranger , mount upon a dark mule , with a small cloak - bag behind he , contain a few shirts , a pair of shoe , and a crimson - sattin pair of breech , enter the town of . he tell the centinel , who question he as he enter the gate , that he have be at the Promontory of -- be go on to -- and should be back again at that day month , in he way to the border of . the centinel look up into the stranger 's face -- he never see such a nose in he life ! -- I have make a very good venture of it , quoth the stranger -- so slipp he
he wrist out of the loop of a black ribbon , to which a short scymetar be hang , he put he hand into he pocket , and with great courtesy touch the fore part of he cap with he left hand , as he extend he right -- he put a florin into the centinel 's hand , and pass on . it grieve , I , say the centinel , speak to a little dwarfish bandy - legg would drummer , that so courteous a soul should have lose he scabbard -- he can not travel without one to he scymetar , and will not be able to get a scabbard to fit it in all Strasburg .-- I never have one , reply the stranger , look back to the centinel , and put he hand up to he cap as he speak -- I carry it , continue he , thus -- hold up he naked scymetar , he mule move on slowly all the time -- on purpose to defend my nose . it be well worth it , gentle stranger , reply the centinel . --'Tis not worth a single stiver , say the bandy - legg would drummer t--'tis a nose of parchment . as I be a true catholic -- except that it be six time as big --'tis a nose , say the centinel , like my own . -- I hear it crackle , say the drummer . by dunder , say the centinel , I see it bleed . what a pity , cry the bandy - legg would drummer , we do not both touch it ! at the very time that this dispute be maintain by the centinel and the drummer -- be the same point debat betwixt a trumpeter and a trumpeter 's wife , who be just then come up , and have stop to see the stranger pass by . Benedicity !-- what a nose ! ' ti as long , say the trumpeter 's wife , as a trumpet . and of the same metal say the trumpeter , as you hear by its sneezing . ' tTis as soft as a flute , say she . --' tTis brass , say the trumpeter . t--'Tis a pudding 's end , say he wife . I tell thee again , say the trumpeter , ' ti a brazen nose , I will know the bottom of it , say the trumpeter 's wife , for I will touch it with my finger before I sleep . the stranger 's mule move on at so slow a rate , that he hear every word of the dispute , not only betwixt the centinel and the drummer , but betwixt the trumpeter and trumpeter 's wife . no ! say he , drop he reins upon he mule 's neck , and lay both he hand upon he breast , the one over the other in a saint - like position ( he mule go on easily all the time ) no ! say he , look up -- I be not such a debtor to the world -- slander and disappoint as I have be -- as to give it that conviction -- no ! say he , my nose shall never be touch whilst give I strength -- to do what ? say a burgomaster 's wife . the stranger take no notice of the burgomaster 's wife -- he be make a vow to ; which do , have uncross he arm with the same solemnity with which he cross they , he take up the rein of he bridle with he left - hand , and put he right hand into he bosom , with the scymetar hang loosely to the wrist of it , he ride on , as slowly as one foot of the mule could follow another , thro ' the principal street of , till chance bring he to the great inn in the market - place over-against the church . the moment the stranger alight , he order he mule to be lead into the stable , and he cloak - bag to be bring in ; then open , and take out of it he crimson - sattin breech , with a silver - fringe --( appendage to they , which I dare not translate ) -- he put he breech , with he fringed cod - piece on , and forth - with , with he short scymetar in he hand , walk out to the grand parade . the stranger have just take three turn upon the parade , when he perceive the trumpeter 's wife at the opposite side of it -- so turn short , in pain lest he nose should be attempt , he instantly go back to he inn -- undress himself , pack up he crimson - sattin breech , & c. in he cloak - bag , and call for he mule . I be go forwards , say the stranger , for -- and shall be back at this day month . I hope , continue the stranger , strok down the face of he mule with he left hand as he be go to mount it , that you have be kind to this faithful slave of mine -- it have carry I and my cloak - bag , continue he , tap the mule 's back , above six hundred leagu . t--'Tis a long journey , , reply the master of the inn -- unless a man have great business .-- Tut ! tut ! say the stranger , I have be at the promontory of ; and have get I one of the goodliest , , that ever fell to a single man 's lot . whilst the stranger be give this odd account of himself , the master of the inn and
and he wife keep both they eye fix full upon the stranger 's nose -- by saint , say the inn -keeper 's wife to herself , there be more of it than in any dozen of the largest nos put together in all Strasburg ! be it not , say she , whisper she husband in he ear , be it not a noble nose ? ' tTis a imposture , my dear , say the master of the inn --'ti a false nose . ' tTis a true nose , say he wife . ' Tis make of fir - tree , say he , I smell the turpentine .-- there be a pimple on it , say she . ' tTis a dead nose , reply the inn -keeper . ' tTis a live nose , and if I be alive myself , say the inn -keeper 's , wife , I will touch it . I have make a vow to saint Nicolas this day , say the stranger , that my nose shall not be touch till -- here the stranger suspend he voice , look up .-- when ? say she hastily . it never shall be touch , say he , clasp he hand and bring they close to he breast , till that hour -- what hour ? cry the inn keeper 's wife .-- never !--never! say the stranger , never till I be get -- for 's sake , into what place ? say she -- the stranger rode away without say a word . the stranger have not get half a league on he way towards before all the city of be in a uproar about he nose . the bell be just ring to call the Strasburger to they devotion , and shut up the duty of the day in prayer :-- no soul in all hear 'em -- the city be like a swarm of be -- man , woman , and child , ( the Compline bell tinkling all the time ) fly here and there -- in at one door , out at another -- this way and that way -- long way and cross way -- up one street , down another street -- in at this alley , out of that -- do you see it ? do you see it ? do you see it ? o ! do you see it ?-- who see it ? who do see it ? for mercy 's sake , who see it ? o' day ! I be at vesper !-- I be wash , I be starch , I be scour , I be quilt -- help I ! I never see it -- I never touch would it !-- would I have be a centinel , a bandy - legg would drummer , a trumpeter , a trumpeter 's wife , be the general cry and lamentation in every street and corner of . whilst all this confusion and disorder triumph throughout the great city of , be the courteous stranger go on as gently upon he mule in he way to , as if he have no concern at all in the affair -- talk all the way he ride in broken sentence , sometimes to he mule -- sometimes to himself -- sometimes to he . of , my lovely !--nay I can not stop to let thee bite that thistle - - that ever the suspect tongue of a rival should have rob I of enjoyment when I be upon the point of taste it .-- -- !--'ti nothing but a thistle -- never mind it -- thou shal have a better supper at night . -- would from my country -- my friend -- from thee .-- poor devil , thou 'rt sadly tired with thy journey !--come -- get on a little faster -- there be nothing in my cloak - bag but two shirt -- a crimson - sattin pair of breech , and a fringed -- dear ! -- but why to ?-- be it that there be a hand unfelt , which secretly be conduct I through these meander and unsuspected tract ? -- ! by saint ! every step -- why at this rate we shall be all night in get in -- -- to happiness -- or am I to be the sport of fortune and slander -- destin to be drive forth unconvicted--unheard -- untouch ' -- if so , why do I not stay at , where justice -- but I have swear ! come , thou shalt drink -- to -- of !-- what dost thou prick up thy ear at ?--'tis nothing but a man , &c . the stranger ride on communing in this manner with he mule and -- till he arrive at he inn , where , as soon as he arrive , he alight -- see he mule , as he have promise it , take good care of -- take off he cloak - bag , with he crimson - sattin breech , & c. in it -- call for a omelet to he supper , go to he bed about twelve o'clock , and in five minute fell fast asleep . it be about the same hour when the tumult in be abate for that night , -- the have all get quietly into they bed -- but not like the stranger , for the rest either of they minds or body ; queen , like a elf as she be , have take the stranger 's nose , and without reduction of its bulk , have that night be at the pain of slitting and divide it into as many nos of different cut and fashions , as there be head in to hold they . the abbess of , who with the four great dignitary of she chapter , the prioress
prioress , the deaness , the sub-chantress , and senior canonness , have that week come to to consult the university upon a case of conscience relate to they placket - hole -- be ill all the night . the courteous stranger 's nose have get perch upon the top of the pineal gland of she brain , and make such rousing work in the fancie of the four great dignitary of she chapter , they could not get a wink of sleep the whole night thro ' for it -- there be no keep a limb still amongst they -- in short , they get up like so many ghost . the penitentiary of the third order of saint -- the nun of mount -- the Praemonstratense -- the Cluniense ( mean the nun of , foun in the year 940 , by , abbe . ) -- the , and all the severer order of nun , who lay that night in blanket or hair - cloth , be still in a worse condition than the abbess of -- by tumbling and tossing , and toss and tumbl from one side of they bed to the other the whole night long -- the several sisterhood have scratch would and maul would themselves all to death -- they get out of they bed almost flay have alive -- every body think saint have visit they for probation with he fire -- they have never once , in short , shut they eye the whole night long from vesper to matin . the nun of saint act the wisest -- they never attempt to go to bed at all . the dean of , the prebendary , the capitular and domiciliar ( capitularly assemble in the morning to consider the case of butter would bun ) all wish they have follow the nun of saint 's example .-- in the hurry and confusion every thing have be in the night before , the baker have all forgot to lay they leaven -- there be no butter would bun to be have for breakfast in all -- the whole close of the cathedral be in one eternal commotion --such a cause of restlessness and disquietude , and such a zealous inquiry into that cause of the restlessness , have never happen in , since , with he doctrine , have turn the city upside down . if the stranger 's nose take this liberty of thrusting himself thus into the dish ( 's compliment to orator -- be very sensible that have here change he metaphor -- which he be very guilty of :-- that as a translator , have all along do what he could to make he stick to it -- but that here ' twas impossible . ) of religious order , &c. what a do he nose make of it , in those of the laity !--'tis more than my pen , wear to the stump as it be , have power to describe ; tho ' , I acknowledge , ( cry with more gaiety of think than I could have expect from he ) that there be many a good simile now subsist in the world which might give my countryman some idea of it ; but at the close of such a folio as this , write for they sake , and in which I have spend the greatest part of my life -- tho' I own to they the simile be in be , yet would it not be unreasonable in they to expect I should have either time or inclination to search for it ? let it suffice to say , that the riot and disorder it occasion in the fantasy be so general -- such a overpowering mastership have it get of all the faculty of the mind -- so many strange thing , with equal confidence on all side , and with equal eloquence in all place , be spoken and swear to concern it , that turn the whole stream of all discourse and wonder towards it -- every soul , good and bad -- rich and poor -- learn and unlearned - - doctor and student--mistress and maid -- gentle and simple -- nun 's flesh and woman 's flesh , in spend they time in hearing tiding about it -- every eye in languish to see it -- every finger -- every thumb in burn to touch it . now what might add , if any thing may be think necessary to add , to so vehement a desire -- be this , that the centinel , the bandy - legg would drummer , the trumpeter , the trumpeter 's wife , the burgomaster 's widow , the master of the inn , and the master of the inn 's wife , how widely soever they all differ every one from another in they testimony and description of the stranger 's nose -- they all agree together in two point -- namely , that he be go to , and would not return to till that day month ; and secondly , whether he nose be true or false , that the stranger himself be one of the most perfect paragon of beauty -- the finest - make man -- the most genteel !-- the most generous of he purse -- the most courteous in he carriage , that have ever enter the gate of -- that as he ride , with scymetar slung loosely to he wrist , thro ' the street -- and walk with he crimson - sattin breech across the parade --'tbe with so sweet a air of careless modesty , and so manly withal -- as would have put the heart in ( have he nose not stood in he way ) of every virgin who have cast she eye upon he . I call not upon that heart which be a stranger
stranger to the throb and yearning of curiosity , so excited , to justify the abbess of , the prioress , the deaness , and sub-chantress , for send at noon -day for the trumpeter 's wife : she go through the street of with she husband 's trumpet in she hand , -- the best apparatus the straitness of the time would allow she , for the illustration of she theory -- she stay no longer than three day . the centinel and bandy - legg would drummer !-- nothing on this side of old Athens could equal they ! they read they lecture under the city - gate to comer and goer , with all the pomp of a and a Crantor in they portico . the master of the inn , with he ostler on he left - hand , read he also in the same stile -- under the portico or gateway of he stable - yard -- he wife , hers more privately in a back room : all flock to they lecture ; not promiscuously -- but to this or that , as be ever the way , as faith and credulity marshal would they -- in a word , each come crouding for intelligence -- and every Strasburger have the intelligence he want . ' tTis worth remark , for the benefit of all demonstrator in natural philosophy , & c. that as soon as the trumpeter 's wife have finish the abbess of 's private lecture , and have begin to read in public , which she do upon a stool in the middle of the great parade , -- she incommod the other demonstrator mainly , by gain incontinently the most fashionable part of the city of for she auditory -- but when a demonstrator in philosophy ( cry ) have a trumpet for a apparatus , pray what rival in science can pretend to be hear besides he ? whilst the unlearned , thro' these conduit of intelligence , be all busy in get down to the bottom of the well , where keep she little court -- be the learn in they way as busy in pump she up thro ' the conduits of dialect induction -- they concern themselves not with fact -- they reason -- not one profession have throw more light upon this subject than the Faculty -- have not all they dispute about it run into the affair of Wens and oedematous swelling , they could not keep clear of they for they bloods and soul -- the stranger 's nose have nothing to do either with wen or oedematous swelling . it be demonstrate however very satisfactorily , that such a ponderous mass of heterogenous matter could not be congest and conglomerate to the nose , whilst the infant be in , without destroy the statical balance of the foetus , and throw it plump upon it be head nine month before the time .-- -- the opponent grant the theory -- they deny the consequence . and if a suitable provision of vein , artery , & c. say they , be not laid in , for the due nourishment of such a nose , in the very first stamina and rudiment of its formation , before it come into the world ( bat the case of ) it could not regularly grow and be sustain afterwards . this be all answer by a dissertation upon nutriment , and the effect which nutriment have in extend the vessel , and in the increase and prolongation of the muscular part to the greatest growth and expansion imaginable -- in the triumph of which theory , they go so far as to affirm , that there be no cause in nature , why a nose might not grow to the size of the man himself . the respondent satisfie the world this event could never happen to they so long as a man have but one stomach and one pair of lung -- for the stomach , say they , be the only organ destin for the reception of food , and turn it into chyle -- and the lung the only engine of sanguification -- it could possibly work off no more , than what the appetite bring it : or admit the possibility of a man 's overload he stomach , nature have set bounds however to he lung -- the engine be of a determined size and strength , and could elaborate but a certain quantity in a give time -- that be , it could produce just as much blood as be sufficient for one single man , and no more ; so that , if there be as much nose as man -- they prove a mortification must necessarily ensue ; and forasmuch as there could not be a support for both , that the nose must either fall off from the man , or the man inevitably fall off from he nose . accommodate herself to these emergency , cry the opponent -- else what do you say to the case of a whole stomach -- a whole pair of lung , and but half a man , when both he leg have be unfortunately shoot off ? he die of a plethora , say they -- or must spit blood , and in a fortnight or three week go off in a consumption .-- -- it happen otherwise -- reply the opponent .-- it ought not , say they . the more curious and intimate inquirer after nature and she doings , though they go hand in hand a good way together , yet they all divide about the nose at last , almost as much as the Faculty itself they amicably lay it down , that there be a just and geometrical arrangement and proportion of the several part of the human frame to its several destination ,
, office , and function , which could not be transgress but within certain limit -- that nature , though she sport -- she sport within a certain circle ; -- and they could not agree about the diameter of it . the logician stick much closer to the point before they than any of the class of the literato ;-- they begin and end with the word nose ; and have it not be for a petitio principii , which one of the ablest of they run he head against in the beginning of the combat , the whole controversy have be settle at once . a nose , argue the logician , can not bleed without blood -- and not only blood -- but blood circulate in it to supply the phaenomenon with a succession of drop --( a stream be but a quicker succession of drop , that be include , say he .) -- now death , continue the logician , be nothing but the stagnation of the blood -- I deny the definition -- be the separation of the soul from the body , say he antagonist -- then we do not agree about we weapon , say the logician -- then there be a end of the dispute , reply the antagonist . the civilian be still more concise : what they offer be more in the nature of a decree -- than a dispute . such a monstrous nose , say they , have it be a true nose , could not possibly have be suffer in civil society -- and if false -- to impose upon society with such false sign and token , be a still greater violation of its rights , and must have have still less mercy shew it . the only objection to this be , that if it prove any thing , it prove the stranger 's nose be neither true nor false . this leave room for the controversy to go on . it be maintain by the advocate of the ecclesiastic court , that there be nothing to inhibit a decree , since the stranger ex mero motu have confess he have be at the Promontory of , and have get one of the goodliest , &c . &c .-- to this it be answer , it be impossible there should be such a place as the Promontory of Nose , and the learn be ignorant where it lay . the commissary of the bishop of undertake the advocate , explain this matter in a treatise upon proverbial phrasis , shew they , that the Promontory of be a mere allegorick expression , import no more than that nature have give he a long nose : in proof of which , with great learning , he cite the underwritten authority , ( ex nostratibus eadem loquendi formula utun . & & -- . in . . . de conjec. vid . vol. . 4 . . I . not . 7 qua etiam in re conspir . . . ff. d. tit 3 . fol . 189 . passim . . . de contrahend . empt . & c. necnon . in cap . para refut . per totum . Cum he con . Rever . , . & Prov. cap. 9 . ff. 11 , 12 . obiter . & , cui . & . Belg . ad finem , cum comment . N. . . Scrip . Argentotarens . . Ecc. in fid coll . per 1583 . praecip. ad finem . Quibus add . Rebuff in . . ff. fol . & de jure Gent . & Civil . de protib . aliena feud . per federa , test . . Luxius in prolegom . quem velim videa , de Anally . Cap. 1 , 2 , 3 . . idea . ) which have decide the point incontestably , have it not appear that a dispute about some franchise of dean and chapter - lands have be determine by it nineteen year before . it happen -- I must say unluckily for , because they be give she a lift another way in so do ; that the two universities of -- the , foun in the year 1538 by , counsellor of the senate , -- and the Popish , found by , arch -duke of , be , during all this time , employ the whole depth of they knowledge ( except just what the affair of the abbess of 's placket - hole require ) -- in determine the point of 's damnation . the Popish doctor have undertake to demonstrate a priori , that from the necessary influence of the planet on the twenty - second day of 1483-- when the moon be in the twelfth house , , , and in the third , the , , and , all get together in the fourth -- that he must in course , and unavoidably , be a damn have man -- and that he doctrine , by a direct corollary , must be damn have doctrine too . by inspection into he horoscope , where five planet be in coition all at once with ( mira , satisque horrenda . Planetarum coitio sub Scorpio Asterismo in nona coeli statione , religioni deputabant efficin sacrilegum hereticum , religionis hostem acerrimum atque prophanum , ex horoscopi directione ad coitum , religiosissimus obiit , ejus scelestissima ad inferno navigavit -- ab , & flagelli tigneis cruciata perenniter .--Lucas in praeteriti multorum hominum accidentibus per genitura examinatis . ) ( in read this my father would always shake he head ) in the ninth house , with the allot to religion -- it appear that do not care one stiver about the matter -- and that from the horoscope direct to the conjunction of -- they make it plain likewise he must die cursing and blasphem -- with the blast of
of which he soul ( be steep would in guilt ) sail before the wind , in the lake of hell - fire . the little objection of the doctor to this , be , that it must certainly be the soul of another man , bear 22 , 83 . which be force to sail down before the wind in that manner -- inasmuch as it appear from the register of in the county of , that be not bear in the year 1483 , but in 84 ; and not on the 22d day of , but on the 10th of , the eve of day , from whence he have the name of . ( -- I must break off my translation for a moment ; for if I do not , I know I should no more be able to shut my eye in bed , than the abbess of -- it be to tell the reader ; that my father never read this passage of to my uncle , but with triumph -- not over my uncle , for he never oppose he in it -- but over the whole world . -- now you see , brother , he would say , look up , ' that christian name be not such indifferent thing ; '-- have here be call by any other name but , he would have be damn ' to all eternity -- not that I look upon , he would add , as a good name -- far from it --'ti something better than a neutral , and but a little -- yet little as it be you see it be of some service to he . my father know the weakness of this prop to he hypothesis , as well as the best logician could show he -- yet so strange be the weakness of man at the same time , as it fall in he way , he could not for he life but make use of it ; and it be certainly for this reason , that though there be many story in 's decade full as entertaining as this I be translat , yet there be not one amongst they which my father read over with half the delight -- it flatter two of he strangest hypotheses together -- he and he Nose .-- I will be bold to say , he might have read all the book in the , have not fate take other care of they , and not have meet with a book or passage in one , which hit two such nail as these upon the head at one stroke . ) the two universities of be hard tugge at this affair of 's navigation . the Protestant doctor have demonstrate , that he have not sail right before the wind , as the Popish doctor have pretend ; and as every one knew there be no sailing full in the tooth of it -- they be go to settle , in case he have sailed , how many point he be off ; whether have double the cape , or have fall upon a lee - shore ; and no doubt , as it be a enquiry of much edification , at least to those who understand this sort of , they have go on with it in spite of the size of the stranger 's nose , have not the size of the stranger 's nose draw off the attention of the world from what they be about -- it be they business to follow . the abbess of and she four dignitary be no stop ; for the enormity of the stranger 's nose run full as much in they fancie as they case of conscience -- the affair of they placket - hole keep cold -- in a word , the printer be order to distribute they type -- all controversy dropp ' . ' Tbe a square cap with a silver tassel upon the crown of it -- to a nut - shell -- to have guess on which side of the nose the two university would split . ' tTis above reason , cry the doctor on one side . ' tTis below reason , cry the other . ' tTis faith , cry one . ' tTis a fiddle - stick , say the other . ' tTis possible , cry the one . ' tTis impossible , say the other . 's power be infinite , cry the , he can do any thing . he can do nothing , reply the , which imply contradiction . he can make matter think , say the . as certainly as you can make a velvet cap out of a sow 's ear , reply the Anti-nosarian . he can not make two and two five , reply the Popish doctor .--'Tis false , say they other opponent .-- infinite power be infinite power , say the doctor who maintain the reality of the nose .-- it extend only to all possible thing , reply the Lutherans . by in heaven , cry the Popish doctor , he can make a nose , if he think fit , as big as the steeple of . now the steeple of be the biggest and the tallest church - steeple to be see in the whole world , the deny that a nose of 575 geometrical foot in length could be worn , at least by a middle - siz would man -- the Popish doctor swore it could -- the doctor say no ;-- it could not . this at once start a new dispute , which they pursue a great way , upon the extent and limitation of the moral and natural attribute of -- that controversy lead they naturally into , and to the devil . the stranger 's nose be no more heard of
of in the dispute -- it just serve as a frigate to launch they into the gulph of school -divinity -- and then they all sail before the wind . be in proportion to the want of true knowledge . the controversy about the attribute , & c. instead of cooling , on the contrary have inflam the imagination to a most inordinate degree -- the less they understand of the matter the greater be they wonder about it -- they be leave in all the distress of desire unsatisfied -- see they doctor , the , the , the , on one side -- the Popish doctor on the other , like and he companion in quest of the oracle of the bottle , all embark out of sight . -- the poor leave upon the beach ! -- what be to be do ?-- no delay -- the uproar increase -- every one in disorder -- the city gate set open .-- unfortunate Strasbergers ! be there in the store - house of nature -- be there in the lumber- room of learning -- be there in the great arsenal of chance , one single engine leave undrawn forth to torture you curiosity , and stretch you desire , which be not point by the hand of Fate to play upon you heart ?-- I dip not my pen into my ink to excuse the surrender of yourselves --' tis to write you panegyrick . Shew I a city so macerate with expectation -- who neither eat , or drank , or sleep , or pray , or hearken to the call either of religion or nature , for seven - and - twenty day together , who could have hold out one day longer . on the twenty - eighth the courteous stranger have promise to return to . Seven thousand coach ( must certainly have make some mistake in he numeral character ) 7000 coach -- 15000 single - horse chair - -20000 waggon , crowd as full as they could all hold with senator , counsellor , syndick -- beguine , widow , wife , virgin , canons , concubine , all in they coach -- the abbess of , with the prioress , the deaness and sub-chantress , lead the procession in one coach , and the dean of , with the four great dignitary of he chapter , on she left - hand -- the rest follow higglety - pigglety as they could ; some on horseback -- some on foot -- some lead -- some driven -- some down the Rhine -- some this way -- some that -- all set out at sun -rise to meet the courteous stranger on the road . haste we now towards the catastrophe of my tale -- I say ( cry ) inasmuch as a tale , with part rightly dispose , not only rejoiceth ( gaudet ) in the and of a , but rejoiceth moreover in all the essential and integrant part of it -- it have its Protasis , , , its or grow one out of the other in it , in the order first plan they -- without which a tale have better never be tell at all , say , but be keep to a man 's self . in all my ten tales , in all my ten decade , have I tie down every tale of they as tightly to this rule , as I have do this of the stranger and he nose . -- from he first parley with the centinel , to he leave the city of , after pull off he crimson - sattin pair of breech , be the or first entrance -- where the character of the be just touch in , and the subject slightly begin . the , wherein the action be more fully enter upon and heighten , till it arrive at its state or height call the Catastasis , and which usually take up the 2d and 3d act , be include within that busy period of my tale , betwixt the first night 's uproar about the nose , to the conclusion of the trumpeter 's wife 's lecture upon it in the middle of the grand parade : and from the first embarking of the learn in the dispute -- to the doctor finally sai away , and leave the upon the beach in distress , be the or the ripening of the incident and passion for they bursting forth in the fifth act . this commence with the setting out of the in the road , and terminate in unwind the labyrinth and bring the hero out of a state of agitation ( as call it ) to a state of rest and quietness . this , say , constitute the catastrophe or Peripeitia of my tale -- and that be the part of it I be go to relate . we leave the stranger behind the curtain asleep -- he enter now upon the stage . -- what dost thou prick up thy ear at ?--'tis nothing but a man upon a horse -- be the last word the stranger utter to he mule . it be not proper then to tell the reader , that the mule take he master 's word for it ; and without any more if or and , let the traveller and he horse pass by . the traveller be hasten with all diligence to get to that night . what a fool be I , say the traveller to himself , when he have ride about a league farther , to think of get into this night .-- Strasburg !--the great Strasburg !-- , the capital of all ! , a imperial city ! , a sovereign state ! , garrison with five thousand of the best troops in all the world ! -- ! if I
I be at the gate of this moment , I could not gain admittance into it for a ducat -- nay a ducat and half --'tis too much -- better go back to the last inn I have pass -- than lie I know not where -- or give I know not what . the traveller , as he make these reflection in he mind , turn he horse 's head about , and three minute after the stranger have be conduct into he chamber , he arrive at the same inn . -- we have bacon in the house , say the host , and bread -- and till eleven o'clock this night have three egg in it -- but a stranger , who arrive a hour ago , have have they dress into a omelet , and we have nothing .-- ! say the traveller , harass as I be , I want nothing but a bed .-- I have one as soft as be in , say the host . -- the stranger , continue he , should have sleep in it , for ' tis my best bed , but upon the score of he nose .-- he have get a defluxion , say the traveller . -- not that I know , cry the host .-- but ' tis a camp - bed , and , say he , look towards the maid , imagine there be not room in it to turn he nose in .-- why so ? cry the traveller , start back .-- it be so long a nose , reply the host .-- the traveller fix he eye upon , then upon the ground -- knee upon he right knee -- have just get he hand laid upon he breast -- not with my anxiety , say he rise up again .--'Tis no trifle , say , ' ti the most glorious nose !-- the traveller fall upon he knee again -- lay he hand upon he breast -- then , say he , look up to heaven , thou hast conduct I to the end of my pilgrimage . the traveller be the brother of the , so often invoke that night by the stranger as he ride from upon he mule ; and be come , on she part , in quest of he . he have accompany he sister from across the Pyrenean mountains through , and have many a entangled skein to wind off in pursuit of he through the many meander and abrupt turnings of a lover 's thorny track . -- have sunk under it -- and have not be able to go a step farther than to Lyons , where , with the many disquietude of a tender heart , which all talk of -- but few feel -- she sicke not ' , but have just strength to write a letter to ; and have conjure she brother never to see she face till he have find he out , and put the letter into he hand , take to she bed . ( for that be she brother 's name ) -- tho ' the camp - bed be as soft as any one in , yet he could not shut he eye in it .-- as soon as it be day he rise , and hear be risen too , he enter he chamber , and discharge he sister 's commission . the letter be as follow : ' . , ' whether my suspicion of you nose be justly excited or not --'tis not now to inquire -- it be enough I have not have firmness to put they to farther tryal . ' how could I know so little of myself , when I send my to forbid you come more under my lattice ? or how could I know so little of you , , as to imagine you would not have stay one day in to have give ease to my doubt ?-- be I to be abandon , , because I be deceive ? or be it kind to take I at my word , whether my suspicion be just or no , and leave I , as you do , a prey to much uncertainty and sorrow ? ' in what manner have resent this -- my brother , when he put this letter into you hand , will tell you ; he will tell you in how few moment she repent of the rash message she have send you -- in what frantic haste she fly to she lattice , and how many day and night together she lean immoveably upon she elbow , look through it towards the way which be will not to come . ' he will tell you , when she hear of you departure -- how she spirit desert she -- how she heart sicken would -- how piteously she mourn -- how low she hang she head . of ! how many weary step have my brother 's pity lead I by the hand languishing to trace out yours ; how far have desire carry I beyond strength -- and how oft have I faint by the way , and sunk into he arm , with only power to cry out -- of my ! ' if the gentleness of you carriage have not bely you heart , you will fly to I , almost as fast as you fle from I -- haste as you will -- you will arrive but to see I expire t.--'Tis a bitter dratch , , but oh ! ' tis embitter still more by die un . . . --' she could proceed no farther . suppose the word intend be unconvinced , but she strength would not enable she to finish she letter . the heart of the courteous over -flow as he read the letter -- he order he
he mule forthwith and 's horse to be saddle ; and as no vent in prose be equal to that of poetry in such conflict -- chance , which as often direct we to remedy as to disease , have throw a piece of charcoal into the window -- avail himself of it , and whilst the hostler be get ready he mule , he ease he mind against the wall as follow . . harsh and untuneful be the note of love , unless my strike the key , she hand alone can touch the part , whose dulcet movement charm the heart , and govern all the man with sympathetick sway . 2d . of ! the line be very natural -- for they be nothing at all to the purpose , say , and ' ti a pity there be no more of they ; but whether it be that Seig . be slow in composing verse -- or the hostler quick in saddling mule -- be not averr ; certain it be , that 's mule and 's horse be ready at the door of the inn , before be ready for he second stanza ; so without stay to finish he ode , they both mount , sally forth , pass the , traverse , shape they course towards Lyons , and before the and the abbess of have set out on they cavalcade , have , , and he , cross the Pyrenean mountain , and get safe to . ' Tis needless to inform the geographical reader , that when be in , it be not possible to meet the courteous stranger in the road ; it be enough to say , that of all restless desire , curiosity be the strongest -- the feel the full force of it ; and that for three day and night they be toss to and for in the road , with the tempestuous fury of this passion , before they could submit to return home .-- when alas ! a event be prepare for they , of all other , the most grievous that could befal a free people . as this revolution of the affair be often spoken of , and little understood , I will , in ten word , say , give the world a explanation of it , and with it put a end to my tale . every body know of the grand system of , write by order of . , and put in manuscript into the hand of the fourteenth , in the year 1664 . ' Tis as well know , that one branch out of many of that system , be the get possession of , to favour a entrance at all time into , in order to disturb the quiet of -- and that in consequence of this plan , unhappily fell at length into they hand . it be the lot of a few to trace out the true spring of this and such like revolution -- the vulgar look too high for they -- look too low -- ( for once ) lie in the middle . what a fatal thing be the popular pride of a free city ! cry one historian -- the deem it a diminution of they freedom to receive a imperial garrison -- so fall a prey to a french one . the fate , say another , of the Strasburger , may be a warning to all free people to save they money .-- they anticipat they revenue -- bring themselves under tax , exhaust they strength , and in the end become so weak a people , they have not strength to keep they gate shut , and so the french push they open . Alas ! alas ! cry , ' tbe not the french ,--'twa Curiosity push they open -- the french indeed , who be ever upon the catch , when they see the Strasburger , man , woman and child , all march out to follow the stranger 's nose -- each man follow he own , and march in . trade and manufacture have decay and gradually grow down ever since -- but not from any cause which commercial head have assign ; for it be owe to this only , that Nose have ever so run in they head , that the could not follow they business . Alas ! alas ! cry , make a exclamation -- it be not the first -- and I fear will not be the last fortress that have be either win -- or lose by . the of 's . . with all this learn upon run perpetually in my father 's fancy - - with so many family prejudice -- and ten decade of such tale run on for ever along with they -- how be it possible with such exquisite -- be it a true nose ?-- that a man with such exquisite feeling as my father have , could bear the shock at all below stair -- or indeed above stair , in any other posture , but the very posture I have describe ? -- throw yourself down upon the bed , a dozen time -- take care only to place a look - glass first in a chair on one side of it , before you do it - - but be the stranger 's nose a true nose , or be it a false one ? to tell that before - hand , madam , would be to do injury to one of the best tale in the Christian - world ; and that be the tenth of the tenth decade , which immediately follow this . this tale , cry , somewhat exultingly , have be reserve by I for the concluding tale of my whole work ; know right well , that when I shall have
have tell it , and my reader shall have read it thro'--'twould be even high time for both of we to shut up the book ; inasmuch , continue , as I know of no tale which could possibly ever go down after it . ' tTis a tale indeed ! this set out with the first interview in the inn at Lyons , when leave the courteous stranger and he sister alone in she chamber , and be over-written . the Intricacy of and . Heavens ! thou be a strange creature , ! what a whimsical view of the involution of the heart of woman hast thou open ! how this can ever be translate , and yet if this specimen of 's tale , and the exquisitiveness of he moral , should please the world -- translate shall a couple of volume be .-- , how this can ever be translate into good , I have no sort of conception -- there seem in some passage to want a sixth sense to do it rightly . -- what can he mean by the lambent pupilability of slow , low , dry chat , five note below the natural tone -- which you know , madam , be little more than a whisper ? the moment I pronounce the word , I could perceive a attempt towards a vibration in the string , about the region of the heart .-- the brain make no acknowledgment .-- there be often no good understanding betwixt th'ey -- I feel as if I understand it .-- I have no idea .-- the movement could not be without cause .-- I be lost . I can make nothing of it --unless , may it please you worship , the voice , in that case be little more than a whisper , unavoidably force the eye to approach not only within six inch of each other -- but to look into the pupil -- be not that dangerous ? --but it can not be avoid -- for to look up to the cieling , in that case the two chin unavoidably meet -- and to look down into each other 's lap , the forehead come to immediate contact , which at once put a end to the conference -- I mean to the sentimental part of it .-- what be leave , madam , be not worth stooping for . . my father lay stretch across the bed as still as if the hand of death have push he down , for a full hour and a half before he begin to play upon the floor with the toe of that foot which hang over the bed - side ; my uncle 's heart be a pound lighter for it .-- in a few moment , he leave - hand , the knuckle of which have all the time recline upon the handle of the chamber - pot , come to its feeling -- he thrust it a little more within the valance -- draw up he hand , when he have do , into he bosom -- give a hem ! my good uncle , with infinite pleasure , answer it ; and full gladly would have ingraft a sentence of consolation upon the opening it afforde : but have no talents , as I say , that way , and fear moreover that he might set out with something which might make a bad matter worse , he contente himself with rest he ching placidly upon the cross of he crutch . now whether the compression shorten my uncle 's face into a more pleasurable oval -- or that the philanthropy of he heart , in see he brother begin to emerge out of the sea of he affliction , have brace up he muscle -- so that the compression upon he ching only double the benignity which be there before , be not hard to decide .-- my father , in turn he eye , be struck with such a gleam of sun -shine in he face , as melt down the sullenness of he grief in a moment . he break silence as follow : . do ever man , brother , cry my father , raise himself upon he elbow , and turn himself round to the opposite side of the bed , where my uncle be sit in he old fringed chair , with he ching rest upon he crutch --do ever a poor unfortunate man , brother , cry my father , receive so many lash ?-- the most I ever see give , quoth my uncle ( ring the bell at the bed 's head for ) be to a grenadier , I think in 's regiment . -- have my uncle shoot a bullet through my father 's heart , he could not have fall down with he nose upon the quilt more suddenly . bless I ! say my uncle . . be it 's regiment , quoth my uncle , where the poor grenadier be so unmercifully whipp would at Bruges about the ducat ?-- of ! he be innocent ! cry , with a deep sigh . -- and he be whipp' , may it please you honour , almost to death 's door .-- they have better have shoot he outright , as he begg ' , and he have go directly to heaven , for he be as innocent as you honour .--i thank thee , , quoth my uncle .-- I never think of he , continue , and my poor brother 's misfortune , for we be all three school - fellow , but I cry like a coward .-- Tears be no proof of cowardice , .-- I drop they oft -times myself , cry my uncle .-- I know you honour do , reply , and so be not asham of it myself .-- but
but to think , may it please you honour , continue , a tear steal into the corner of he eye as he speak -- to think of two virtuous lad with heart as warm in they body , and as honest as could make they -- the child of honest people , go forth with gallant spirit to seek they fortune in the world -- and fall into such evils !-- poor Tom ! to be torture upon a rack for nothing -- but marry a 's widow who sell sausage -- honest 's soul to be scour out of he body , for the ducat another man put into he knapsack !--o !--these be misfortune , cry ,- - pull out he handkerchief -- these be misfortune , may it please you honour , worth lie down and cry over . -- my father could not help blushing . 'Twould be a pity , , quoth my uncle , thou shouldst ever feel sorrow of thy own -- thou feelest it so tenderly for other .-- - of - day , reply the corporal , brighten up he face -- you honou know I have neither wife or child -- I can have no sorrow in this world .-- my father could not help smile .-- as few as any man , , reply my uncle ; nor can I see how a fellow of thy light heart can suffer , but from the distress of poverty in thy old age -- when thou be pass all service , -- and hast outlive thy friend . -- a ' please you honour , never fear , reply , chearily . -- but I would have thee never fear , , reply my uncle , and therefore , continue my uncle , throw down he crutch , and get up upon he leg as he utter the word therefore -- in recompence , , of thy long fidelity to I , and that goodness of thy heart I have have such proof of -- whilst thy master be worth a shilling -- thou shalt never ask elsewhere , , for a penny . attempt to thank my uncle -- but have not power -- tear trickle down he cheek faster than he could wipe they off -- he lay he hand upon he breast -- make a bow to the ground , and shut the door . -- I have leave my bowling - green , cry my uncle -- my father smile .-- I have leave he moreover a pension , continue my uncle .-- my father look grave . . be this a fit time , say my father to himself , to talk of Pensions and Grenadiers ? . when my uncle first mention the grenadier , my father , I say , fall down with he nose flat to the quilt , and as suddenly as if my uncle have shoot he ; but it be not add that every other limb and member of my father instantly relapse with he nose into the same precise attitude in which he lay first describe ; so that when corporal leave the room , and my father find himself dispose to rise off the bed -- he have all the little preparatory movement to run over again , before he could do it . Attitudes be nothing , madam --'ti the transition from one attitude to another -- like the preparation and resolution of the discord into harmony , which be all in all . for which reason my father play the same jig over again with he toe upon the floor -- push the chamber - pot still a little farther within the valance -- give a hem -- raise himself up upon he elbow -- and be just begin to address himself to my uncle -- when recollect the unsuccessfulness of he first effort in that attitude -- he get upon he leg , and in make the third turn across the room , he stop short before my uncle ; and lay the three first finger of he right - hand in the palm of he left , and stoop a little , he address himself to my uncle as follow : . when I reflect , brother , upon man ; and take a view of that dark side of he which represent he life as open to so many cause of trouble -- when I consider , brother , how oft we eat the bread of affliction , and that we be bear to it , as to the portion of we inheritance -- I be bear to nothing , quoth my uncle , interrupt my father -- but my commission . Zooks ! say my father , do not my uncle leave you a hundred and twenty pound a year ?-- what could I have do without it ? reply my uncle -- that be another concern , say my father testily -- but I say Toby , when one run over the catalogue of all the cross -reckoning and sorrowful item with which the heart of man be overcharged , ' tis wonderful by what hide resource the mind be enable to stand out , and bear itself up , as it do , against the imposition laid upon we nature .--'Tis by the assistance of , cry my uncle , look up , and press the palm of he hand close together --'tis not from we own strength , brother -- a centinel in a wooden centry - box might as well pretend to stand it out against a detachment of fifty man .-- we be upheld by the grace and the assistance of the best of . -- that be cut the knot , say my father , instead of unty it ,-- but give I leave to lead you , brother , a little deeper into the mystery
mystery . with all my heart , reply my uncle . my father instantly exchange the attitude he be in , for that in which be so finely paint by in he school of ; which you connoisseurship know be so exquisitely imagined , that even the particular manner of the reasoning of be express by it -- for he hold the fore - finger of he left - hand between the fore - finger and the thumb of he right , and seem as if he be say to the libertine he be reclaim --' you grant I this -- and this : and this , and this , I do not ask of you -- they follow of themselves in course . ' so stand my father , hold fast he fore - finger betwixt he finger and he thumb , and reaso with my uncle as he sit in he old fringed chair , valance around with party - colour worsted bobs -- of ! -- what a rich scene of this would thy exquisite power make ! and how gladly would I write such another to avail myself of thy immortality , and secure my own behind it . . though man be of all other the most curious vehicle , say my father , yet at the same time ' tis of so slight a frame , and so totteringly put together , that the sudden jerk and hard jostling it unavoidably meet with in this rug journey , would overset and tear it to piece a dozen time a day -- be it not , brother Toby , that there be a secret spring within we .-- which spre , say my uncle , I take to be .-- will that set my child 's nose on ? cry my father , let go he finger , and strike one hand against the other .--It make every thing straight for we , answer my uncle .-- figuratively speak , dear , it may , for atch I know , say my father ; but the spring I be speak of , be that great and elastic power within we of counterbalancing evil , which , like a secret spring in a well - order machine , though it can not prevent the shock - - at least it impos upon we sense of it . now , my dear brother , say my father , replace he fore - finger , as he be come closer to the point -- have my child arrive safe into the world , unmartyr would in that precious part of he -- fanciful and extravagant as I may appear to the world in my opinion of christian name , and of that magic bia which good or bad name irresistibly impress upon we character and conduct -- be witness ! that in the warmest transport of my wish for the prosperity of my child , I never once wish to cry he head with more glory and honour than what or would have spread around it . but alas ! continue my father , as the greatest evil have befall he -- I must counteract and undo it with the greatest good . he shall be christen Trismegistus , brother . I wish it may answer -- reply my uncle , rise up . . what a chapter of chance , say my father , turn himself about upon the first landing , as he and my uncle be go down stair , what a long chapter of chance do the event of this world lay open to we ! take pen and ink in hand , brother , and calculate it fairly -- I know no more of calculation than this balluster , say my uncle ( strike short of it with he crutch , and hit my father a desperate blow souse upon he shin - bone ) --'Tbe a hundred to one - cry my uncle -- I think , quoth my father , ( rub he shin ) you have know nothing of calculation , brother . a mere chance , say my uncle .-- then it add one to the chapter - - reply my father . the double success of my father 's repartee tick off the pain of he shing at once -- it be well it so fell out --( chance ! again ) -- or the world to this day have never know the subject of my father 's calculation -- to guess it -- there be no chance -- what a lucky chapter of chance have this turn out ! for it have save I the trouble of writing one express , and in truth I have enough already upon my hand without it .-- have not I promise the world a chapter of knot ? two chapters upon the right and the wrong end of a woman ? a chapter upon whisker ? a chapter upon wish ?-- a chapter of nose ?-- no , I have do that -- a chapter upon my uncle 's modesty ? to say nothing of a chapter upon chapter , which I will finish before I sleep - - by my great grandfather 's whisker , I shall never get half of 'em through this year . take pen and ink in hand , and calculate it fairly , brother , say my father , and it will turn out a million to one , that of all the part of the body , the edge of the forcep should have the ill luck just to fall upon and break down that one part , which should break down the fortune of we house with it . it might have be worse , reply my uncle .-- I do not comprehend , say my father .-- suppose the hip have present , reply my uncle , as forebod . my father
father reflect half a minute -- look down -- touch the middle of he forehead slightly with he finger -- -- true , say he . . be it not a shame to make two chapter of what pass in go down one pair of stair ? for we be get no farther yet than to the first landing , and there be fifteen more step down to the bottom ; and for atch I know , as my father and my uncle be in a talking humour , there may be as many chapter as step :-- let that be as it will , , I can no more help it than my destiny :-- a sudden impulse come across I -- drop the curtain , Shandy -- I drop it -- strike a line here across the paper , Tristram -- I strike it -- and hey for a new chapter . the deuce of any other rule have I to govern myself by in this affair -- and if I have one -- as I do all thing out of all rule -- I would twist it and tear it to piece , and throw it into the fire when I have do -- be I warm ? I be , and the cause demand it -- a pretty story ! be a man to follow rule -- or rule to follow he ? now this , you must know , be my chapter upon chapter , which I promise to write before I go to sleep , I think it meet to ease my conscience entirely before I lay down , by tell the world all I know about the matter at once : be not this ten time better than to set out dogmatically with a sententious parade of wisdom , and tell the world a story of a roast horse -- that chapter relieve the mind -- that they assist -- or impose upon the imagination -- and that in a work of this dramatic cast they be as necessary as the shifting of scene -- with fifty other cold conceit , enough to extinguish the fire which roast he ?--o ! but to understand this , which be a puff at the fire of 's temple -- you must read -- read away - - if you be not a jot the wiser by read he the first time over --never fear -- read he again -- and read 's metaphysick forty time through a - piece , and never understand a single word . -- but mark the consequence -- to turn out a desperate writer at all kind of writing -- for he write book de omni scribili ; and for ( ) though all the world know he be bear a foetus , ( Ce Foetus n'etoit pa plus grand que la paume de la main ; tmais son pere l'ayant examine e qualite , & ayant trouve que c'etoit quelque chose plus , le fit transporter tout vivant a , out il le fit voy a & a du lieu . on trouva qu'il ne lui manquoit rien d'essentiel a la vie ; & son pere pour faire voir un essai de son experience , entreprit d'achever l'ouvrage de la nature , & de travailler a la formation avec le meme artifice que celui do not on se sert pour faire ecclorre les Poulet en Egypte . instruisit une tout ce qu'elle avoin a faire , & ayant fait mettre son fils dan un pour proprement accommode , il reussit a l'elever & a lui faire prendre s accroissemen necessaire , par l'uniformite d'une chaleur etrangere mesuree exactement sur les degr d'un Thermometre , yoou would 'un autre instrument equivalent . ( . Giustinian , ne gli . a 223 . 488 . ) on auroit toujour ete tr satisfait 'un pere si experiment l' , quand il n'auroit pu prolonger la vie a son fils que pour Puelque mois , yoou pour peu d'annee . tMais quand on se represente que l'Enfant a vecu pr de quatre - vingt ans , & qu'il a compose quatre - vingt Ouvrage differents tous fruit d'une longue lecture -- il faut convenir que tout ce qui est incroyable n'est pa toujour faux , & que la Vraisemblance n'est pa toujour do cite . n'avoit que dix neuf and lorsqu 'il composa humana . ( Les celebre , revus & corrige par . ) ) of no more than five inche and a half in length , yet he grow to that astonishing height in literature , as to write a book with a title as long as himself -- the learn know I mean he , upon the origin of the human soul . so much for my chapter upon chapters , which I hold to be the best chapter in my whole work ; and take my word , whoever read it , be full as well employ , as in picking straw . . we shall bring all thing to rights , say my father , set he foot upon the first step from the landing .-- this Trismegistus , continue my father , draw he leg back and turn to my uncle -- be the greatest ( ) of all earthly being -- he be the greatest king -- the greatest lawgiver -- the greatest philosopher -- and the greatest priest -- and engineer -- say my uncle . -- in course , say my father . . -- and how do you mistress ? cry my father , take the same step over again from the landing , and call to , whom he see pass by the foot of the stair with a huge pin-cushion in she hand -- how do you mistress ? as well , say , trip by , but without look up , as can be expect .-- what a fool be I
I ! say my father , draw he leg back again -- let thing be as they will , brother , ' tis ever the precise answer -- and how be the child , pray ?-- no answer . and where be ? add my father , raise he voice aloud , and look over the balluster -- be out of hearing . of all the riddle of a married life , say my father , cross the landing in order to set he back against the wall , whilst he propound it to my uncle -- of all the puzzling riddle , say he , in a marriage state , -- of which you may trust I , brother , there be more ass load than all 's stock of ass could have carry -- there be not one that have more intricacy in it than this -- that from the very moment the mistress of the house be bring to bed , every female in it , from my lady 's gentlewoman down to the cinder - wench , become a inch taller for it ; and give themselves more air upon that single inch , than all they other inch put together . I think rather , reply my uncle , that ' tis we who sink a inch lower .-- if I meet but a woman with child -- I do it t.--'Tis a heavy tax upon that half of we fellow - creature , brother , say my uncle a piteous burden upon , continue he , shak he head -- yes , yes , ' tis a painful thing -- say my father , shak he head too -- but certainly since shaking of head come into fashion , never do two head shake together , in concert , from two such different spring . / take th'ey all -- say my uncle and my father , each to himself . . Holla !-- you , chairman !-- here 's sixpence -- do step into that bookseller 's shop , and call I a day - tall critick . I be very willing to give any one of th'ey a crown to help I with he tackling , to get my father and my uncle off the stair , and to put they to bed . --'Tis even high time ; for except a short nap , which they both get whilst be bore the jack - boot -- and which , by - the - bye , do my father no sort of good , upon the score of the bad hinge -- they have not else shut they eye , since nine hour before the time that doctor be lead into the back parlour in that dirty pickle by . be every day of my life to be as busy a day as this -- and to take up -- . I will not finish that sentence till I have make a observation upon the strange state of affair between the reader and myself , just as thing stand at present -- a observation never applicable before to any one biographical writer since the creation of the world , but to myself -- and I believe , will never hold good to any other , until its final destruction -- and therefore , for the very novelty of it alone , it must be worth you worship attend to . I be this month one whole year older than I be this time twelve - month ; and have get , as you perceive , almost into the middle of my third volume ( accord to the preceding Editions . ) -- and no farther than to my first day 's life --'tis demonstrative that I have three hundred and sixty - four day more life to write just now , than when I first set out ; so that instead of advancing , as a common writer , in my work with what I have be do at it -- on the contrary , I be just throw so many volume back -- be every day of my life to be as busy a day as this -- and why not ?-- and the transaction and opinion of it to take up as much description -- and for what reason should they be cut short ? as at this rate I should just live 364 time faster than I should write -- it must follow , an' please you worship , that the more I write , the more I shall have to write -- and consequently , the more you worship read , the more you worship will have to read . will this be good for you worship eye ? it will do well for mine ; and , be it not that my opinion will be the death of I , I perceive I shall lead a fine life of it out of this self - same life of mine ; or , in other word , shall lead a couple of fine life together . as for the proposal of twelve volume a year , or a volume a month , it no way alter my prospect -- write as I will , and rush as I may into the middle of thing , as Horace advise -- I shall never overtake myself whipp' and drive to the last pinch ; at the worst I shall have one day the start of my pen -- and one day be enough for two volume -- and two volume will be enough for one year .-- prosper the manufacturer of paper under this propitious reign , which be now open to we -- as I trust its providence will prosper every thing else in it that be take in hand . as for the propagation of Geese -- I give myself no concern -- be all - bountiful -- I
I shall never want tool to work with . -- so then , friend ! you have get my father and my uncle off the stair , and see they to be ?--And how do you manage it ?-- you dropp ' a curtain at the stair - foot -- I think you have no other way for it -- here be a crown for you trouble . . -- then reach I my breech off the chair , say my father to .-- there be not a moment 's time to dress you , , cry -- the child be as black in the face as my -- as you what ? say my father , for like all orator , he be a dear searcher into comparisons .-- , I , , say , the child 's in a fit .-- and where be ? -- never where he should be , say , but he curate 's in the dressing - room , with the child upon he arm , wait for the name -- and my mistress bid I run as fast as I could to know , as be the godfather , whether it should not be call after he . be one sure , say my father to himself , scratch he eye - brow , that the child be expire , one might as well compliment my brother as not -- and it would be a pity , in such a case , to throw away so great a name as upon he -- but he may recover . no , no ,--said my father to , I will get up -- there be no time , cry , the child 's as black as my shoe . , say my father -- but stay -- thou be a leaky vessel , , add my father ; canst thou carry in thy head , the length of the gallery without scattering ? -- can I ? cry , shutt the door in a huff .-- if she can , I will be shot , say my father , bounce out of bed in the dark , and grope for he breech . run with all speed along the gallery . my father make all possible speed to find he breech . get the start , and keep it -- something , cry -- there be no christian - name in the world , say the curate , begin with -- but . then ' ttis Tristram -gistus , quoth . -- there be no gistus to it , noodle !--'ti my own name , reply the curate , dip he hand , as he speak , into the bason-- Tristram ! say he , &c . &c . &c . &c .-- so be I call , and shall I be to the day of my death . my father follow , with he night - gow across he arm , with nothing more than he breech on , fasten through haste with but a single button , and that button through haste thrust only half into the button - hole . -- she have not forget the name , cry my father , half open the door ?-- no , no , say the curate , with a tone of intelligence .-- and the child be better , cry . -- and how do you mistress ? as well , say , as can be expect .-- ! say my father , the button of he breech slip out of the button - hole -- so that whether the interjection be level at , or the button - hole -- whether be a interjection of contempt or a interjection of modesty , be a doubt , and must be a doubt till I shall have time to write the three follow favourite chapter , that be , my chapter of chamber - maid , my chapter of pish , and my chapter of button - hole . all the light I be able to give the reader at present be this , that the moment my father cry ! he whis have himself about -- and with he breech hold up by one hand , and he night - gown throw across the arm of the other , he turn along the gallery to bed , something slower than he come . . I wish I could write a chapter upon sleep . a fitter occasion could never have present itself , than what this moment offer , when all the curtain of the family be draw -- the candle put out - - and no creature 's eye be open but a single one , for the other have be shut these twenty year , of my mother 's nurse . it be a fine subject . and yet , as fine as it be , I would undertake to write a dozen chapter upon button - hole , both quicker and with more fame , than a single chapter upon this . -hole ! there be something lively in the very idea of 'em -- and trust I , when I get amongst 'em -- you gentry with great beard -- look as grave as you will -- I will make merry work with my button - hole -- I shall have th'ey all to myself t--'tis a maiden subject -- I shall run foul of no man 's wisdom or fine saying in it . but for sleep -- I know I shall make nothing of it before I begin -- I be no dab at you fine saying in the first place -- and in the next , I can not for my soul set a grave face upon a bad matter , and tell the world --'ti the refuge of the unfortunate -- the enfranchisement of the prisoner -- the downy lap of the hopeless , the weary
weary , and the broken - hear ; nor could I set out with a lye in my mouth , by affirming , that of all the soft and delicious function of we nature , by which the great author of it , in he bounty , have be pleased to recompence the suffering wherewith he justice and he good pleasure have weary we -- that this be the chiefest ( I know pleasur worth ten of it ) ; or what a happiness it be to man , when the anxiety and passion of the day be over , and he lie down upon he back , that he soul shall be so seate within he , that whichever way she turn she eye , the heaven shall look calm and sweet above she -- no desire -- or fear -- or doubt that trouble the air , nor any difficulty past , present , or to come , that the imagination may not pass over without offence , in that sweet secession . ' have bless , ' say , ' be upon the man who first invent this self - same thing call sleep -- it cover a man all over like a cloak . ' now there be more to I in this , and it speak warmer to my heart and affection , than all the dissertation squeez would out of the head of the learn together upon the subject . -- not that I altogether disapprove of what advance upon it --'tis admirable in its way -- ( I quote by memory . ) the world enjoy other pleasur , say he , as they do that of sleep , without taste or feel it as it slip and pass by .-- we should study and ruminate upon it , in order to render proper thanks to he who grant it to we .-- for this end I cause myself to be disturb in my sleep , that I may the better and more sensibly relish it .-- and yet I see few , say he again , who live with less sleep , when need require ; my body be capable of a firm , but not of a violent and sudden agitation -- I evay of late all violent exercise -- I be never weary with walking -- but from my youth , I never look to ride upon pavement . I love to lie hard and alone , and even without my wife -- this last word may stagger the faith of the world -- but remember , ' ( as say in the affair of ) ' n'est pa toujour do Cote de la Verite . ' and so much for sleep . . if my wife will but venture he -- brother , shall be dress ' and bring down to we , whilst you and I be get we breakfast together .-- -- go , tell , , to step here . she be run up stair , answer , this very instant , sobb and cry , and wringe she hand as if she heart would break . we shall have a rare month of it , say my father , turn he head from , and look wistfully in my uncle 's face for some time -- we shall have a devilish month of it , brother , say my father , set he arm a'kimbo , and shake he head ; fire , water , woman , wind -- brother !--'Tis some misfortune , quoth my uncle .-- that it be , cry my father -- to have so many jarring element breaking loose , and ride triumph in every corner of a gentleman 's house -- boot it to the peace of a family , brother , that you and I possess ourselves , and sit here silent and unmoved -- whilst such a storm be whistl over we head .-- and what be the matter , ? they have call the child Tristram -- and my mistress be just get out of a hysterick fit about it -- no !--'tis not my fault , say -- I tell he it be Tristram - gistus . -- make tea for yourself , brother , say my father , take down he hat - - but how different from the sally and agitation of voice and member which a common reader would imagine ! -- for he spake in the sweetest modulation -- and take down he hat with the genteelest movement of limb , that ever affliction harmonize and attune together . -- go to the bowling - green for corporal , say my uncle , speak to , as soon as my father leave the room . . when the misfortune of my fall so heavily upon my father 's head ; -- the reader remember that he walk instantly up stair , and cast himself down upon he bed ; and from hence , unless he have a great insight into human nature , he will be apt to expect a rotation of the same ascending and descende movement from he , upon this misfortune of my name ; -- no . the different weight , dear Sir -- nay even the different package of two vexation of the same weight -- make a very wide difference in we manner of bearing and get through with they .-- it be not half a hour ago , when ( in the great hurry and precipitation of a poor devil 's writing for daily bread ) I throw a fair sheet , which I have just finish , and carefully write out , slap into the fire , instead of the foul one . instantly I snatch would off my wig , and throw it perpendicularly , with all imaginable violence , up to the top of the room -- indeed I catch it as
as it fall -- but there be a end of the matter ; nor do I think any think else in would have give such immediate ease : she , dear Goddess , by a instantaneous impulse , in all provoke case , determine we to a sally of this or that member -- or else she thrust we into this or that place , or posture of body , we know not why -- but mark , madam , we live amongst riddle and mystery -- the most obvious thing , which come in we way , have dark side , which the quickest sight can not penetrate into ; and even the clearest and most exalt understanding amongst we find ourselves puzzl and at a loss in almost every cranny of nature 's work : so that this , like a thousand other thing , fall out for we in a way , which tho ' we can not reason upon it -- yet we find the good of it , may it please you reverence and you worship -- and that be enough for we . now , my father could not lie down with this affliction for he life -- nor could he carry it up stair like the other -- he walk composedly out with it to the fish - pond . have my father lean he head upon he hand , and reason a hour which way to have gone -- reason , with all she force , could not have direct he to any think like it : there be something , , in fish - ponds -- but what it be , I leave to system -builder and fish - pond - digger betwixt 'em to find out -- but there be something , under the first disorderly transport of the humours , so unaccountably becalm in a orderly and a sober walk towards one of they , that I have often wonder that neither Pythagora , nor , nor , nor , nor , nor any one of you note lawgiver , ever give order about they . . you honour , say , shutt the parlour - door before he begin to speak , have hear , I imagine , of this unlucky accident -- o yes , , say my uncle , and it give I great concern .-- I be heartily concerned too , but I hope you honour , reply Trim , will do I the justice to believe , that it be not in the least owe to I .-- to thee -- ?-- cry my uncle , look kindly in he face --'tbe 's and the curate 's folly betwixt they .-- what business could they have together , an' please you honour , in the garden ?-- in the gallery thou meanest , reply my uncle . Tre find he be upon a wrong scent , and stop short with a low bow -- two misfortune , quoth the corporal to himself , be twice as many at least as be needful to be talk over at one time ; -- the mischief the cow have do in break into the fortification , may be tell he honour hereafter .-- 's casuistry and address , under the cover of he low bow , prevent all suspicion in my uncle , so he go on with what he have to say to as follow : -- for my own part , , though I can see little or no difference betwixt my nephew 's be call or -- yet as the thing sit so near my brother 's heart , Trim -- I would freely have give a hundred pound rather than it should have happen .-- a hundred pound , an' please you honour ! reply Tre ,-- I would not give a cherry - stone to boot .-- would I , , upon my own account , quoth my uncle -- but my brother , whom there be no arguing with in this case -- maintain that a great deal more depend , , upon christian - name , than what ignorant people imagine -- for he say there never be a great or heroic action perform since the world begin by one call Tristram -- nay , he will have it , , that a man can neither be learn , or wise , or brave .--'Tis all fancy , a ' please you honour -- I fight just as well , reply the corporal , when the regiment call I , as when they call I .-- and for my own part , say my uncle , though I should blush to boast of myself , -- yet have my name be , I could have do no more at than my duty .-- bless you honour ! cry Trim , advance three step as he speak , do a man think of he christian - name when he go upon the attack ?-- or when he stand in the trench , ? cry my uncle , look firm .-- or when he enter a breach ? say Trim , push in between two chair .-- or force the line ? cry my uncle , rise up , and push he crutch like a pike .-- or face a platoon ? cry Tre , present he stick like a firelock .-- or when he march up the glacis ? cry my uncle , look warm and set he foot upon he stool .-- . my father be return from he walk to the fish - pond -- and open the parlour - door in the very height of the attack , just as my uncle be march up the glacis -- Tre recover he arm -- never be my uncle catch in riding at such a desperate rate in he life ! ! my uncle ! have not a weightier matter call
call forth all the ready eloquence of my father -- how hadst thout then and thy poor hobby - horse too be insult ! my father hang up he hat with the same air he take it down ; and after give a slight look at the disorder of the room , he take hold of one of the chair which have form the corporal 's breach , and place it over - against my uncle , he sit down in it , and as soon as the tea - thing be take away , and the door shut , he break out in a lamentation as follow : my 's . it be in vain longer , say my father , address himself as much to 's curse , which be laid upon the corner of the chimney - piece -- as to my uncle who sit under it -- it be in vain longer , say my father , in the most querulous monotony imaginable , to struggle as I have do against this most uncomfortable of human persuasion -- I see it plainly , that either for my own sins , brother , or the sins and folly of the Shandy family , have think fit to draw forth the heaviest of its artillery against I ; and that the prosperity of my child be the point upon which the whole force of it be direct to play .-- such a thing would batter the whole universe about we ear , brother , say my uncle -- if it be so - unhappy Tristram ! child of wrath ! child of decrepitude ! interruption ! mistake ! and discontent ! what one misfortune or disaster in the book of embryotic evil , that could unmechanize thy frame , or entangle thy filament ! which have not fall upon thy head , or ever thou camest into the world -- what evils in thy passage into it !-- what evils since !--produce into being , in the decline of thy father 's day -- when the power of he imagination and of he body be wax feeble -- when radical heat and radical moisture , the element which should have temper have thine , be dry up ; and nothing leave to find thy stamina in , but negation --'ti pitiful -- brother , at the best , and call out for all the little help that care and attention on both side could give it . but how be we defeat ! you know the event , brother --'ti too melancholy a one to be repeat now -- when the few animal spirit I be worth in the world , and with which memory , fancy , and quick part should have be convey' -- be all disperse , confuse , confound , scatter , and send to the devil .-- here then be the time to have put a stop to this persecution against he ;- - and try a experiment at least -- whether calmness and serenity of mind in you sister , with a due attention , brother , to she evacuation and repletion -- and the rest of she non-natural , might not , in a course of nine month gestation , have set all thing to rights .-- my child be bereft of these ! -- what a teazing life do she lead herself , and consequently she foetus too , with that nonsensical anxiety of hers about lie - in in town ? I think my sister submit with the greatest patience , reply my uncle -- I never hear she utter one fretful word about it .-- she fume inwardly , cry my father ; and that , let I tell you , brother , be ten time worse for the child -- and then ! what battle do she fight with I , and what perpetual storm about the midwife .-- there she give vent , say my uncle .-- ! cry my father , look up . but what be all this , my dear , to the injuries do we by my child 's come head foremost into the world , when all I wish , in this general wreck of he frame , be to have save this little casket unbroke , unrifled .-- with all my precaution , how be my system turn topside - turvy in the womb with my child ! he head expose to the hand of violence , and a pressure of 470 pound tavoirdupois weight act so perpendicularly upon its apex -- that at this hour ' ttis ninety per . insurance , that the fine net - work of the intellectual web be not rent and tear to a thousand tatter . -- still we could have do .-- , coxcomb , puppy -- give he but a nose -- , , , --( shape he as you will ) the door of fortune stand open -- of ! ! have I be blest with a foetus five inch long and a half , like thee -- Fate might have do she worst . still , brother , there be one cast of the dye leave for we child after all -- of ! Tristram ! Tristram ! we will send for , say my uncle . -- you may send for whom you will , reply my father . . what a rate have I go on at , curvett and strike it away , two up and two down for three volume ( accord to the preceding Editions . ) together , without look once behind , or even on one side of I , to see whom I trod upon !-- I will tread upon no one -- quoth I to myself when I mount -- I will take a good rattling gallop ; but I will not hurt the poorest jack - ass upon the road
road .-- so off I set -- up one lane -- down another , through this turnpike -- over that , as if the arch - jockey of jockey have get behind I . now ride at this rate with what good intention and resolution you may --'ti a million to one you will do some one a mischief , if not yourself -- he be flung -- he be off -- he be lose he hat -- he be down -- he will break he neck -- see !-- if he have not gallop full among the scaffolding of the undertaking critick !-- he will knock he brain out against some of they post -- he be bounce out !-- look -- he be now ride like a mad -cap full tilt through a whole crowd of painter , fiddler , poet , biographer , physician , lawyer , logician , player , school -men , churchman , statesman , soldier , casuist , connoisseur , prelate , pope , and engineers .-- do not fear , say I -- I will not hurt the poorest jack - ass upon the king 's highway . -- but you horse throw dirt ; see you have splash ' a bishop -- I hope in , ' twas only Ernulphus , say I .--but you have squirt full in the face of . , , and , doctor of the .-- that be last year , reply I .--but you have trod this moment upon a king . -- king have bad time of not , say I , to be trod upon by such people as I . you have do it , reply my accuser . I deny it , quoth I , and so have get off , and here be I stand with my bridle in one hand , and with my cap in the other , to tell my story . -- and what in it ? you shall hear in the next chapter . . as the first of be one winterly night warm himself over the ember of a wood fire , and talk with he first minister of sundry thing for the good of the state ( , . I .) -- it would not be amiss , say the king , stirr up the ember with he cane , if this good understanding betwixt ourselves and be a little strengthen .- - there be no end , , reply the minister , in give money to these people -- they would swallow up the treasury of .-- ! poo ! answer the king -- there be more way , Mons . le premier , of brib , besides that of give money -- I will pay the honour of stand godfather for my next child . -- you majesty , say the minister , in so do , would have all the grammarian in upon you back ;-- , as a republic , be a female , can in no construction be godfather .-- she may be godmother , reply hastily -- so announce my intention by a courier to - morrow morning . I be astonish , say the , ( that day fortnight ) speak to he minister as he enter the closet , that we have have no answer from . -- , I wait upon you this moment , say . le , to lay before you my dispatch upon that business .-- they take it kindly , say the king .-- they do , , reply the minister , and have the highest sense of the honour you majesty have do they -- but the republick , as godmother , claim she right , in this case , of name the child . in all reason , quoth the king -- she will christen he , or , or , or some name that she know will be agreeable to we . you majesty be deceive , reply the minister -- I have this hour receive a dispatch from we resident , with the determination of the republic on that point also . -- and what name have the republick fix upon for the Dauphin ?-- , , -nego , reply the minister .-- by 's girdle , I will have nothing to do with the Swiss , cry the , pull up he breech and walk hastily across the floor . you majesty , reply the minister calmly , can not bring yourself off . we will pay they in money -- say the king . , there be not sixty thousand crown in the treasury , answer the minister .-- I will pawn the best jewel in my crown , quoth the . you honour stand pawn would already in this matter , answer . then , . le , say the king , by . . . we will go to war with 'em . . , gentle reader , I have lust earnestly , and endeavoure carefully ( accord to the measure of such a slender skill as have vouchsaf I , and as convenient leisure from other occasion of needful profit and healthful pastime have permit ) that these little book which I here put into thy hand , might stand instead of many bigger book -- yet have I carry myself towards thee in such fanciful guise of careless disport , that right sore be I asham now to intreat thy lenity seriously -- in beseeching thee to believe it of I , that in the story of my father and he christian - name -- I have no thought of treading upon the -- nor in the affair of the nose -- upon the -- nor in the character of my uncle -- of characterize the militiating spirit of my country -- the wound upon he groin , be a wound to every comparison of that kind -- nor by --
-- that I mean the duke of -- or that my book be write against predestination , or free - will , or tax -- if ' tis write against any thing ,-- ' tis write , an' please you worship , against the spleen ! in order , by a more frequent and a more convulsive elevation and depression of the diaphragm , and the succussation of the intercostal and abdominal muscle in laughter , to drive the gall and other bitter juice from the gall - bladder , liver , and sweet - bread of he majesty 's subject , with all the inimicitious passion which belong to they , down into they duodenum . . -- but can the thing be undone , ? say my father -- for in my opinion , continue he , it can not . I be a vile canonist , reply -- but of all evils , hold suspence to be the most tormenting , we shall at least know the worst of this matter . I hate these great dinner -- say my father -- the size of the dinner be not the point , answer -- we want , , to dive into the bottom of this doubt , whether the name can be change or not -- and as the beard of so many commissary , official , advocates , proctor , register , and of the most eminent of we school -divine , and other , be all to meet in the middle of one table , and have so pressingly invite you -- who in you distress would miss such a occasion ? all that be requisite , continue , be to apprize , and let he manage a conversation after dinner so as to introduce the subject .-- then my brother , cry my father , clapp he two hand together , shall go with we . -- let my old tye - wig , quoth my uncle , and my lace regimental , be hang to the fire all night , . ( page numbering skip ten page ) . -- no doubt , , -- there be a whole chapter want here -- and a chasm of ten page make in the book by it -- but the book - binder be neither a fool , or a knave , or a puppy -- nor be the book a jot more imperfect ( at least upon that score ) -- but , on the contrary , the book be more perfect and complete by want the chapter , than have it , as I shall demonstrate to you reverence in this manner .-- I question first , by - the - bye , whether the same experiment might not be make as successfully upon sundry other chapter -- but there be no end , a ' please you reverence , in try experiment upon chapter -- we have have enough of it -- so there be a end of that matter . but before I begin my demonstration , let I only tell you , that the chapter which I have tear out , and which otherwise you would all have be read just now , instead of this -- be the description of my father 's , my uncle 's , 's , and 's set out and journey to the visitation at . . .. we will go in the coach , say my father -- , have the arm be alte , Obadiah ?-- it would have make my story much better to have begin with tell you , that at the time my mother 's arm be add to the 's , when the coach be re-paint upon my father 's marriage , it have so fall out that the coach - painter , whether by perform all he work with the left hand , like the , or of -- or whether ' twas more from the blunder of he head than hand -- or whether , lastly , it be from the sinister turn which every thing relate to we family be apt to take -- it so fall out , however , to we reproach , that instead of the bend - dexter , which since the 's reign be honestly we due -- a bend - sinister , by some of these fatality , have be draw quite across the field of the Shandy arm . ' tTis scarce credible that the mind of so wise a man as my father be , could be so much incommod with so small a matter . the word coach -- let it be whose it would -- or coach -man , or coach - horse , or coach - hire , could never be name in the family , but he constantly complain of carry this vile mark of illegitimacy upon the door of he own ; he never once be able to step into the coach , or out of it , without turn round to take a view of the arm , and make a vow at the same time , that it be the last time he would ever set he foot in it again , till the bend - sinister be take out -- but like the affair of the hinge , it be one of the many thing which the destiny have set down in they book ever to be grumble at ( and in wiser family than ours ) -- but never to be mende . -- have the bend - sinister be brush would out , I say ? say my father .-- there have be nothing brush ' out , , answer , but the lining . we will go o'horseback , say my father , turn to -- of all thing in the world , except politick , the clergy know the least of heraldry , say .-- no
no matter for that , cry my father -- I should be sorry to appear with a blot in my escutcheon before they . -- never mind the bend - sinister , say my uncle , put on he tye - wig .-- no , indeed , say my father -- you may go with my aunt Dinah to a visitation with a bend - sinister , if you think fit -- my poor uncle blush ' . my father be vex at himself .-- no --my dear brother , say my father , change he tone -- but the damp of the coach - line about my loin , may give I the sciatica again , as it do , , and last winter -- so if you please you shall ride my wife 's pad -- and as you be to preach , , you have better make the best of you way before -- and leave I to take care of my brother , and to follow at we own rate . now the chapter I be oblige to tear out , be the description of this cavalcade , in which and , upon two coach - horse a - breast , lead the way as slow as a patrole -- whilst my uncle , in he laced regimental and tye - wig , keep he rank with my father , in deep roads and dissertation alternately upon the advantage of learning and arm , as each could get the start . -- but the painting of this journey , upon review it , appear to be so much above the stile and manner of any thing else I have be able to paint in this book , that it could not have remain in it , without depreciat every other scene ; and destroy at the same time that necessary equipoise and balance , ( whether of good or bad ) betwixt chapter and chapter , from whence the just proportion and harmony of the whole work result . for my own part , I be but just set up in the business , so know little about it -- but , in my opinion , to write a book be for all the world like hum a song -- be but in tune with yourself , madam , ' tis no matter how high or how low you take it . -- this be the reason , may it please you reverence , that some of the lowest and flattest composition pass off very well --( as tell my uncle Toby one night ) by siege .-- my uncle look brisk at the sound of the word siege , but could make neither head or tail of it . I be to preach at court next , say -- run over my note -- so I humm would over doctor 's note -- the modulation 's very well --'twill do , , if it hold on at this rate -- so on I humm ' -- and a tolerable tune I think it be ; and to this hour , may it please you reverence , have never find out how low , how flat , how spiritless and jejune it be , but that all of a sudden , up start a air in the middle of it , so fine , so rich , so heavenly , -- it carry my soul up with it into the other world ; now have I ( as complain in a parallel accident ) --had I find the declivity easy , or the ascent accessible -- certe I have be outwit .-- you note , Homenas , I should have say , be good note ; -- but it be so perpendicular a precipice -- so wholly cut off from the rest of the work , that by the first note I hummhave I find myself fly into the other world , and from thence discover the vale from whence I come , so deep , so low , and dismal , that I shall never have the heart to descmend into it again . > a dwarf who bring a standard along with he to measure he own size -- take my word , be a dwarf in more article than one .-- and so much for tear out of chapter . . -- see if he be not cut it into slips , and give they about he to light they pipe !--'Tis abominable , answer ; it should not go unnoticed , say doctor --> he be of the of the . , say , half rise from he chair , in order to remove a bottle and a tall decanter , which stand in a direct line betwixt he and -- you might have spare this sarcastic stroke , and have hit upon a more proper place , -- or at least upon a more proper occasion to have shewn you contempt of what we have be about : if the sermon be of no better worth than to light pipe with --'twa certainly , , not good enough to be preach before so learn a body ; and if ' tbe good enough to be preach before so learn a body --'tbe certainly Sir , too good to light they pipe with afterwards . -- I have get he fast hang up , quoth to himself , upon one of the two horn of my dilemma -- let he get off as he can . I have undergone such unspeakable torment , in bring forth this sermon , quoth , upon this occasion -- that I declare , , I would suffer martyrdom -- and if it be possible my horse with I , a thousand time over , before I would sit down and make such another : I be deliver of it at the wrong end of I -- it
it come from my head instead of my heart -- and it be for the pain it give I , both in the writing and preaching of it , that I revenge myself of it , in this manner -- to preach , to show the extent of we reading , or the subtlety of we wit -- to parade in the eyes of the vulgar with the beggarly account of a little learning , tinsel would over with a few word which glitter , but convey little light and less warmth -- be a dishonest use of the poor single half hour in a week which be put into we hand not preach the gospel -- but ourselves -- for my own part , continue , I have rather direct five word point - blank to the heart .- - as pronounce the word point - blank , my uncle rise up to say something upon projectile -- when a single word and no more utter from the opposite side of the table draw every one 's ear towards it -- a word of all other in the dictionary the last in that place to be expect -- a word I be asham to write -- yet must be write -- must be read -- illegal -- uncanonical -- guess ten thousand guesse , multiply into themselves -- rack -- torture you invention for ever , you be where you be -- in short , I will tell it in the next chapter . . Zounds !--Z...ds ! cry , partly to himself -- and yet high enough to be hear -- and what seem odd , ' tbe utter in a construction of look , and in a tone of voice , somewhat between that of a man in amazement and one in bodily pain . one or two who have very nice ears , and could distinguish the expression and mixture of the two tone as plainly as a third or a fifth , or any other chord in musick -- be the most puzzl and perplex with it -- the concord be good in itself -- but then ' tbe quite out of the key , and no way applicable to the subject start ;-- so that with all they knowledge , they could not tell what in the world to make of it . other who know nothing of musical expression , and merely lent they ear to the plain import of the word , imagine that , who be somewhat of a cholerick spirit , be just go to snatch the cudgel out of 's hand , in order to bemaul to some purpose -- and that the desperate monosyllable z ... ds be the exordium to a oration , which , as they judge from the sample , presage but a rough kind of handling of he ; so that my uncle 's good - nature feel a pang for what be about to undergo . but see stop short , without any attempt or desire to go on - - a third party begin to suppose , that it be no more than a involuntary respiration , casually form itself into the shape of a twelve - penny oath -- without the sin or substance of one . other , and especially one or two who sit next he , look upon it on the contrary as a real and substantial oath , propensly form against , to whom he be know to bear no good liking -- which say oath , as my father philosophize upon it , actually lay fretting and fume at that very time in the upper region of 's purtenance ; and so be naturally , and accord to the due course of thing , first squeeze out by the sudden influx of blood which be drive into the right ventricle of 's heart , by the stroke of surprize which so strange a theory of preaching have exci . how finely we argue upon mistaken fact ! there be not a soul busy in all these various reasoning upon the monosyllable which utter -- who do not take this for grant , proceed upon it as from a axiom , namely , that 's mind be intent upon the subject of debate which be arise between and ; and indeed as he look first towards the one and then towards the other , with the air of a man listen to what be go forwards -- who would not have think the same ? but the truth be , that know not one word or one syllable of what be pass -- but he whole thought and attention be take up with a transaction which be go forwards at that very instant within the precinct of he own Galligaskins , and in a part of they , where of all other he stand most interested to watch accident : so that notwithstand he look with all the attention in the world , and have gradually skrew up every nerve and muscle in he face , to the utmost pitch the instrument would bear , in order , as it be think , to give a sharp reply to , who sit over-against he -- yet , I say , be never once in any one domicile of 's brain -- but the true cause of he exclamation lay at least a yard below . this I will endeaavor to explain to you with all imaginable decency . you must be inform then , that Gastripheres , who have take a turn into the kitchen a little before dinner , to see how thing go on -- observe a wicker - basket of fine chesnut stand upon the dresser , have order that a hundred or two of they might be roast and send in , as soon as dinner be over --Gastripheres inforce he order about they
they , that , but especially , be particularly fond of th'ey . about two minute before the time that my uncle interrupt 's harangue -- Gastripheres 's chesnut be bring in -- and as 's fondness for th'ey be uppermost in the waiter 's head , he lay they directly before , wrapt up hot in a clean damask napkin . now whether it be physically impossible , with half a dozen hand all thrust into the napkin at a time -- but that some one chesnut , of more life and rotundity than the rest , must be put in motion -- it so fall out , however , that one be actually send roll off the table ; and as sit straddl under -- it fall perpendicularly into that particular aperture of 's breech , for which , to the shame and indelicacy of we language be it speak , there be no chaste word throughout all 's dictionary -- let it suffice to say -- it be that particular aperture which , in all good society , the law of decorum do strictly require , like the temple of ( in peace at least ) to be universally shut up . the neglect of this punctilio in ( which by - the - bye should be a warning to all mankind ) have open a door to this accident .-- Accident I call it , in compliance to a receive mode of speak -- but in no opposition to the opinion either of or in this matter ; I know they be both prepossess and fully persuade of it -- and be so to this hour , that there be nothing of accident in the whole event -- but that the chesnut 's take that particular course , and in a manner of its own accord -- and then fal with all its heat directly into that one particular place , and no other -- be a real judgment upon for that filthy and obscene treatise retinendi , which have publish about twenty year ago -- and be that identical week go to give the world a second edition of . it be not my business to dip my pen in this controversy --much undoubtedly may be write on both side of the question -- all that concern I as a historian , be to represent the matter of fact , and render it credible to the reader , that the hiatus in 's breech be sufficiently wide to receive the chesnut ; -- and that the chesnut , somehow or other , do fall perpendicularly , and pipe hot into it , without 's perceive it , or any one else at that time . the genial warmth which the chesnut impart , be not undelectable for the first twenty or five - and - twenty second -- and do no more than gently solicit 's attention towards the part :-- but the heat gradually increase , and in a few seconds more get beyond the point of all sober pleasure , and then advanc with all speed into the region of pain , the soul of , together with all he idea , he thought , he attention , he imagination , judgment , resolution , deliberation , ratiocination , memory , fancy , with ten battalion of animal spirit , all tumultuously crowd down , through different defile and circuit , to the place of danger , leave all he upper region , as you may imagine , as empty as my purse . with the best intelligence which all these messenger could bring he back , be not able to dive into the secret of what be go forwards below , nor could he make any kind of conjecture , what the devil be the matter with it : however , as he know not what the true cause might turn out , he deem it most prudent in the situation he be in at present , to bear it , if possible , like a ; which , with the help of some wry face and compursion of the mouth , he have certainly accomplished , have he imagination continue neuter ; -- but the sally of the imagination be ungovernable in thing of this kind -- a thought instantly dart into he mind , that tho ' the anguish have the sensation of glow heat -- it might , notwithstand that , be a bite as well as a burn ; and if so , that possibly a or a Asker , or some such detested reptile , have crept up , and be fasten he tooth -- the horrid idea of which , with a fresh glow of pain arise that instant from the chesnut , seize with a sudden panick , and in the first terrifying disorder of the passion , it throw he , as it have do the best generals upon earth , quite off he guard :-- the effect of which be this , that he leapt incontinently up , utter as he rise that interjection of surprise so much descant upon , with the aposiopestic break after it , mark thus , -- which , though not strictly canonical , be still as little as any man could have say upon the occasion ; -- and which , by - the - bye , whether canonical or not , could no more help than he could the cause of it . though this have take up some time in the narrative , it take up little more time in the transaction , than just to allow time for to draw forth the chesnut , and throw it down with violence upon the floor -- and for to rise from he chair , and pick the chesnut up . it be curious to observe the triumph of slight incidents over the mind :-- what incredible weight
weight they have in form and govern we opinion , both of man and thing -- that trifle , light as air , shall waft a belief into the soul , and plant it so immoveably within it -- that 's demonstration , could they be bring to batter it in breach , should not all have power to overthrow it . , I say , pick up the chesnut which 's wrath have fling down -- the action be trifl -- I be asham to account for it -- he do it , for no reason , but that he think the chesnut not a jot worse for the adventure -- and that he hold a good chesnut worth stoop for . -- but this incident , trifl as it be , wrotch differently in 's head : he consider this act of 's in get off he chair and pick up the chesnut , as a plain acknowledgment in he , that the chesnut be originally he -- and in course , that it must have be the owner of the chesnut , and no one else , who could have play he such a prank with it : what greatly confirm he in this opinion , be this , that the table be parallelogramical and very narrow , it afforde a fair opportunity for , who sit directly over against , of slipp the chesnut in -- and consequently that he do it . the look of something more than suspicion , which cast full upon as these thought arise , too evidently speak he opinion -- and as be naturally suppose to know more of the matter than any person beside , he opinion at once become the general one ; -- and for a reason very different from any which have be yet give -- in a little time it be put out of all manner of dispute . when great or unexpected event 's fall out upon the stage of this sublunary world -- the mind of man , which be a inquisitive kind of a substance , naturally take a flight behind the scene to see what be the cause and first spring of they .-- the search be not long in this instance . it be well know that have never a good opinion of the treatise which have write de Concubinis retinendi , as a thing which he fear have do hurt in the world -- and ' tbe easily find out , that there be a mystical meaning in 's prank -- and that he chuck the chesnut hot into 's . . .--. . . , be a sarcastical fling at he book -- the doctrine of which , they say , have enflam many a honest man in the same place . this conceit awaken have -- make smile -- and if you can recollect the precise look and air of a man 's face intent in find out a riddle -- it throw 's into that form -- and in short be think by many to be a master - stroke of arch-wit . this , as the reader have see from one end to the other , be as groundless as the dream of philosophy : , no doubt , as say of he ancestor -- 'be a man of jest , ' but it be temper ' with something which withheld he from that , and many other ungracious prank , of which he as undeservedly bear the blame ; -- but it be he misfortune all he life long to bear the imputation of say and do a thousand thing , of which ( unless my thesteey blind I ) he nature be incapable . all I blame he for -- or rather , all I blame and alternately like he for , be that singularity of he temper , which would never suffer he to take pain to set a story right with the world , however in he power . in every ill usage of that sort , he act precisely as in the affair of he lean horse -- he could have explain it to he honour , but he spirit be above it ; and besides , he ever look upon the inventor , the propagator and believer of a illiberal report alike so injuriious to he -- he could not stoop to tell he story to they -- and so trust to time and truth to do it for he . this heroic cast produce he inconvenience in many respects -- in the present it be follow by the fix resentment of , who , as have just make a end of he chesnut , rise up from he chair a second time , to let he know it -- which indeed he do with a smile ; say only -- that he would endeaavor not to forget the obligation . but you must mark and carefully separate and distinguish these two thing in you mind . -- the smile be for the company . -- the threat be for . . -- can you tell I , quoth Phutatorius , speak to who sit next to he -- for one would not apply to a surgeon in so foolish a affair -- can you tell I , Gastripheres , what be best to take out the fire ? -- , say Gastripheres .-- that greatly depend , say , pretend ignorance of the adventure , upon the nature of the part -- if it be a tender part , and a part which can conveniently be wrapt up -- it be both the one and the other , reply Phutatorius , lay he hand as he speak , with a emphatical nod of he head , upon the part in question , and lift up he right leg at the same time to ease and ventilate it . --
-- if that be the case , say , I would advise you , , not to tamper with it by any means ; but if you will send to the next printer , and trust you cure to such a simple thing as a soft sheet of paper just come off the press -- you need do nothing more than twist it round .-- the damp paper , quoth ( who sit next to he friend ) though I know it have a refresh coolness in it -- yet I presume be no more than the vehicle -- and that the oil and lamp - black with which the paper be so strongly impregnate , do the business .-- right , say , and be , of any outward application I would venture to recommend , the most anodyne and safe . be it my case , say Gastripheres , as the main thing be the oil and lamp - black , I should spread they thick upon a rag , and clap it on directly .-- that would make a very devil of it , reply . -- and besides , add , it would not answer the intention , which be the extreme neatness and elegance of the prescription , which the Faculty hold to be half in half ; -- for consider , if the type be a very small one ( which it should be ) the sanative particle , which come into contact in this form , have the advantage of be spread so infinitely thin , and with such a mathematical equality ( fresh paragraph and large capital accept ) as no art or management of the spatula can come up to .-- it fall out very luckily , reply , that the second edition of my treatise retinendi be at this instant in the press .-- you may take any leaf of it , say -- no matter which .-- provide , quoth , there be no bawdry in it .-- they be just now , reply , print off the ninth chapter -- which be the last chapter but one in the book .-- pray what be the title of that chapter ? say ; make a respectful bow to as he speak .-- I think , answer , ' tis that de re concubinaria . for 's sake keep out of that chapter , quoth . -- by all mean -- add . . -- now , quoth Didius , rise up , and lay he right hand with he finger spread upon he breast -- have such a blunder about a christian - name happen before the Reformation --( it happen the day before yesterday , quoth my uncle to himself ) -- and when baptism be administer ' in --( all in , say my uncle ) -- many thing might have coincide with it , and upon the authority of sundry decree case , to have pronounce the baptism null , with a power of give the child a new name -- have a priest , for instance , which be no uncommon thing , through ignorance of the tongue , baptize a child of , in nomine patria & filia & spiritum sancto -- the baptism be hold null .-- I beg you pardon , reply -- in that case , as the mistake be only the termination , the baptism be valid -- and to have render it null , the blunder of the priest should have fall upon the first syllable of each noun -- and not , as in you case , upon the last . my father delighte in subtlety of this kind , and listen would with infinite attention . Gastripheres , for example , continue , baptize a child of 's in gatris , &c . & c. instead of in patris , &c .-- be this a baptism ? no --say the ablest canonist ; in as much as the radix of each word be hereby tear up , and the sense and meaning of they remove and change quite to another object ; for do not signify a name , nor gatri a father .-- what do they signify ? say my uncle .-- nothing at all -- quoth .-- , such a baptism be null , say .-- in course , answer , in a tone two part jest and one part earnest . - - but in the case cite , continue , where patria be put for patris , filia for filii , and so on -- as it be a fault only in the declension , and the root of the word continue untouch ' , the inflection of they branch either this way or that , do not in any sort hinder the baptism , inasmuch as the same sense continue in the word as before . -- but then , say , the intention of the priest 's pronounce they grammatically must have be prove to have go along with it .-- right , answer ; and of this , brother , we have a instance in a decree of the decretal of the . -- but my brother 's child , cry my uncle , have nothing to do with the Pope --'tis the plain child of a Protestant gentleman , christen would Tristram against the will and wish both of he father and mother , and all who be a - kin to it .-- if the wills and wish , say , interrupt my uncle , of those only who stand related to 's child , be to have weight in this matter , . Shandy , of all people , have the least to do in it .-- my uncle lay would down he pipe , and my father draw he chair still closer to the table , to hear the conclusion of so strange a introduction . --
-- it have not only be a question , , amongst the ( on , 7 . para 8 . ) best lawyer and civilian in this land , continue , ' whether the mother be of kin to she child , '-- but , after much dispassionate enquiry and jactitation of the argument on all side -- it have be adjudge for the negative -- namely , ' that the mother be not of kin to she child . ' ( . . Administr . N. 47 . ) my father instantly clapp have he hand upon my uncle 's mouth , under colour of whispering in he ear ; -- the truth be , he be alarme for -- and have a great desire to hear more of so curious a argument -- he begg would my uncle , for heaven 's sake , not to disappoint he in it .-- my uncle give a nod -- resum he pipe , and contente himself with whistling inwardly -- , , and go on with the discourse as follow : this determination , continue , how contrary soever it may seem to run to the stream of vulgar idea , yet have reason strongly on its side ; and have be put out of all manner of dispute from the famious case , know commonly by the name of the of 's case .-- it be cite in , say -- and take notice of by , add .-- and you may find it in on , say . the case , , be this : in the reign of the , duke of have issue a son by one venter , and a daughter by another venter , make he last will , wherein he devise goods to he son , and die ; after whose death the son die also -- but without will , without wife , and without child -- he mother and he sister by the father 's side ( for she be bear of the former venter ) then liive . the mother take the administration of she son 's goods , accord to the statute of the 21st of the , whereby it be enact , that in case any person die intestate the administration of he goods shall be commit to the next of kin . the administration be thus ( surreptitiously ) grant to the mother , the sister by the father 's side commence a suit before the Ecclesiastical judge , alledging , 1st , that she herself be next of kin ; and 2dly , that the mother be not of kin at all to the party decease ; and therefore pray the court , that the administration grant to the mother might be revoke , and be commit unto she , as next of kin to the decease , by force of the say statute . , as it be a great cause , and much depend upon its issue -- and many cause of great property likely to be decide in time to come , by the precedent to be then make -- the most learned , as well in the law of this realm , as in the civil law , be consult together , whether the mother be of kin to she son , or no .-- Whereunto not only the temporal lawyer -- but the church lawyer -- the juris - consulto -- the jurisprudente -- the civilian -- the advocate -- the commissary -- the judge of the consistory and prerogative court of and , with the master of the faculty , be all unanimously of opinion , that the mother be not of ( non numeratur inter consanguineo , . in ult. signific . ) kin to she child .-- and what say the duchess of to it ? say my uncle . the unexpectedness of my uncle 's question , confound more than the ablest advocate -- he stopp would a full minute , look in my uncle 's face without reply -- and in that single minute Triptolemus put by he , and take the lead as follow . ' tTis a ground and principle in the law , say , that thing do not ascend , but descmend in it ; and I make no doubt 's tis for this cause , that however true it be , that the child may be of the blood and see of its parent -- that the parent , nevertheless , be not of the blood and see of it ; inasmuch as the parent be not beget by the child , but the child by the parent -- for so they write , Liberi sunt de sanguine patris & matris , s pater & mater non sunt de sanguine liberorum . -- but this , , cry , prove too much -- for from this authority cite it would follow , not only what indeed be grant on all side , that the mother be not of kin to she child -- but the father likewise .-- it be hold , say , the better opinion ; because the father , the mother , and the child , though they be three person , yet be they but ( una caro ( . tit . Administr . N .47 . ) ) one flesh ; and consequently no degree of kindred -- or any method of acquire one in nature .-- there you push the argument again too far , cry -- for there be no prohibition in nature , though there be in the Levitical law -- but that a man may beget a child upon he grandmother -- in which case , suppose the issue a daughter , she would stand in relation both of -- but who ever think , cry , of lay with he grandmother ?-- the young gentleman , reply , whom speak of --
-- who not only think of it , but justifi he intention to he father by the argument draw from the law of retaliation .--' you lay , , with my mother , ' say the lad -- ' why may not I lay with yours ?'--' the commune , add as good , reply , take down he hat , as they deserve . the company break up . . -- and pray , say my uncle , lean upon , as he and my father be help he leisurely down the stair -- do not be terrified , madam , this stair - case conversation be not so long as the last -- and pray , , say my uncle , which way be this say affair of Tristram at length settle by these learne man ? very satisfactorily , reply ; no mortal , , have any concern with it -- for Mrs . Shandy the mother be nothing at all a - kin to he -- and as the mother 's be the surest side -- . Shandy , in course be still less than nothing -- in short , he be not as much a - kin to he , Sir , as I be .-- -- that may well be , say my father , shak he head . -- let the learn say what they will , there must certainly , quoth my uncle , have be some sort of consanguinity betwixt the duchess of and she son . the vulgar be of the same opinion , quoth , to this hour . . though my father be hugely tick with the subtlety of these learn discourse --'twa still but like the anointing of a broken bone -- the moment he get home , the weight of he affliction return upon he but so much the heavier , as be ever the case when the staff we lean on slips from under we .-- he become pensive -- walk frequently forth to the fish - pond -- let down one loop of he hat -- sigh ' often -- forbore to snap -- and , as the hasty spark of temper , which occasion snapping , so much assist perspiration and digestion , as tell we -- he have certainly fall ill with the extinction of they , have not he thought be critically draw off , and he health rescue by a fresh train of disquietude leave he , with a legacy of a thousand pound , by my aunt . my father have scarce read the letter , when take the thing by the right end , he instantly begin to plague and puzzle he head how to lay it out mostly to the honour of he family .-- a hundr - and -fifty odd project take possession of he brain by turn -- he would do this , and that and t'other -- he would go to -- he would go to law -- he would buy stock -- he would buy 's farm -- he would know fore front he house , and add a new wing to make it even -- there be a fine water - mill on this side , and he would build a wind - mill on the other side of the river in full view to answer it - - but above all thing in the world , he would inclose the great ox- moor , and send out my brother immediately upon he travels . but as the sum be finite , and consequently could not do every thing -- and in truth very few of these to any purpose -- of all the project which offer themselves upon this occasion , the two last seem to make the deepest impression ; and he would infallibly have determine upon both at once , but for the small inconvenience hint at above , which absolutely put he under a necessity of deciding in favour either of the one or the other . this be not altogether so easy to be do ; for though ' tis certain my father have long before set he heart upon this necessary part of my brother 's education , and like a prudent man have actually determined to carry it into execution , with the first money that return from the second creation of action in the , in which he be a adventurer -- yet the Ox - moor , which be a fine , large , whinny , undrained , unimproved common , belong to the Shandy - estate , have almost as old a claim upon he : he have long and affectionately set he heart upon turn it likewise to some account . but have never hithertoo be presse with such a conjuncture of thing , as make it necessary to settle either the priority or justice of they claim -- like a wise man he have refrain enter into any nice or critical examination about they : so that upon the dismission of every other project at this crisis -- the two old project , the Ox - moor and my brother , divide he again ; and so equal a match be they for each other , as to become the occasion of no small contest in the old gentleman 's mind -- which of the two should be set o'going first . -- people may laugh as they will -- but the case be this . it have ever be the custom of the family , and by length of time be almost become a matter of common right , that the eldest son of it should have free ingress , egress , and regress into foreign part before marriage -- not only for the sake of bettere he own private part , by the benefit of exercise and change of so much air -- but simply for the mere delectation
delectation of he fancy , by the feather put into he cap , of have be abroad -- tantum valet , my father would say , quantum sonat . now as this be a reasonable , and in course a most christian indulgence -- to deprive he of it , without why or wherefore -- and thereby make a example of he , as the first Shandy unwhirl would about in a post-chaise , and only because he be a heavy lad -- would be use he ten time worse than a . on the other hand , the case of the Ox - moor be full as hard . Exclusive of the original purchase - money , which be eight hundred pound -- it have cost the family eight hundred pound more in a law - suit about fifteen year before -- besides the know what trouble and vexation . it have be moreover in possession of the Shandy - family ever since the middle of the last century ; and though it lay full in view before the house , bound on one extremity by the water-mill , and on the other by the project wind - mill speak of above -- and for all these reason seem to have the fairest title of any part of the estate to the care and protection of the family -- yet by a unaccountable fatality , common to man , as well as the ground they tread on -- it have all along most shamefully be overlook ' ; and to speak the truth of it , have suffer so much by it , that it would have make any man 's heart have b ( say ) who understand the value of the land , to have rode over it , and only see the condition it be in . however , as neither the purchase this tract of ground -- nor indeed the placing of it where it lay , be either of they , properly speak , of my father 's do -- he have never think himself any way concerned in the affair -- till the fifteen year before , when the breaking out of that curse law - suit mention above ( and which have arise about its boundary ) -- which be altogether my father 's own act and deed , it naturally awaken every other argument in its favour , and upon summ they all up together , he see , not merely in interest , but in honour , he be bound to do something for it -- and that now or never be the time . I think there must certainly have be a mixture of ill - luck in it , that the reasons on both side should happen to be so equally balance by each other ; for though my father weigh have they in all humour and condition -- spend many a anxious hour in the most profound and abstract meditation upon what be best to be do -- read book of farme one day -- book of travel another -- lay aside all passion whatever -- view the argument on both side in all they light and circumstance -- commun every day with my uncle -- argue with , and talk over the whole affair of the Ox - moor with -- yet nothing in all that time appear so strongly in behalf of the one , which be not either strictly applicable to the other , or at least so far counterbalance by some consideration of equal weight , as to keep the scale even . for to be sure , with proper help , in the hand of some people , tho ' the - moor would undoubtedly have make a different appearance in the world from what it do , or ever could do in the condition it lay -- yet every tittle of this be true , with regard to my brother -- let say what he would .-- in point of interest -- the contest , I own , at first sight , do not appear so undecisive betwixt they ; for whenever my father take pen and ink in hand , and set about calculate the simple expence of paring and burn , and fence in the Ox - moor , &c . &c .-- with the certain profit it would bring he in return -- the latter turn out so prodigiously in he way of work the account , that you would have swear the Ox - moor would have carry all before it . for it be plain he should reap a hundred last of rape , at twenty pound a last , the very first year -- besides a excellent crop of wheat the year follow -- and the year after that , to speak within bounds , a hundr -- but in all likelihood , a hundred and fifty -- if not two hundred quarter of pease and bean -- besides potatoe without end .-- but then , to think he be all this while breed up my brother , like a hog to eat they - - knock all on the head again , and generally leave the old gentleman in such a state of suspense -- that , as he often declare to my uncle -- he know no more than he heel what to do . no body , but he who have feel it , can conceive what a plague thing it be to have a man 's mind tear asunder by two project of equal strength , both obstinately pull in a contrary direction at the same time : for to say nothing of the havock , which by a certain consequence be unavoidably make by it all over the finer system of the nerve , which you know convey the animal spirit and more subtle juice from the heart to the head
head , and so on -- it be not to be tell in what a degree such a wayward kind of friction work upon the more gross and solid part , waste the fat and impair the strength of a man every time as it go backwards and forwards . my father have certainly sunk under this evil , as certainly as he have do under that of my -- have he not be rescue out of it , as he be out of that , by a fresh evil -- the misfortune of my brother 's death . what be the life of man ! be it not to shift from side to side ?-- from sorrow to sorrow ? -- to button up one cause of vexation -- and unbutton another ? . from this moment I be to be consider as here -apparent to the Shandy family -- and it be from this point properly , that the story of my life and my opinion set out . with all my hurry and precipitation , I have but be clear the ground to raise the building -- and such a building do I foresee it will turn out , as never be plan , and as never be execute since . in less than five minute I shall have throw my pen into the fire , and the little drop of thick ink which be leave remain at the bottom of my ink - horn , after it -- I have but half a score thing to do in the time -- I have a thing to name -- a thing to lament -- a thing to hope -- a thing to promise , and a thing to threaten -- I have a thing to suppose -- a thing to declare -- a thing to conceal -- a thing to choose , and a thing to pray for -- this chapter , therefore , I name the chapter of thing -- and my next chapter to it , that be , the first chapter of my next volume , if I live , shall be my chapter upon Whiskers , in order to keep up some sort of connection in my work . the thing I lament be , that thing have crowd in so thick upon I , that I have not be able to get into that part of my work , towards which I have all the way look forwards , with so much earnest desire ; and that be the , but especially the amour of my uncle , the event of which be of so singular a nature , and so Cervantick a cast , that if I can so manage it , as to convey but the same impressions to every other brain , which the occurrences themselves excite in my own -- I will answer for it the book shall make its way in the world , much better than its master have do before it .-- oh ! Tristram ! can this but be once bring about -- the credit , which will attend thee as a author , shall counterbalance the many evil will have befallen thee as a man -- thou will feast upon the one -- when thou hast lose all sense and remembrance of the other !-- no wonder I itch so much as I do , to get at these amour -- they be the choicest morsel of my whole story ! and when I do get at 'em -- assure yourselves , good folk --( nor do I value whose squeamish stomach take offence at it ) I shall not be at all nice in the choice of my word !-- and that be the thing I have to declare .-- I shall never get all through in five minute , that I fear -- and the thing I hope be , that you worship and reverence be not offend -- if you be , depend upo not I will give you something , my good gentry , next year to be offend at -- that be my dear 's way -- but who my be -- and which be the right and which the wrong end of a woman , be the thing to be conceal -- it shall be tell you in the next chapter but one to my chapter of - hole -- and not one chapter before . and now that you have just get to the end of these ( accord to the preceding Editions . ) three volume -- the thing I have to ask be , how you feel you head ? my own akes dismally ! -- as for you health , I know , they be much better .-- true Shandeism , think what you will against it , open the heart and lung , and like all those affections which partake of its nature , it force the blood and other vital fluid of the body to run freely through its channel , make the wheel of life run long and cheerfully round . be I leave , like , to choose my kingdom , it should not be maritime -- or a kingdom of black to make a penny of ; -- no , it should be a kingdom of hearty laugh subject : and as the bilious and more saturnine passion , by create disorder in the blood and humour , have as bad a influence , I see , upon the body politick as body natural -- and as nothing but a habit of virtue can fully govern those passion , and subject they to reason -- I should add to my prayer -- that would give my subjects grase to be as wise as they be ; and then should I be the happiest monarch , and they be the happiest people under heaven . and so with this moral
moral for the present , may it please you worship and you reverence , I take my leave of you till this time twelve - month , when , ( unless this vile cough kill I in the mean time ) I will have another pluck at you beard , and lay open a story to the world you little dream of . end of the . volume the Third . si quid forte jocosius , hoc mihi juris venia dabis .-- . -- Si quis calumnietur levius esse qube decet theologum , aut mordacius qube deceat -- non , s Democritus dixit .-- . , aut , verba joculatoria , risum moventia , sciebat , anathema esto . second Council of . to the , . my , I Humbly beg leave to offer you these two volume ( volumes and . in the first Edition . ) ; they be the best my talents , with such bad health as I have , could produce :-- have grant I a larger stock of either , they have be a much more proper present to you Lordship . I beg you Lordship will forgive I , if , at the same time I dedicate this work to you , I join , in the liberty I take of inscrib the story of to she name ; for which I have no other motive , which my heart have inform I of , but that the story be a humane one . I be , my , you Lordship 's most devoted and most humble , . . the Life and opinion of , . . if it have not be for those two mettlesome tits , and that madcap of a postillion who drive they from to , the thought have never enter my head . he flow like lightning -- there be a slope of three mile and a half -- we scarce touch the ground -- the motion be most rapid -- most impetuous --'tbe communicate to my brain -- my heart partook of it --'by the great of day , ' say I , look towards the sun , and thrust my arm out of the fore - window of the chaise , as i make my vow , 'I will lock up my study - door the moment I get home , and throw the key of it ninety foot below the surface of the earth , into the draw - well at the back of my house . ' the waggon confirm I in my resolution ; it hang totter upon the hill , scarce progressive , drag ' -- drag ' up by eight heavy beasts --'by main strength !-- quoth I , nodd -- but you better draw the same way -- and something of every body 's !-- of rare ! ' tell I , ye learn , shall we for ever be add so much to the bulk -- so little to the stock ? shall we for ever make new book , as apothecary make new mixture , by pour only out of one vessel into another ? be we for ever to be twiste , and untwist the same rope ? for ever in the same track -- for ever at the same pace ? shall we be destin to the day of eternity , on holy - day , as well as work - day , to be shew the relick of learning , as monk do the relick of they saint --without work one -- one single miracle with they ? who make , with power which dart he from earth to heaven in a moment -- that great , that most excellent , and most noble creature of the world -- the miracle of nature , as in he book ( ) call he -- the Shekinah of the divine presence , as -- the image of , as - - the ray of divinity , as -- the marvel of marvel , as -- to go sneak on at this pitiful --pimpe --pettifogging rate ? I scorn to be as abusive as upon the occasion -- but if there be no catachresis in the wish , and no sin in it , I wish from my soul , that every imitator in Great , , and , have the farcy for he pain ; and that there be a good farcical house , large enough to hold -- aye - - and sublimate they , shag rag and bob -tail , male and female , all together : and this lead I to the affair of Whiskers -- but , by what chain of idea -- I leave as a legacy in mort -main to Prudes and Tartufs , to enjoy and make the most of . upon Whiskers . I be sorry I make it --'twas as inconsiderate a promise as ever enter a man 's head -- a chapter upon whisker ! alas ! the world will not bear it t--'tis a delicate world -- but I know not of what mettle it be make -- nor have I ever see the under -written fragment ; otherwise , as surely as nos be nos , and whisker be whisker still ( let the world say what it will to the contrary ) ; so surely would I have steer clear of this dangerous chapter . the Fragment . . . .-- you be half asleep , my good lady , say the old gentleman , take hold of the old lady 's hand , and give it a gentle squeeze , as he pronounce the word Whisker -- shall we change the subject ? by no means , reply the old lady -- I like you account of those matters ; so throw a thin gauze handkerchief over she head , and lean it back upon the chair with she face turn towards
towards he , and advance she two foot as she recline herself -- I desire , continue she , you will go on . the old gentleman go on as follow :-- Whiskers ! cry the queen of , drop she knott ball , as utter the word -- Whisker , madam , say , pin the ball to the queen 's apron , and make a courtesy as she repeat it . 's voice be naturally soft and low , yet ' tbe a articulate voice : and every letter of the word Whiskers fall distinctly upon the queen of 's ear -- Whiskers ! cry the queen , lay a greater stress upon the word , and as if she have still distrust she ear -- Whiskers ! reply , repeat the word a third time -- there be not a cavalier , madam , of he age in , continue the maid of honour , press the page 's interest upon the queen , that have so gallant a pair -- of what ? cry , smile -- of whisker , say , with infinite modesty . the word Whisker still stand its ground , and continue to be make use of in most of the best company throughout the little kingdom of , notwithstand the indiscreet use which have make of it : the truth be , have pronounce the word , not only before the queen , but upon sundry other occasion at court , with a accent which always imply something of a mystery -- and as the court of , as all the world know , be at that time a mixture of gallantry and devotion -- and whisker be as applicable to the one , as the other , the word naturally stand it be ground -- it gain full as much as it lose ; that be , the clergy be for it -- the laity be against it -- and for the woman , -- they be divide . the excellency of the figure and mien of the young , be at that time begin to draw the attention of the maid of honour towards the terrace before the palace gate , where the guard be mount . the lady fall deeply in love with he ,-- do the same -- it be the finest weather for it , that ever be remember in , , , fall in love with the also -- and know better -- have fail in a attempt to recommend himself to Rebours ; and and be inseparable . the queen of be sit with she lady in the painted bow - window , face the gate of the second court , as pass through it -- he be handsome , say the -- he have a good mien , say -- he be finely shaped , say -- I never see a officer of the horse - guard in my life , say , with two such leg -- or who stand so well upon they , say -- but he have no whisker , cry -- not a pile , say . the queen go directly to she oratory , muse all the way , as she walk through the gallery , upon the subject ; turn it this way and that way in she fancy -- !-- what can mean ? say she , knee down upon the cushion . , , , , retir instantly to they chamber -- Whiskers ! say all four of they to themselves , as they bolt they door on the inside . the be count she bead with both hand , unsuspect , under she farthingal -- from . down to inclusive , not a saint pass through she finger without whisker ; , , , , , have all whisker . the have get into a wilderness of conceit , with moralizing too intricately upon 's text -- she mount she palfrey , she page follow she -- the host pass by -- the ride on . one denier , cry the order of mercy -- one single denier , in behalf of a thousand patient captive , whose eye look towards heaven and you for they redemption . -- the ride on . Pity the unhappy , say a devout , venerable , hoary - head man , meekly hold up a box , begirt with iron , in he withered hand -- I beg for the unfortunate -- good my , ' tis for a prison -- for a hospital --'tis for a old man -- a poor man undone by shipwreck , by suretyship , by fire -- I call and all he angels to witness --'tis to clothe the naked -- to feed the hungry --'tis to comfort the sick and the broken - hear . the ride on . a decay kinsman bow himself to the ground . -- the ride on . he run begge bare - head on one side of she palfrey , conjur she by the former bond of friendship , alliance , consanguinity , &c .-- cousin , aunt , sister , mother , -- for virtue 's sake , for you own , for mine , for 's sake , remember I -- pity I . -- the ride on . take hold of my whisker , say the -- the page take hold of she palfrey . she dismount at the end of the terrace . there be some train of certain idea which leave print of themselves about we eye and eye - brows ; and there be a consciousness of it , somewhere about the heart , which serve but to make these etching the stronger -- we see , spell , and put they together without a dictionary . , ha ! he , hee ! cry and , look close at each other 's print -- , ho !
! cry and , do the same :- - Whist ! cry one -- ft , ft ,-- say a second -- hush , quoth a third -- poo , poo , reply a fourth -- gramercy ! cry the ;--'tbe she who bewhisker would . draw she bodkin from the knot of she hair , and have trace the outline of a small whisker , with the blunt end of it , upon one side of she upper lip , put in into 's hand -- shook she head . the coughe thrice into the inside of she muff -- smile -- , say the . the queen of touch she eye with the tip of she fore - finger -- as much as to say , I understand you all . ' Tbe plain to the whole court the word be ruin : have give it a wound , and it be not the better for pass through all these defile -- it make a faint stand , however , for a few month , by the expiration of which , the , finde it high time to leave for want of whisker -- the word in course become indecent , and ( after a few effort ) absolutely unfit for use . the best word , in the best language of the best world , must have suffer under such combination .-- the curate of write a book against they , set forth the dangers of accessory idea , and warn the against they . do not all the world know , say the curate d' at the conclusion of he work , that run the same fate some centurie ago in most part of , which have now do in the kingdom of ?-- the evil indeed spread no farther then -- but have not bed and bolster , and night - cap and chamber - pots stand upon the brink of destruction ever since ? be not trouse , and placket - hole , and pump - handle -- and spigot and faucet , in danger still from the same association ?-- Chastity , by nature , the gentlest of all affections -- give it but its head --'tis like a ramping and a roaring lion . the drift of the curate 's argument be not understand .-- they run the scent the wrong way .-- the world bridle he ass at the tail .-- and when the extreme of , and the beginning of , hold they next provincial chapter together , they may decree that bawdy also . . when my father receive the letter which bring he the melancholy account of my brother 's death , he be busy calculate the expence of he riding post from to , and so on to Lyons . ' Tbe a most inauspicious journey ; my father have have every foot of it to travel over again , and he calculation to begin afresh , when he have almost get to the end of it , by 's open the door to acquaint he the family be out of yeast -- and to ask whether he might not take the great coach - horse early in the morning and ride in search of some . -- with all my heart , , say my father ( pursue he journey ) -- take the coach - horse , and welcome .-- but he want 's a shoe , poor creature ! say .-- poor creature ! say my uncle , vibrat the note back again , like a string in unison . then ride the horse , quoth my father hastily .-- he can not bear a saddle upon he back , quoth , for the whole world .-- the 's in that horse ; then take , cry my father , and shut the door .-- be sell , say . here be for you ! cry my father , make a pause , and look in my uncle 's face , as if the thing have not be a matter of fact .-- you worship order I to sell he last , say .-- then go on foot for you pain , cry my father -- I have much rather walk than ride , say , shutt the door . what plagu , cry my father , go on with he calculation . -- but the water be out , say , -- open the door again . till that moment , my father , who have a map of 's , and a book of the post -road before he , have keep he hand upon the head of he compass , with one foot of they fix upon , the last stage he have pay for -- purpose to go on from that point with he journey and calculation , as soon as quit the room : but this second attack of 's , in open the door and lay the whole country under water , be too much .-- he let go he compass -- or rather with a mix motion between accident and anger , he throw they upon the table ; and then there be nothing for he to do , but to return back to ( like many other ) as wise as he have set out . when the letter be brotch into the parlour , which contain the news of my brother 's death , my father have get forwards again upon he journey to within a stride of the compass of the very same stage of Nevers .-- by you leave , Mons . , cry my father , strike the point of he compass through Nevers into the table -- and nodd to my uncle to see what be in the letter -- twice of one night , be too much for a english gentleman and he son , Mons . , to be turn
turn back from so lousy a town as Nevers -- what think 'st thou , ? add my father in a sprightly tone .-- unless it be a garrison town , say my uncle -- for then -- I shall be a fool , say my father , smile to himself , as long as I live .-- so give a second nod -- and keep he compass still upon with one hand , and hold he book of the post -road in the other -- half calculating and half listen , he lean forwards upon the table with both elbow , as my uncle hum over the letter . . . . he be gone ! say my uncle -- where -- who ? cry my father .-- my nephew , say my uncle .-- what --without leave --without money -- without ? cry my father in amazement . no :-- he be dead , my dear brother , quoth my uncle .-- without be ill ? cry my father again .-- I dare say not , say my uncle , in a low voice , and fetch a deep sigh from the bottom of he heart , he have be ill enough , poor lad ! I will answer for he -- for he be dead . when be tell of she son 's death , inform we , that , not be able to moderate the violence of she passion , she abruptly break off she work -- my father stick he compass into Nevers , but so much the faster .-- what contrariety ! he , indeed , be matter of calculation !-- 's must have be quite a different affair ; who else could pretend to reason from history ? how my father go on , in my opinion , deserve a chapter to itself .-- chapter 3.iii . . . .-- and a chapter it shall have , and a devil of a one too -- so look to yourselves . ' either , or , or , or , or , or , or -- or some one perhaps of later date -- either , or , or , or -- or possibly it may be some divine or father of the church , , or , or , who affirm that it be a irresistible and natural passion to weep for the loss of we friend or child -- and ( I be positive ) tell we somewhere , that such grief evacuate themselves best by that particular channel -- and accordingly we find , that wept for he son -- for he Antinous -- for she child , and that and both she tear for before he death . my father manage he affliction otherwise ; and indeed differently from most man either ancient or modern ; for he neither weep it away , as the and the -- or sleep it off , as the Laplander -- or hang it , as the , or drown it , as the , -- nor do he curse it , or damn it , or excommunicate it , or rhyme it , or lillabullero it .-- -- he get rid of it , however . will you worship give I leave to squeeze in a story between these two page ? when Tully be bereft of he dear daughter , at first he lay it to he heart , -- he listen to the voice of nature , and modulate he own unto it .-- of my ! my daughter ! my child !-- still , still , still ,--'tbe of my ! Methink I see my , I hear my , I talk with my . -- but as soon as he begin to look into the store of philosophy , and consider how many excellent thing might be say upon the occasion -- no body upon earth can conceive , say the great orator , how happy , how joyful it make I . my father be as proud of he eloquence as could be for he life , and , for atch I be convinced of to the contrary at present , with as much reason : it be indeed he strength -- and he weakness too .-- he strength -- for he be by nature eloquent ; and he weakness -- for he be hourly a dupe to it ; and , provide a occasion in life would but permit he to show he talents , or say either a wise thing , a witty , or a shrewd one -- ( bat the case of a systematic misfortune ) -- he have all he want .-- a blessing which tie up my father 's tongue , and a misfortune which let it loose with a good grace , be pretty equal : sometimes , indeed , the misfortune be the better of the two ; for instance , where the pleasure of the harangue be as ten , and the pain of the misfortune but as five -- my father gain half in half , and consequently be as well again off , as if it have never befall he . this clue will unravel what otherwise would seem very inconsistent in my father 's domestic character ; and it be this , that , in the provocation arise from the neglect and blunders of servants , or other mishap unavoidable in a family , he anger , or rather the duration of it , eternally run counter to all conjecture . my father have a favourite little mare , which he have consign over to a most beautiful Arabian horse , in order to have a pad out of she for he own riding : he be sanguine in all he project ; so talk about he pad every day with as absolute a security , as if it have be rear , break , -- and
and bridle and saddle at he door ready for mounting . by some neglect or other in , it so fall out , that my father 's expectation be answer with nothing better than a mule , and as ugly a beast of the kind as ever be produce . my mother and my uncle expect my father would be the death of -- and that there never would be a end of the disaster -- see here ! you rascal , cry my father , point to the mule , what you have do !-- it be not I , say Obadiah .-- how do I know that ? reply my father . Triumph swam in my father 's eyes , at the repartee -- the Attic salt bring water into they -- and so hear no more about it . now let we go back to my brother 's death . have a fine saying for every thing .-- for death it have a entire set ; the misery be , they all at once rush into my father 's head , that ' tbe difficult to str they together , so as to make any thing of a consistent show out of they . -- he take they as they come . a inevitable chance -- the first statute in -- it be a everlasting act of parliament , my dear brother , -- all must die . ' if my son could not have die , it have be matter of , -- not that he be dead . ' Monarch and prince dance in the same ring with we . ' -- to die , be the great debt and tribute due unto nature : tomb and monument , which should perpetuate we memory , pay it themselves ; and the proudest pyramid of they all , which wealth and science have erect , have lose its apex , and stand obtruncate in the traveller 's horizon . ' ( my father find he get great ease , and go on ) --'Kingdom and province , and town and city , have they not they period ? and when those principles and power , which at first cement and put they together , have perform they several evolutions , they fall back .'-- , say my uncle , lay down he pipe at the word evolutions -- revolution , I mean , quoth my father , -- by heaven ! I mean revolution , brother -- evolutions be nonsense .--'Tis not nonsense -- say my uncle .-- but be it not nonsense to break the thread of such a discourse upon such a occasion ? cry my father -- do not -- dear , continue he , take he by the hand , do not -- do not , I beseech thee , interrupt I at this crisis .-- my uncle put he pipe into he mouth . ' where be and , and and , and and ?'-- continue my father , take up he book of post -road , which he have laid down .--' what be become , brother , of and , of and ? the fairest town that ever the sun rise upon , be now no more ; the name only be leave , and those ( for many of they be wrong spelt ) be fall themselves by piece -meal to decay , and in length of time will be forget , and involved with every thing in a perpetual night : the world itself , brother , must -- must come to a end . ' return out of , when I sail from towards ,' ( when can this have be ? think my uncle , ) ' I begin to view the country round about . be behind I , be before , Pyraeus on the right hand , on the left .-- what flourish town now prostrate upon the earth ! ! alas ! say I to myself , that man should disturb he soul for the loss of a child , when so much as this lie awfully bury in he presence -- , say I to myself again -- remember thou be a man . '-- now my uncle know not that this last paragraph be a extract of 's consolatory letter to . -- he have as little skill , honest man , in the fragment , as he have in the whole piece of antiquity .-- and as my father , whilst he be concerned in the trade , have be three or four different time in the , in one of which he have stay a whole year and a half at , my uncle naturally conclude , that , in some one of these period , he have take a trip across the into ; and that all this sailing affair with , and before , and on the right hand , & c . & c. be nothing more than the true course of my father 's voyage and reflection certainly in he manner , and many a undertaking critic would have build two story higher upon worse foundation . -- and pray , brother , quoth my uncle , lay the end of he pipe upon my father 's hand in a kindly way of interruption -- but wait till he finish the account -- what year of we be this ?-- ' Tbe no year of we , reply my father .-- that be impossible , cry my uncle .-- ! say my father ,--'tbe forty year before be bear . my uncle have but two thing for it ; either to suppose he brother to be the wander , or that he misfortune have disorder he brain .-- ' May the of heaven and earth protect he and restore he ! ' say my uncle , pray silently for my father , and with tear
tear in he eye . -- my father place the tear to a proper account , and go on with he harangue with great spirit . ' there be not such great odd , brother , betwixt good and evil , as the world imagine ' --( this way of set off , by the bye , be not likely to cure my uncle 's suspicion ) .--' , sorrow , grief , sickness , want , and woe , be the sauce of life .'-- much good may do they -- say my uncle to himself .-- ' my son be dead !-- so much the better ; --'tis a shame in such a tempest to have but one anchor . ' but he be gone for ever from we !-- be it so . he be get from under the hand of he barber before he be bald -- he be but risen from a feast before he be surfeit -- from a banquet before he have get drunken . ' the weep when a child be bear , ' --( and we be very near it , quoth my uncle , )--'and feast and make merry when a man go out of the world ; and with reason . -- open the gate of fame , and shut be the gate of envy after it , -- it unloose the chain of the captive , and put the bondsman 's task into another man 's hand . ' Shew I the man , who know what life be , who dread it , and I will show thee a prisoner who dread he liberty . ' be it not better , my dear brother , ( for -- we appetite be but disease , ) -- be it not better not to hunger at all , than to eat ?-- not to thirst , than to take physic to cure it ? be it not better to be free from car and ague , from love and melancholy , and the other hot and cold fit of life , than , like a gall traveller , who come weary to he inn , to be bound to begin he journey afresh ? there be no terrour , brother , in it be look , but what it borrow from groan and convulsion -- and the blowing of nos and the wiping away of tear with the bottom of curtain , in a die man 's room .-- Strip it of these , what be it ?--'Tis better in battle than in bed , say my uncle .- - take away its hearse , its mute , and its mourning , -- its plume , scutcheon , and other mechanic aids -- what be it ?-- better in battle ! continue my father , smile , for he have absolutely forget my brother --'tis terrible no way -- for consider , brother , -- when we be -- death be not ;-- and when death be -- we be not . my uncle lay down he pipe to consider the proposition ; my father 's eloquence be too rapid to stay for any man -- away it go , -- and hurrie my uncle 's idea along with it .-- for this reason , continue my father , ' tis worthy to recollect , how little alteration , in great man , the approach of death have make .-- die in a jest upon he close - stool -- with a sentence -- in a dispatch -- Tiberius in dissimulation , and in a compliment .-- I hope ' tbe a sincere one -- quoth my uncle . --'Twas to he wife , -- say my father . . -- and lastly -- for all the choice anecdote which history can produce of this matter , continue my father , -- this , like the gild dome which cover in the fabric -- crown all .-- ' Tis of , the praetor -- which , I dare say , brother , you have read .-- I dare say I have not , reply my uncle .-- he die , say my father as . . .-- and if it be with he wife , say my uncle -- there could be no hurt in it .-- that be more than I know -- reply my father . . my mother be go very gingerly in the dark along the passage which lead to the parlour , as my uncle pronounce the word wife .--'Tis a shrill penetrate sound of itself , and have help it by leave the door a little a - jar , so that my mother hear enough of it to imagine herself the subject of the conversation ; so lay the edge of she finger across she two lip -- hold in she breath , and bend she head a little downward , with a twist of she neck --( not towards the door , but from it , by which mean she ear be bring to the chink ) -- she listen with all she power :- - the listening slave , with the goddess of Silence at he back , could not have give a finer think for a intaglio . in this attitude I be determined to let she stand for five minute : till i bring up the affair of the kitchen ( as do those of the church ) to the same period . . though in one sense , we family be certainly a simple machine , as it consist of a few wheel ; yet there be thus much to be say for it , that these wheel be set in motion by so many different spring , and act one upon the other from such a variety of strange principle and impulse -- that though it be a simple machine , it have all the honour and
and advantage of a complex one , -- and a number of as odd movement within it , as ever be beheld in the inside of a silk - mill . amongst these there be one , I be go to speak of , in which , perhaps , it be not altogether so singular , as in many other ; and it be this , that whatever motion , debate , harangue , dialogue , project , or dissertation , be go forwards in the parlour , there be generally another at the same time , and upon the same subject , run parallel along with it in the kitchen . now to bring this about , whenever a extraordinary message , or letter , be deliver in the parlour -- or a discourse suspend till a servant go out - - or the line of discontent be observe to hang upon the brows of my father or mother -- or , in short , when any thing be suppose to be upon the tapis worth know or listen to , ' tbe the rule to leave the door , not absolutely shut , but somewhat a - jar -- as it stand just now , -- which , under covert of the bad hinge , ( and that possibly might be one of the many reason why it be never mende , ) it be not difficult to manage ; by which mean , in all these case , a passage be generally left , not indeed as wide as the Dardanelle , but wide enough , for all that , to carry on as much of this windward trade , as be sufficient to save my father the trouble of govern he house ; -- my mother at this moment stand profit by it .-- do the same thing , as soon as he have leave the letter upon the table which bring the news of my brother 's death , so that before my father have well get over he surprise , and enter upon he harangue , -- have get upon he leg , to speak he sentiment upon the subject . a curious observer of nature , have he be worth the inventory of all 's stock -- though by the bye , you curious observer be seldom worth a groat -- would have give the half of it , to have hear and my father , two orator so contrast by nature and education , harangue over the same bier . my father -- a man of deep reading -- prompt memory -- with , and , and , at he finger end .-- the corporal -- with nothing -- to remember -- of no deeper read than he muster - roll -- or greater name at he finger end , than the contents of it . the one proceeding from period to period , by metaphor and allusion , and strike the fancy as he go along ( as man of wit and fancy do ) with the entertainment and pleasantry of he picture and image . the other , without wit or antithesis , or point , or turn , this way or that ; but leave the image on one side , and the picture on the other , go straight forwards as nature could lead he , to the heart . of ! would to heave thou have 'st a better historian !--would !--thy historian have a better pair of breech !-- of ye critic ! will nothing melt you ? . -- my young master in be dead ? say .-- -- a green sattin night - gown of my mother 's , which have be twice scour , be the first idea which 's exclamation bring into 's head .-- well might Locke write a chapter upon the imperfection of word .-- then , quoth , we must all go into mourning . -- but note a second time : the word mourn , notwithstand make use of it herself -- fail also of do it be office ; it excit not one single idea , tinge either with grey or black , -- all be green .-- the green sattin night - gown hang there still . -- o ! ot will be the death of my poor mistress , cry .-- my mother 's whole wardrobe follow .-- what a procession ! she red damask , -- she orange tawney , -- she white and yellow lutestring , -- she brown taffata , -- she bone - lace cap , she bed - gowns , and comfortable under- petticoat .-- not a rag be leave behind . --'no ,--she will never look up again , ' say . we have a fat , foolish scullion -- my father , I think , keep she for she simplicity ; -- she have be all autumn struggle with a dropsy .-- he be dead , say , -- he be certainly dead !-- so be not I , say the foolish scullion . -- here be sad news , , cry , wip she eye as stepp ' into the kitchen ,-- master be dead and bury -- the funeral be a interpolation of 's -- we shall have all to go into mourning , say . I hope not , say Trim .-- you hope not ! cry earnestly .-- the mourning run not in 's head , whatever it do in 's .-- I hope -- say Trim , explain himself , I hope in the news be not true . I hear the letter read with my own ears , answer ; and we shall have a terrible piece of work of it in stubb the ox -moor .-- oh ! he be dead , say .-- as sure , say the scullion , as I be alive . I lament for he from my
my heart and my soul , say , fetch a sigh .-- poor creature !-- poor boy ! -- poor gentleman ! -- he be alive last Whitsontide ! say the coachman .-- ! alas ! cry Tre , extend he right arm , and fall instantly into the same attitude in which he read the sermon , -- what be , ( for that be the coachman 's name ) , or , or any tide or time past , to this ? be we not here now , continue the corporal ( strike the end of he stick perpendicularly upon the floor , so as to give a idea of health and stability ) -- and be we not --( drop he hat upon the ground ) go ! in a moment !--'Tbe infinitely strik ! burst into a flood of tear .- - we be not stock and stone .-- , , the cook -maid , all melt .-- the foolish fat scullion herself , who be scour a fish - kettle upon she knee , be rous ' with it .-- the whole kitchen crowd about the corporal . now , as I perceive plainly , that the preservation of we constitution in church and state , -- and possibly the preservation of the whole world -- or what be the same thing , the distribution and balance of its property and power , may in time to come depend greatly upon the right understanding of this stroke of the corporal 's eloquence -- I do demand you attention -- you worship and reverence , for any ten page together , take they where you will in any other part of the work , shall sleep for it at you ease . I say , 'we be not stock and stone ' --'tis very well . I should have add , nor be we angels , I wish we be , -- but man clothed with body , and govern by we imagination ; -- and what a junketing piece of work of it there be , betwixt these and we seven sense , especially some of they , for my own part , I own it , I be asham to confess . let it suffice to affirm , that of all the sense , the eye ( for I absolutely deny the touch , though most of you Barbati , I know , be for it ) have the quickest commerce with the soul , -- give a smarter stroke , and leave something more inexpressible upon the fancy , than word can either convey -- or sometimes get rid of . -- I have go a little about -- no matter , ' tis for health -- let we only carry it back in we mind to the mortality of 's hat --' be we not here now , -- and go in a moment ?'-- there be nothing in the sentence --'tbe one of you self - evident truth we have the advantage of hearing every day ; and if Tre have not trust more to he hat than he head -- he make nothing at all of it . --' be we not here now ;' continue the corporal , ' and be we not ' -- ( drop he hat plumb upon the ground -- and pausing , before he pronounce the word )--'gone ! in a moment ? ' the descent of the hat be as if a heavy lump of clay have be knead into the crown of it .-- nothing could have express the sentiment of mortality , of which it be the type and fore - runner , like it , -- he hand seem to vanish from under it , -- it fall dead , -- the corporal 's eye fix upon it , as upon a corpse , -- and burst into a flood of tear . now -- ten thousand , and ten thousand time ten thousand ( for matter and motion be infinite ) be the way by which a hat may be drop upon the ground , without any effect .-- have he fling it , or throw it , or cast it , or skim it , or squirt it , or let it slip or fall in any possible direction under heaven , -- or in the best direction that could be give to it , -- have he drop it like a goose -- like a puppy -- like a ass -- or in do it , or even after he have do , have he look like a fool -- like a ninny -- like a nincompoop -- it have fail ' , and the effect upon the heart have be lose . ye who govern this mighty world and its mighty concern with the engine of eloquence , -- who heat it , and cool it , and melt it , and mollify it , -- and then hare it again to you purpose -- ye who wind and turn the passion with this great windlass , and , have do it , lead the owners of they , whither ye think meet . ye , lastly , who drive -- and why not , also who be drive , like turkey to market with a stick and a red clout -- meditate -- meditate , I beseech you , upon 's hat . . stay -- I have a small account to settle with the reader before Tre can go on with he harangue .-- it shall be do in two minute . amongst many other book - debt , all of which I shall discharge in due time ,- - I own myself a debtor to the world for two item ,-- a chapter upon chamber - maid and button - hole , which , in the former part of my work , I promise
promise and fully intend to pay off this year : but some of you worship and reverence tell I , that the two subject , especially so connect together , might endanger the moral of the world , -- I pray the chapter upon chamber - maid and button - hole may be forgive I , -- and that they will accept of the last chapter in lieu of it ; which be nothing , a n't please you reverence , but a chapter of chamber - maid , green gown , and old hat . Tre take he hat off the ground , -- put it upon he head , -- and then go on with he oration upon death , in manner and form follow . . -- to we , , who know not what want or care be -- who live here in the service of two of the best of master --( bat in my own case he majesty the , whom I have the honour to serve both in and Flanders ) -- I own it , that from to within three week of not long --'tis like nothing ; -- but to those , , who know what death be , and what havock and destruction he can make , before a man can well wheel about --'tis like a whole age .--O ! ' twould make a good - natured man 's heart bleed , to consider , continue the corporal ( stand perpendicularly ) , how low many a brave and upright fellow have be laid since that time !-- and trust I , , add the corporal , turn to , whose eye be swim in water , -- before that time come round again , --many a bright eye will be dim .--Susannah place it to the right side of the page -- she weep -- but she court'sy too .-- be we not , continue , look still at -- be we not like a flower of the field -- a tear of pride stole in betwixt every two tear of humiliation -- else no tongue could have describe 's affliction -- be not all flesh grass ? t--Tis clay ,--'tis dirt .-- they all look directly at the scullion , -- the scullion have just be scour a fish - kettle .-- it be not fair .-- -- what be the finest face that ever man look at !-- I could hear Tre talk so for ever , cry , -- what be it ! ( lay she hand upon 's shoulder ) -- but corruption take it off . now I love you for this -- and ' ti this delicious mixture within you which make you dear creature what you be -- and he who hate you for it -- all I can say of the matter be -- that he have either a pumpkin for he head -- or a pippin for he heart , -- and whenever he be dissect 'twill be find so . . , by take she hand too suddenly from off the corporal 's shoulder ( by the whisking about of she passion ) -- break a little the chain of he reflexion -- or whether the corporal begin to be suspicious , he have get into the doctor 's quarter , and be talk more like the chaplain than himself -- or whether . . . or whether -- for in all such case a man of invention and part may with pleasure fill a couple of page with supposition -- which of all these be the cause , let the curiious physiologist , or the curiious any body determine --'tis certain , at least , the corporal go on thus with he harangue . for my own part , I declare it , that out of door , I value not death at all :-- not this . . . add the corporal , snapp he finger , -- but with a air which no one but the corporal could have give to the sentiment .-- in battle , I value death not this . . . and let he not take I cowardly , like poor , in scour he gun .-- what be he ? a pull of a trigger -- a push of a bayonet a inch this way or that -- make the difference . -- look along the line -- to the right -- see ! 's down ! well ,--'tis worth a regiment of horse to he .-- no --'tis . then 's no worse . -- never mind which , -- we pass on , -- in hot pursuit the wound itself which bring he be not feel , -- the best way be to stand up to he , -- the man who fly , be in ten time more danger than the man who march up into he jaw . -- I have look ' he , add the corporal , a hundred time in the face , -- and know what he be . -- he be nothing , Obadiah , at all in the field . -- but he be very frightful in a house , quoth .-- I never mind it myself , say , upon a coach - box .-- it must , in my opinion , be most natural in bed , reply .-- and could I escape he by creepe into the worst calf 's skin that ever be make into a knapsack , I would do it there -- say -- but that be nature . -- be nature , say . -- and that be the reason , cry , I so much pity my mistress .-- she will never get the better of it .-- now I pity the captain the most of any one in the family , answer Trim .-- Madam will get ease of heart in weeping
weeping , -- and the Squire in talk about it , -- but my poor master will keep it all in silence to himself .-- I shall hear he sigh in he bed for a whole month together , as he do for lieutenant . a ' please you honour , do not sigh so piteously , I would say to he as I lay besides he . I can not help it , , my master would say ,-- ' tis so melancholy a accident -- I can not get it off my heart .-- you honour fear not death yourself .-- I hope , , I fear nothing , he would say , but they do a wrong thing .-- well , he would add , whatever betide , I will take care of 's boy . -- and with that , like a quieting dratch , he honou would fall asleep . I like to hear 's story about the captain , say .-- he be a kindly - hear gentleman , say , as ever liv . -- aye , and as brave a one too , say the corporal , as ever steep before a platoon .-- there never be a better officer in the king 's army , -- or a better man in 's world ; for he would march up to the mouth of a cannon , though he see the lighted match at the very touch - hole , -- and yet , for all that , he have a heart as soft as a child for other people .-- he would not hurt a chicken .-- I would sooner , quoth , drive such a gentleman for seven pound a year -- than some for eight .-- thank thee , ! for thy twenty shilling , -- as much , , say the corporal , shak he by the hand , as if thou hadst put the money into my own pocket .-- I would serve he to the day of my death out of love . he be a friend and a brother to I , -- and could I be sure my poor brother be dead , -- continue the corporal , take out he handkerchief , -- be I worth ten thousand pound , I would leave every shilling of it to the captain .-- Tre could not refrain from tear at this testamentary proof he give of he affection to he master .-- the whole kitchen be affect .-- do tell we the story of the poor lieutenant , say .-- with all my heart , answer the corporal . Susannah , the cook , , , and corporal , form a circle about the fire ; and as soon as the scullion have shut the kitchen door , -- the corporal begun . . I be a if I have not as much forget my mother , as if have plaister I up , and set I down nake upon the bank of the , without one .-- you most obedient servant , Madam -- I have cost you a great deal of trouble , -- I wish it may answer ; -- but you have leave a crack in my back , -- and here be a great piece fall off here before , -- and what must I do with this foot ?--I shall never reach with it . for my own part , I never wonder at any thing ; -- and so often have my judgment deceive I in my life , that I always suspect it , right or wrong , -- at least I be seldom hot upon cold subject . for all this , I reverence truth as much as any body ; and when it have slipp we , if a man will but take I by the hand , and go quietly and search for it , as for a thing we have both lose , and can neither of we do well without , -- I will go to the world 's end with he :-- but I hate dispute , -- and therefore ( bat religious point , or such as touch society ) I would almost subscribe to any thing which do not choak I in the first passage , rather than be draw into one -- but I can not bear suffocation , -- and bad smell worst of all . -- for which reason , I resolve from the beginning , that if ever the army of martyr be to be augment , -- or a new one raise ,-- I would have no hand in it , one way or t'other . . -- but to return to my mother . my uncle 's opinion , madam , ' that there could be no harm in , the praetor 's lie with he wife ; ' -- or rather the last word of that opinion , --( for it be all my mother hear of it ) catch hold of she by the weak part of the whole sex :-- you shall not mistake I ,-- I mean she curiosity , -- she instantly conclude herself the subject of the conversation , and with that prepossession upon she fancy , you will readily conceive every word my father say , be accommodate either to herself , or she family concern . -- , , in what street do the lady live , who would not have do the same ? from the strange mode of 's death , my father have make a transition to that of , and be give my uncle a abstract of he pleading before he judg ;--'tbe irresistible :-- not the oration of , -- but my father 's temptation to it . -- he have write the life of ( this book my father would never consent to publish ; ' tis in manuscript ,
, with some other tract of he , in the family , all , or most of which will be print in due time . ) himself the year before he leave off trade , which , I fear , be the means of hasten he out of it ;-- so that no one be able to set out with so full a sail , and in so swell a tide of heroic loftiness upon the occasion , as my father be . not a period in 's oration , which close with a shorter word than transmigration , or annihilation , -- or a worse thought in the middle of it than to be -- or not to be , -- the entering upon a new and untried state of thing , -- or , upon a long , a profound and peaceful sleep , without dream , without disturbance ?-- that we and we child be bear to die , -- but neither of we bear to be slave .-- no --there I mistake ; that be part of 's oration , as record by ( . Judaic ) --Eleazer own he have it from the philosopher of ; in all likelihood Alexander the Great , in he irruption into , after he have over-run , amongst the many thing he steal , -- steal that sentiment also ; by which mean it be carry , if not all the way by himself ( for we all know he die at ) , at least by some of he maroder , into , -- from it get to ,-- from to , -- and from to :-- so thing come round .-- by land carriage , I can conceive no other way .-- by water the sentiment might easily have come down the into the , or of , and so into the indian Sea ; and follow the course of trade ( the way from by the cape of be then unknown ) , might be carry with other drug and spice up the to , the port of , or else to or Sues , town at the bottom of the gulf ; and from thence by karrawan to , but three day journey distant , so down the directly to , where the sentiment would be land at the very foot of the great stair - case of the library , -- and from that store - house it would be fetch .-- bless I ! what a trade be drive by the learn in those day ! . -- now my father have a way , a little like that of 's ( in case there ever be such a man -- if not , there be a end of the matter .-- though , by the bye , because you learn man find some difficulty in fix the precise aera in which so great a man liv ;--whether , for instance , before or after the patriarch , &c . -- to vote , therefore , that he never liv at all , be a little cruel ,--'tis not do as they would be do by ,- - happen that as it may ) -- my father , I say , have a way , when thing go extremely wrong with he , especially upon the first sally of he impatience , -- of wonder why he be beget , -- wish himself dead ;-- sometimes worse :-- and when the provocation run high , and grief touch he lip with more than ordinary power -- , you scarce could have distinguished he from himself .-- every word would breathe the sentiment of a soul disdaining life , and careless about all its issue ; for which reason , though my mother be a woman of no deep reading , yet the abstract of 's oration , which my father be give my uncle , be not altogether new to she .-- she listen to it with compose intelligence , and would have do so to the end of the chapter , have not my father plunge ( which he have no occasion to have do ) into that part of the pleading where the great philosopher reckon up he connection , he alliances , and child ; but renounce a security to be so win by work upon the passion of he judge .-- 'I have friend -- I have relation , -- I have three desolate child , '-- say .-- -- then , cry my mother , open the door , -- you have one more , , than I know of . by heaven ! I have one less , -- say my father , get up and walk out of the room . . -- they be 's child , say my uncle . he have be dead a hundred year ago , reply my mother . my uncle be no chronologer -- so not care to advance one step but upon safe ground , he lay down he pipe deliberately upon the table , and rise up , and take my mother most kindly by the hand , without say another word , either good or bad , to she , he lead she out after my father , that he might finish the ecclaircissement himself . . have this volume be a farce , which , unless every one 's life and opinion be to be look upon as a farce as well as mine , I see no reason to suppose -- the last chapter , , have finish the first act of it , and then this chapter must have set off thus . . . .r . . .r . . .e --twing -- twang -- prut--trut --'tis a curse bad fiddle .-- do you know whether my fiddle 's in tune or no ?--trut . . .prut . . .-- they should be
be fifth .--'Tis wickedly string -- tr . . .a.e.i.o.u .- twang .-- the bridge be a mile too high , and the sound post absolutely down , -- else -- trut . . .prut --hark ! ti not so bad a tone .-- Diddle diddle , diddle diddle , diddle diddle , dum . there be nothing in play before good judge , -- but there be a man there -- no -- not he with the bundle under he arm -- the grave man in black .--'Sdeath ! not the gentleman with the sword on . -- , I have rather play a to Calliope herself , than draw my bow across my fiddle before that very man ; and yet I will stake my to a 's trump , which be the greatest musical odd that ever be laid , that I will this moment stop three hundred and fifty leagu out of tune upon my fiddle , without punish one single nerve that belong to he -- Twaddle diddle , tweddle diddle ,-- twiddle diddle , -- twoddle diddle , -- twuddle diddle ,- - prut trut -- krish -- krash -- krush .--I have undo you , , -- but you see he be no worse , -- and be to take he fiddle after I , he can make he no better . Diddle diddle , diddle diddle , diddle diddle --hum --dum--drum . -- you worship and you reverence love music -- and have make you all with good ear -- and some of you play delightfully yourselves -- trut -prut , -- prut -trut . o ! there be -- whom I could sit and hear whole day , -- whose talents lie in make what he fiddle to be feel , -- who inspire I with he joy and hope , and put the most hidden spring of my heart into motion . -- if you would borrow five guinea of I , ,-- which be generally ten guinea more than I have to spare -- or you Messrs . and , want you bill pay , -- that be you time . . the first thing which enter my father 's head , after affair be a little settle in the family , and to have get possession of my mother 's green sattin night - gown , -- be to sit down coolly , after the example of , and write a -paedia , or system of education for I ; collect first for that purpose he own scattered thought , counsel , and notion ; and bind they together , so as to form a Institute for the government of my childhood and adolescence . I be my father 's last stake -- he have lose my brother entirely , -- he have lose , by he own computation , full three - fourt of I -- that be , he have be unfortunate in he three first great cast for I --my geniture , nose , and name , -- there be but this one leave ; and accordingly my father give himself up to it with as much devotion as ever my uncle have do to he doctrine of projectil .-- the difference between they be , that my uncle draw he whole knowledge of projectil from -- my father spun he , every thread of it , out of he own brain , -- or reel and cross -twist what all other spinner and spinster have spun before he , that ' twas pretty near the same torture to he . in about three year , or something more , my father have get advanced almost into the middle of he work .-- like all other writer , he meet with disappointment .-- he imagine he should be able to bring whatever he have to say , into so small a compass , that when it be finished and bound , it might be roll up in my mother 's hussive .-- matter grow under we hand .-- let no man say ,--'come -- I will write a duodecimo . ' my father give himself up to it , however , with the most painful diligence , proceed step by step in every line , with the same kind of caution and circumspection ( though I can not say upon quite so religious a principle ) as be use by , the lord archbishop of , in compassing he ; in which he of spend near forty year of he life ; and when the thing come out , it be not of above half the size or the thickness of a rider 's Almanack .-- how the holy man manage the affair , unless he spend the greatest part of he time in comb he whisker , or play at primero with he chaplain , -- would pose any mortal not let into the true secret ; -- and therefore ' ttis worth explain to the world , be it only for the encouragement of those few in it , who write not so much to be feed -- as to be famous . I own have , the archbishop of , for whose memory ( notwithstand he , ) I retain the highest veneration , -- have he be , , a slender clerk -- of dull wit -- slow part -- costive head , and so forth , -- he and he Galatea might have jog on together to the age of for I , -- the phaenomenon have not be worth a parenthesis .-- but the reverse of this be the truth : be a genius of fine part and fertile fancy ; and yet with all these great advantage of nature , which should have prick he forwards with he Galatea , he lay under a impuissance at the same time of advancing above a line and a half in the
the compass of a whole summer 's day : this disability in he arise from a opinion he be afflict with , -- which opinion be this ,-- viz . that whenever a be write a book ( not for he private amusement , but ) where he intent and purpose be , boto fide , to print and publish it to the world , he first thought be always the temptation of the evil one .-- this be the state of ordinary writer : but when a personage of venerable character and high station , either in church or state , once turn author , -- he maintain , that from the very moment he take pen in hand -- all the devils in hell break out of they hole to cajeal he .--' term - time with they ,-- every thought , first and last , be captious ; -- how specious and good soever ,--'twas all one ; -- in whatever form or colour it present itself to the imagination ,--'tbe still a stroke of one or other of th'ey levell would at he , and be to be fence off .-- so that the life of a writer , whatever he might fancy to the contrary , be not so much a state of composition , as a state of warfare ; and he probation in it , precisely that of any other man militant upon earth , -- both depend alike , not half so much upon the degree of he wit -- as he resistance . my father be hugely pleased with this theory of , archbishop of ; and ( have it not cramp he a little in he creed ) I believe would have give ten of the best acre in the estate , to have be the broacher of it .-- how far my father actually believe in the devil , will be see , when I come to speak of my father 's religious notion , in the progress of this work : ' ttis enough to say here , as he could not have the honour of it , in the literal sense of the doctrine -- he take up with the allegory of it ; and would often say , especially when he pen be a little retrograde , there be as much good meaning , truth , and knowledge , couch under the veil of 's parabolical representation , -- as be to be find in any one poetic fiction or mystic record of antiquity .-- prejudice of education , he would say , be the devil , -- and the multitude of they which we suck in with we mother 's milk -- be the devil and all . -- we be haunt with they , brother , in all we lucubration and research ; and be a man fool enough to submit tamely to what they obtrude upon he , -- what would he book be ? nothing , -- he would add , throw he pen away with a vengeance , -- nothing but a farrago of the clack of nurse , and of the nonsense of the old woman ( of both sex ) throughout the kingdom . this be the best account I be determined to give of the slow progress my father make in he Tristra - paedia ; at which ( as I say ) he be three year , and something more , indefatigably at work , and , at last , have scarce complete , by this own reckoning , one half of he undertaking : the misfortune be , that I be all that time totally neglect and abandon to my mother ; and what be almost as bad , by the very delay , the first part of the work , upon which my father have spend the most of he pain , be render entirely useless ,-- every day a page or two became of no consequence .-- -- certainly it be ordain as a scourge upon the pride of human wisdom , that the wisest of we all should thus outwin ourselves , and eternally forego we purpose in the intemperate act of pursue they . in short my father be so long in all he act of resistance , -- or in other word , -- he advance so very slow with he work , and I begin to live and get forwards at such a rate , that if a event have not happen , -- which , when we get to it , if it can be tell with decency , shall not be conceal a moment from the reader -- I verily believe , I have put by my father , and leave he draw a sundial , for no better purpose than to be bury under ground . . --' Tbe nothing ,-- I do not lose two drop of blood by it --'tbe not worth call in a surgeon , have he live next door to we -- thousand suffer by choice , what I do by accident .-- Doctor Slop make ten time more of it , than there be occasion :-- some man rise , by the art of hang great weights upon small wire , -- and I be this day ( the 10th , 1761 ) pay part of the price of this man 's reputation .-- of ' twould provoke a stone , to see how thing be carry on in this world !-- the chamber-maid have leave no ....... ... under the bed :-- can not you contrive , master , quoth , lift up the sash with one hand , as she speak , and help I up into the window - seat with the other , -- can not you manage , my dear , for a single time , to .... ... .. ... ......? I be five year old
old .-- do not consider that nothing be well hang in we family , -- so slap come the sash down like light upon we ;-- nothing be leave , -- cry , -- nothing be leave -- for I , but to run my country .- - my uncle 's house be a much kinder sanctuary ; and so fle to it . . when tell the corporal the misadventure of the sash , with all the circumstance which attend the murder of I , --( as she call it , ) -- the blood forsook he cheek , -- all accessary in murder be principal ,-- 's conscience tell he he be as much to blame as , -- and if the doctrine have be true , my uncle have as much of the bloodshed to answer for to heaven , as either of th'ey ; -- so that neither reason or instinct , separate or together , could possibly have guide 's step to so proper a asylum . it be in vain to leave this to the reader 's imagination :-- to form any kind of hypothesis that will render these proposition feasible , he must cudgel he brain sore , -- and to do it without , -- he must have such brain as no reader ever have before he .-- why should I put they either to trial or to torture ? ' Ti my own affair : I will explain it myself . . ' tTis a pity , , say my uncle , rest with he hand upon the corporal 's shoulder , as they both stood survey they work , -- that we have not a couple of field - piece to mount in the gorge of that new redoubt ; --'twould secure the line all along there , and make the attack on that side quite complete :-- get I a couple cast , . you honour shall have they , reply , before tomorrow morning . it be the joy of 's heart , nor be he fertile head ever at a loss for expedient in do it , to supply my uncle in he campaigns , with whatever he fancy call for ; have it be he last crown , he would have sate down and hammer it into a paderero , to have prevent a single wish in he master . the corporal have already , -- what with cutting off the end of my uncle 's spout -- hack and chisel up the side of he leaden gutter ,-- melt down he pewter shaving - bason , -- and go at last , like the , on to the top of the church , for spare end , &c .-- he have that very campaign bring no less than eight new battering cannon , besides three demi-culverin , into the field ; my uncle 's demand for two more piece for the redoubt , have set the corporal at work again ; and no better resource offering , he have take the two leaden weights from the nursery window : and as the sash pully , when the lead be gone , be of no kind of use , he have take they away also , to make a couple of wheel for one of they carriage . he have dismantle every sash -window in my uncle 's house long before , in the very same way , -- though not always in the same order ; for sometimes the pully have be want , and not the lead ,-- so then he begin with the pully , -- and the pully be pick out , then the lead become useless , -- and so the lead go to pot too . -- a great might be pick handsomely out of this , but I have not time --'tis enough to say , wherever the demolition begin , ' tbe equally fatal to the sash window . . the corporal have not take he measure so badly in this stroke of artilleryship , but that he might have keep the matter entirely to himself , and leave to have sustain the whole weight of the attack , as she could ; -- true courage be not content with come off so .-- the corporal , whether as general or comptroller of the train ,--'tbe no matter , -- have do that , without which , as he imagine , the misfortune could never have happen , -- at least in 's hand ;-- how would you honour have behave ?-- he determine at once , not to take shelter behind , -- but to give it ; and with this resolution upon he mind , he march upright into the parlour , to lay the whole manoeuvre before my uncle . my uncle have just then be give a account of the of , and of the strange conduct of count Solme in order the foot to hal , and the horse to march where it could not act ; which be directly contrary to the king 's command , and prove the loss of the day . there be incidents in some family so pat to the purpose of what be go to follow , -- they be scarce exceed by the invention of a dramatic writer ;-- I mean of ancient day .-- Trim , by the help of he fore - finger , laid flat upon the table , and the edge of he hand strike across it at right angles , make a shift to tell he story so , that priest and virgin might have listen to it ;-- and the story be tell , -- the dialogue go on as follow . . -- I would be picquet to death , cry the corporal , as he conclude 's story , before I would suffer the woman to come to any
any harm ,-- ' tbe my fault , a ' please you honour , -- not she 's . , reply my uncle , put on he hat which lay upon the table , -- if any thing can be say to be a fault , when the service absolutely require it should be do ,--'tis I certainly who deserve the blame , -- you obey you order . have count , , do the same at the battle of , say , droll a little upon the corporal , who have be run over by a dragoon in the retreat , -- he have save thee ;-- save ! cry Trim , interrupt , and finish the sentence for he after he own fashion , -- he have save five battalion , an' please you reverence , every soul of they :-- there be 's , -- continue the corporal , clapp the forefinger of he right hand upon the thumb of he left , and count round he hand , -- there be Cutt's ,-- 's ,-- Angus 's ,-- 's , -- and 's , all cut to piece ; -- and so have the english life - guard too , have it not be for some regiment upon the right , who march up boldly to they relief , and receive the enemy 's fire in they face , before any one of they own platoon discharge a musket , -- they will go to heaven for it ,-- add Trim .-- be right , say my uncle , nodd to , -- he be perfectly right . what signify he march the horse , continue the corporal , where the ground be so strait , that the have such a nation of hedge , and copse , and ditch , and fell would tree laid this way and that to cover they ( as they always have ) .-- should have send we , -- we would have fire muzzle to muzzle with they for they life .-- there be nothing to be do for the horse :-- he have he foot shot off however for he pain , continue the corporal , the very next campaign at .-- poor Trim get he wound there , quoth my uncle .--' owe , an' please you honour , entirely to count Solmes , -- have he drub they soundly at , they would not have fight we at .-- possibly not ,-- , say my uncle ; -- though if they have the advantage of a wood , or you give they a moment 's time to intrench themselves , they be a nation which will pop and pop for ever at you .-- there be no way but to march coolly up to they , -- receive they fire , and fall in upon they , pell -mell -- Ding dong , add Trim .-- horse and foot , say my uncle .-- , say Trim .-- right and leave , cry my uncle .-- a ' ound , shoute the corporal ; -- the battle rage ,-- draw he chair a little to one side for safety , and after a moment 's pause , my uncle Toby sink he voice a note , -- resume the discourse as follow . . , say my uncle , address himself to , be so terribly provoke at count Solmes for disobey he order , that he would not suffer he to come into he presence for many month after .-- I fear , answer , the squire will be as much provoke at the corporal , as the at the count .-- but ' twould be singularly hard in this case , continue be , if corporal , who have behave so diametrically opposite to count , should have the fate to be reward with the same disgrace :-- too oft in this world , do thing take that train .-- I would spre a mine , cry my uncle , rise up , -- and blow up my fortification , and my house with they , and we would perish under they ruin , ere I would stand by and see it .-- Tre direct a slight , -- but a grateful bow towards he master , -- and so the chapter end . . -- then , , reply my uncle , you and I will lead the way abreast , -- and do you , corporal , follow a few pace behind we .-- and , an' please you honour , say , shall be put in the rear .-- ' Tbe a excellent disposition , -- and in this order , without either drum beate , or colour fly , they march slowly from my uncle 's house to - hall . -- I wish , say , as they enter the door ,-- instead of the sash weight , I have cut off the church spout , as I once think to have do .-- you have cut off spout enow , reply . . as many picture as have be give of my father , how like he soever in different air and attitude , -- not one , or all of they , can ever help the reader to any kind of preconception of how my father would think , speak , or act , upon any untried occasion or occurrence of life .-- there be that infinitude of oddity in he , and of chance along with it , by which handle he would take a thing , -- it baffle , Sir , all calculation .-- the truth be , he road lay so very far on one side , from that wherein most men travel , -- that every object before he present a face and section of itself to he eye , altogether different from the plan and elevation of it see by the rest
rest of mankind .-- in other word , ' tbe a different object , and in course be differently consider : this be the true reason , that my dear and I , as well as all the world besides we , have such eternal squabble about nothing .-- she look at she outside ,-- I , at she in . . .. how be it possible we should agree about she value ? . ' tTis a point settle , -- and I mention it for the comfort of , ( be suppose to mean . . . , ; member for . . ., -- and not the chinese . ) who be apt to get entangle in tell a plain story -- that provide he keep along the line of he story , -- he may go backwards and forward as he will ,--'ti still hold to be no digression . this be premise , I take the benefit of the act of go backwards myself . . fifty thousand pannier load of devils --( not of the of 's -- I mean of 's devils ) , with they tail chop off by they rump , could not have make so diabolical a scream of it , as I do -- when the accident befel I : it summon up my mother instantly into the nursery , -- so that have but just time to make she escape down the back stair , as my mother come up the fore . now , though I be old enough to have tell the story myself , -- and young enough , I hope , to have do it without malignity ; yet , in passing by the kitchen , for fear of accident , have leave it in short - hand with the cook -- the cook have tell it with a commentary to , and to ; so that by the time my father have rng the bell half a dozen time , to know what be the matter above , --be enable to give he a particular account of it , just as it have happen .-- I think as much , say my father , tuck up he night - gown ; -- and so walk up stair . one would imagine from this --( though for my own part I somewhat question it ) -- that my father , before that time , have actually write that remarkable character in the , which to I be the most original and entertaine one in the whole book ; -- and that be the chapter upon sash - window , with a bitter at the end of it , upon the forgetfulness of chamber-maid .-- I have but two reason for think otherwise . first , have the matter be take into consideration , before the event happen , my father certainly would have nail up the sash window for good a ' all ;-- which , consider with what difficulty he compose book , -- he might have do with ten time less trouble , than he could have write the chapter : this argument I foresee hold good against he write a chapter , even after the event ; but ' tis obviate under the second reason , which I have the honour to offer to the world in support of my opinion , that my father do not write the chapter upon sash - window and chamber - pots , at the time suppose , -- and it be this . -- that , in order to render the Tristra-paedia complete , -- I write the chapter myself . . my father put on he spectacle -- look , -- take they off , -- put they into the case -- all in less than a statutable minute ; and without open he lip , turn about and walk precipitately down stair : my mother imagine he have step down for lint and basilicon ; but see he return with a couple of folio under he arm , and Obadiah follow he with a large reading - desk , she take it for grant ' tbe a herbal , and so draw he a chair to the bedside , that he might consult upon the case at he ease . -- if it be but right do , -- say my father , turn to the section -- de sede vel subjecto circumcisionis , -- for he have bring up -- and , in order to confront and examine we altogether .-- -- if it be but right do , quoth he :-- only tell we , cry my mother , interrupt he , what herb ?-- for that , reply my father , you must send for . my mother go down , and my father go on , read the section as follow , . . .-- very well , -- say my father , . . .--nay , if it have that convenience -- and so without stop a moment to settle it first in he mind , whether the have it from the , or the from the , -- he rise up , and rub he forehead two or three time across with the palm of he hand , in the manner we rub out the footstep of care , when evil have trod lighter upon we than we forebod , -- he shut the book , and walk down stair .-- , say he , mention the name of a different great nation upon every step as he set he foot upon it -- if the , -- the , -- the , -- the , -- the , -- if the , and do it -- if and submit , -- what be ?-- who be I , that I should fret or fume one moment about the matter ? . dear , say my father
father smile ( for have break he rank with my uncle in come through the narrow entry , and so have steep first into the parlour ) -- this Tristram of ours , I find , come very hardly by all he religious rite .-- never be the son of , , , or initiate into they in so oblique and slovenly a manner . -- but he be no worse , I trust , say .-- there have be certainly , continue my father , the deuce and all to do in some part or other of the ecliptic , when this offspring of mine be form .-- that , you be a better judge of than I , reply , quoth my father , know better than we both :-- the trine and sextil aspect have jump awry , -- or the opposite of they ascendent have not hit it , as they should , -- or the lord of the geniture ( as they call they ) have be at bo - peep , -- or something have be wrong above , or below with we . ' tTis possible , answer . -- but be the child , cry my uncle , the worse ?-- the say not , reply my father . and you theologist , , tell we -- Theologically ? say , -- or speak after the manner of apothecary ? ( footnote in .) --statesmen ? ( footnote in ) -- or washer - woman ? ( footnote in . ) -- I be not sure , reply my father , -- but they tell we , brother , he be the better for it .-- provide , say , you travel he into .-- of that , answer my father , he will have the advantage , when he see the Pyramid .-- now every word of this , quoth my uncle , be to I .-- I wish , say , ' twas so , to half the world . -- , ( footnote in . ) continue my father , circumcise he whole army one morning .-- not without a court martial ? cry my uncle .-- though the learn , continue he , take no notice of my uncle 's remark , but turn to , -- be greatly divide still who be ; -- some say ; -- some the ;--other , no more than a brigadier general under - neco .-- let he be who he will , say my uncle , I know not by what article of war he could justify it . the controvertist , answer my father , assign two - and - twenty different reason for it :--other , indeed , who have draw they pens on the opposite side of the question , have shew the world the futility of the greatest part of they . -- but then again , we best polemic divine -- I wish there be not a polemic divine , say , in the kingdom ; -- one ounce of practical divinity -- be worth a pain ship - load of all they reverence have import these fifty year .-- , , quoth my uncle , -- do tell I what a polemic divine be ?-- the best description , captain , I have ever read , be of a couple of th'ey , reply , in the account of the battle fight single hand betwixt and ; which I have in my pocket .-- I beg I may hear it , quoth my uncle earnestly .-- you shall , say . -- and as the corporal be wait for I at the door ,-- and I know the description of a battle will do the poor fellow more good than he supper , -- I beg , brother , you will give he leave to come in .-- with all my soul , say my father .-- Tre come in , erect and happy as a emperor ; and have shut the door , take a book from he right - hand coat - pocket , and read , or pretend to read , as follow . . --' which word be hear by all the soldier which be there , diver of they be inwardly terrify , do shrink back and make room for the assailant : all this do Gymnast very well remark and consider ; and therefore , make as if he would have alight from off he horse , as he be poise himself on the mounting side , he most nimbly ( with he short sword by this thigh ) shift he foot in the stirrup , and perform the stirrup - leather feat , whereby , after the inclining of he body downward , he forthwill launch himself aloft into the air , and place both he foot together upon the saddle , stand upright , with he back turn towards he horse 's head ,-- now , ( say he ) my case go forward . then suddenly in the same posture wherein he be , he fetch a gambol upon one foot , and turn to the left - hand , fail not to carry he body perfectly round , just into he former position , without miss one jot . -- ! say Tripet , I will not do that at this time , -- and not without cause . well , say , I have fail ,-- I will undue this leap ; then with a marvellous strength and agility , turn towards the right - hand , he fetch another striking gambol as before ; which do , he set he right hand thumb upon the bow of the saddle , raise himself up , and spring into the air , poise and uphold he whole weight upon the muscle and nerve of the say thumb , and so turn and whir himself about
about three time : at the fourth , reverse he body , and overturn it upside down , and foreside back , without touch any thing , he bring himself betwixt the horse 's two ear , and then give himself a jerking swing , he seat himself upon the crupper --' ( this can not be fight , say my uncle .-- the corporal shook he head at it .-- have patience , say . ) ' then ( ) pass would he right leg over he saddle , and place himself en croup .--but , say he , ' twere better for I to get into the saddle ; then put the thumb of both hand upon the crupper before he , and there - upon lean himself , as upon the only supporter of he body , he incontinently turn heel over head in the air , and strait find himself betwixt the bow of the saddle in a tolerable seat ; then spring into the air with a summerset , he turn he about like a wind - mill , and make above a hundred frisk , turn , and demi-pommada .'-- ! cry Trim , lose all patience , -- one home thrust of a bayonet be worth it all .-- I think so too , reply .-- I be of a contrary opinion , quoth my father . . -- no ,-- I think I have advance nothing , reply my father , make answer to a question which have take the liberty to put to he , -- I have advance nothing in the -paedia , but what be as clear as any one proposition in .-- reach I , , that book from off the scrutoir :-- it have oft -times be in my mind , continue my father , to have read it over both to you , , and to my brother , and I think it a little unfriendly in myself , in not have do it long ago :-- shall we have a short chapter or two now , -- and a chapter or two hereafter , as occasion serve ; and so on , till we get through the whole ? my uncle and make the obeisance which be proper ; and the corporal , though he be not include in the compliment , laid he hand upon he breast , and make he bow at the same time .-- the company smile . , quoth my father , have pay the full price for stay out the entertainment .-- he do not seem to relish the play , reply .--' Twas a Tom - fool - battle , an' please you reverence , of 's and that other officer , make so many summerset , as they advance ; -- the french come on cape now and then in that way , -- but not quite so much . my uncle never feel the consciousness of he existence with more complacency than what the corporal 's , and he own reflection , make he do at that moment ; -- he light he pipe ,-- draw he chair closer to the table , -- snuff would the candle , -- my father stirr ' up the fire , -- take up the book , -- cough would twice , and begun . . the first thirty page , say my father , turn over the leave , -- be a little dry ; and as they be not closely connect with the subject , -- for the present we will pass they by : ' ti a prefatory introduction , continue my father , or a introductory preface ( for I be not determine which name to give it ) upon political or civil government ; the foundation of which be laid in the first conjunction betwixt male and female , for procreation of the species -- I be insensibly lead into it .--' Twas natural , say . the original of society , continue my father , I be satisfied be , what Politian tell we , I . e . merely conjugal ; and nothing more than the get together of one man and one woman ; -- to which , ( accord to ) the philosopher add a servant :-- but suppose in the first beginning there be no man servants bear -- he lay the foundation of it , in a man ,-- a woman -- and a bull .-- I believe ' ttis a ox , quoth , quote the passage ( ) -- a bull must have give more trouble than he head be worth . -- but there be a better reason still , say my father ( dip he pen into he ink ) ; for the ox be the most patient of animal , and the most useful withal in till the ground for they nourishment , -- be the properest instrument , and emblem too , for the new join couple , that the creation could have associate with they . -- and there be a stronger reason , add my uncle , than they all for the ox .-- my father have not power to take he pen out of he ink - horn , till he have hear my uncle 's reason .-- for when the ground be till , say my uncle , and make worth inclosing , then they begin to secure it by wall and ditch , which be the origin of fortification .-- true , true , dear , cry my father , strike out the bull , and put the ox in he place . my father give Trim a nod , to snuff the candle , and resume he discourse . -- I enter upon this speculation , say my father carelessly , and half shutt the book , as he go on , merely to show the foundation
foundation of the natural relation between a father and he child ; the right and jurisdiction over whom he acquire these several way -- 1st , by marriage. 2 d , by adoption. 3 d , by legitimation . and 4th , by procreation ; all which I consider in they order . I lay a slight stress upon one of they , reply -- the act , especially where it end there , in my opinion lay as little obligation upon the child , as it convey power to the father .-- you be wrong , -- say my father argutely , and for this plain reason . . ..-- I own , add my father , that the offspring , upon this account , be not so under the power and jurisdiction of the mother . -- but the reason , reply , equally hold good for she .-- she be under authority herself , say my father :-- and beside , continue my father , nodd he head , and lay he finger upon the side of he nose , as he assign he reason , -- she be not the principal agent , .-- in what , quoth my uncle ? stop he pipe .-- though by all means , add my father ( not attend to my uncle ) , ' the son ought to pay she respect , ' as you may read , , at large in the first book of the Institutes of , at the eleventh title and the tenth section .-- I can read it as well , reply , in the Catechism . . Tre can repeat every word of it by heart , quoth my uncle .-- ! say my father , not care to be interrupt with 's say he Catechism . he can , upon my honour , reply my uncle .-- ask he , , any question you please .-- -- the fifth Commandment , , -- say , speak mildly , and with a gentle nod , as to a modest . the corporal stood silent .-- you do not ask he right , say my uncle , raise he voice , and give it rapidly like the word of command :-- the fifth -- cry my uncle .-- I must begin with the first , an' please you honour , say the corporal .-- -- could not forbear smile . -- you reverence do not consider , say the corporal , shouldere he stick like a musket , and march into the middle of the room , to illustrate he position , -- that ' tis exactly the same thing , as do one 's exercise in the field .-- ' join you right - hand to you firelock , ' cry the corporal , give the word of command , and perform the motion .-- ' Poise you firelock , ' cry the corporal , do the duty still both of adjutant and private man . ' rest you firelock ; '-- one motion , an' please you reverence , you see lead into another . -- if he honou will begin but with the first -- the -- cry my uncle , set he hand upon he side --. . .. the -- cry my uncle , wave he tobacco - pipe , as he would have do he sword at the head of a regiment .-- the corporal go through he manual with exactness ; and have honoure he father and mother , make a low bow , and fall back to the side of the room . every thing in this world , say my father , be big with jest , and have wit in it , and instruction too , -- if we can but find it out . -- here be the scaffold work of , it be true point of folly , without the Building behind it . -- here be the glass for pedagogue , preceptor , tutor , governors , gerund - grinders , and bear - leader to view themselves in , in they true dimension .-- oh ! there be a husk and shell , , which grow up with learning , which they unskilfulness know not how to fl away ! -- be learn by but . think my father inspire .-- I will enter into obligation this moment , say my father , to lay out all my aunt 's legacy in charitable use ( of which , by the bye , my father have no high opinion ) , if the corporal have any one determinate idea annex to any one word he have repeat .-- , , quoth my father , turn round to he ,-- what dost thou mean , by ' honour thy father and mother ? ' allow they , a ' please you honour , three halfpence a day out of my pay , when they grow old . -- and didst thou do that , ? say .-- he do indeed , reply my uncle .-- then , , say , spring out of he chair , and take the corporal by the hand , thou be the best commentator upon that part of the ; and I honou thee more for it , corporal Trim , than if thou hadst have a hand in the itself . . of bless health ! cry my father , make a exclamation , as he turn over the leaf to the next chapter , thou be before all gold and treasure ; ' ti thou who enlargest the soul , -- and openest all its power to receive instruction and to relish virtue . -- he that have thee , have little more to wish for ; -- and he that be so wretched as to want thee , -- want every thing with thee . I have concentrate all that can be say upon
upon this important head , say my father , into a very little room , therefore we will read the chapter quite through . my father read as follow : ' the whole secret of health depend upon the due contention for mastery betwixt the radical heat and the radical moisture'-- you have prove that matter of fact , I suppose , above , say . sufficientely , reply my father . in say this , my father shut the book , -- not as if he resolve to read no more of it , for he keep he fore - finger in the chapter :-- nor pettishly , -- for he shut the book slowly ; he thumb rest , when he have do it , upon the upper - side of the cover , as he three finger support the lower side of it , without the least compressive violence .-- I have demonstrate the truth of that point , quoth my father , nodd to , most sufficiently in the preceding chapter . now could the man in the moon be tell , that a man in the earth have write a chapter , sufficiently demonstrate , that the secret of all health depend upon the due contention for mastery betwixt the radical heat and the radical moisture , -- and that he have manage the point so well , that there be not one single word wet or dry upon radical heat or radical moisture , throughout the whole chapter , -- or a single syllable in it , pro or con , directly or indirectly , upon the contention betwixt these two power in any part of the animal oeconomy -- 'o thout eternal maker of all being !' -- he would cry , strike he breast with he right hand ( in case he have one ) --'Thout whose power and goodness can enlarge the faculty of thy creature to this infinite degree of excellence and perfection , -- what have we Moonites do ? ' . with two stroke , the one at , the other at , do my father achieve it . the stroke at the prince of physician , with which he begin , be no more than a short insult upon he sorrowful complaint of the longa , -- and brevis . -- Life short , cry my father , -- and the art of healing tedious ! and who be we to thank for both the one and the other , but the ignorance of quack themselves , -- and the stage - load of chymical nostrum , and peripatetic lumber , with which , in all age , they have first flatter would the world , and at last deceive it ? -- of my lord ! cry my father , turn from , and make he second stroke at he , as the principal of nostrum -monger , and the fittest to be make a example of to the rest ,-- what shall I say to thee , my great lord Verulam ? what shall I say to thy internal spirit , -- thy opium , thy salt - petre , -- thy greasy unction , -- thy daily purge , -- thy nightly clyster , and succedaneum ? -- my father be never at a loss what to say to any man , upon any subject ; and have the least occasion for the exordium of any man breathing : how he deal with he lordship 's opinion , -- you shall see ; -- but when -- I know not :-- we must first see what he lordship 's opinion be . . ' the two great cause , which conspire with each other to shorten life , say lord , be first -- ' the internal spirit , which like a gentle flame waste the body down to death :-- and secondly , the external air , that parch the body up to ash :- - which two enemy attack we on both side of we body together , at length destroy we organ , and render they unfit to carry on the function of life . ' this be the state of the case , the road to longevity be plain ; nothing more be require , say he lordship , but to repair the waste commit by the internal spirit , by make the substance of it more thick and dense , by a regular course of opiate on one side , and by refrigerat the heat of it on the other , by three grain and a half of salt - petre every morning before you get up .-- still this frame of ours be leave expose to the inimical assault of the air without ; -- but this be fence off again by a course of greasy unction , which so fully saturate the pore of the skin , that no spicula could enter ; -- nor could any one get out .-- this put a stop to all perspiration , sensible and insensible , which be the cause of so many scurvy distemper -- a course of clyster be requisite to carry off redundant humours , -- and render the system complete . what my father have to say to my lord of 's opiate , he salt - petre , and greasy unction and clyster , you shall read , -- but not to - day -- or to - morrow : time pressis upon I , -- my reader be impatient -- I must get forwards -- you shall read the chapter at you leisure ( if you chuse it ) , as soon as ever the Tristra-paedia be publish .-- Sufficeth it , at present to say , my father level the hypothesis with the ground , and in do that , the learn know , he build up and establish he own .-- . the
the whole secret of health , say my father , begin the sentence again , depend evidently upon the due contention betwixt the radical heat and radical moisture within we ; -- the least imaginable skill have be sufficient to have maintain it , have not the school - man confound the task , merely ( as , the famous chymist , have prove ) by all along mistake the radical moisture for the tallow and fat of animal body . now the radical moisture be not the tallow or fat of animal , but a oily and balsamous substance ; for the fat and tallow , as also the phlegm or watery part , be cold ; whereas the oily and balsamous part be of a lively heat and spirit , which account for the observation of , ' Quod omne animal post coitum est triste . ' now it be certain , that the radical heat live in the radical moisture , but whether vice versa , be a doubt : however , when the one decay , the other decay also ; and then be produce , either a unnatural heat , which cause a unnatural dryness -- or a unnatural moisture , which cause dropsy .-- so that if a child , as he grow up , can but be teach to avoid run into fire or water , as either of th'ey threat he destruction ,--ot will be all that be needful to be do upon that head .-- . the description of the siege of itself , could not have engage the attention of my uncle Toby more powerfully than the last chapter ; -- he eye be fix upon my father throughout it ; -- he never mention radical heat and radical moisture , but my uncle take he pipe out of he mouth , and shake he head ; and as soon as the chapter be finish , he beckon to the corporal to come close to he chair , to ask he the follow question , -- aside .--. . .. it be at the siege of , an' please you honour , reply the corporal , make a bow . the poor fellow and I , quoth my uncle , address himself to my father , be scarce able to crawl out of we tent , at the time the siege of be raise , upon the very account you mention .-- now what can have get into that precious noddle of thine , my dear brother ? cry my father , mentally .-- by ! continue he , commun still with himself , it would puzzle a Oedipus to bring it in point .-- I believe , an' please you honour , quoth the corporal , that if it have not be for the quantity of brandy we set fire to every night , and the claret and cinnamon with which I ply you honour off ;-- and the geneva , , add my uncle , which do we more good than all -- I verily believe , continue the corporal , we have both , an' please you honour , leave we life in the trench , and be bury in they too .-- the noblest grave , corporal ! cry my uncle , he eye sparkl as he speak , that a soldier could wish to lie down in .-- but a pitiful death for he ! a ' please you honour , reply the corporal . all this be as much to my father , as the rite of the and have be before to my uncle ; my father could not determine whether he be to fry or to smile . my uncle , turn to , resum the case at , more intelligibly than he have begin it , -- and so settle the point for my father at once . . it be undoubtedly , say my uncle , a great happiness for myself and the corporal , that we have all along a burning fever , attend with a most raging thirst , during the whole five - and - twenty day the flux be upon we in the camp ; otherwise what my brother call the radical moisture , must , as I conceive it , inevitably have get the better .-- my father draw in he lung top - full of air , and look up , blow it forth again , as slowly as he possibly wcould .-- -- it be 's mercy to we , continue my uncle , which put it into the corporal 's head to maintain that due contention betwixt the radical heat and the radical moisture , by reinforce the fever , as he do all along , with hot wine and spice ; whereby the corporal keep up ( as it be ) a continual firing , so that the radical heat stand it be ground from the beginning to the end , and be a fair match for the moisture , terrible as it be .-- upon my honour , add my uncle , you might have hear the contention within we body , brother , twenty toise .-- if there be no firing , say . well -- say my father , with a full aspiration , and pause a while after the word -- be I a judge , and the law of the country which make I one permit it , I would condemn some of the worst malefactor , provide they have have they clergy . . .-- , foresee the sentence be likely to end with no sort of mercy , laid he hand upon my father 's breast , and beg he would respite it for a few minute , till he ask the corporal a question .-- , , say , without stay for my father 's leave , -- tell we honestly -- what be
be thy opinion concern this self - same radical heat and radical moisture ? with humble submission to he honour 's better judgament , quoth the corporal , make a bow to my uncle -- thy opinion freely , corporal , say my uncle .-- the poor fellow be my servant , -- not my slave , -- add my uncle , turn to my father .-- the corporal put he hat under he left arm , and with he stick hang upon the wrist of it , by a black thong split into a tassel about the knot , he march up to the ground where he have perform he catechism ; then touch he under - jaw with the thumb and finger of he right hand before he open he mouth , -- he deliver he notion thus . . just as the corporal be hum , to begin -- in waddle not two - pence matter -- the corporal shall go on in the next chapter , let who will come in .-- well , my good doctor , cry my father sportively , for the transitions of he passion be unaccountably sudden , -- and what have this whelp of mine to say to the matter ? have my father be ask after the amputation of the tail of a puppy - dog -- he could not have do it in a more careless air : the system which have laid down , to treat the accident by , no way allow of such a mode of enquiry .-- he sit down . , , quoth my uncle , in a manner which could not go unanswered ,- - in what condition be the boy ?--'Twill end in a phimosis , reply . I be no wiser than I be , quoth my uncle -- return he pipe into he mouth .-- then let the corporal go on , say my father , with he medical lecture .-- the corporal make a bow to he old friend , , and then deliver he opinion concern radical heat and radical moisture , in the follow word . . the city of , the siege of which be begin under he majesty king himself , the year after I go into the army -- lie , an' please you honour , in the middle of a devilish wet , swampy country .--'Tis quite surround , say my uncle , with the , and be , by its situation , one of the strongest fortified place in .-- I think this be a new fashion , quoth , of begin a medical lecture .--'Tis all true , answer Trim .-- then I wish the faculty would follow the cut of it , say all cut through , a ' please you reverence , say the corporal , with drain and bog ; and besides , there be such a quantity of rain fall during the siege , the whole country be like a puddle ,--'twa that , and nothing else , which bring on the flux , and which have like to have kill both he honour and myself ; now there be no such thing , after the first ten day , continue the corporal , for a soldier to lie dry in he tent , without cut a ditch round it , to draw off the water ; -- nor be that enough , for those who could afford it , as he honour could , without set fire every night to a pewter dish full of brandy , which take off the damp of the air , and make the inside of the tent as warm as a stove .-- and what conclusion dost thou draw , corporal , cry my father , from all these premise ? I infer , a ' please you worship , reply , that the radical moisture be nothing in the world but ditch - water -- and that the radical heat , of those who can go to the expence of it , be burnt brandy , -- the radical heat and moisture of a private man , an' please you honour , be nothing but ditch - water -- and a dram of geneva -- and give we but enough of it , with a pipe of tobacco , to give we spirits , and drive away the vapour -- we know not what it be to fear death . I be at a loss , , quoth , to determine in which branch of learn you servant shine most , whether in physiology or divinity .-- Slop have not forget 's comment upon the sermon .-- it be but a hour ago , reply , since the corporal be examine in the latter , and pass muster with great honour .-- the radical heat and moisture , quoth , turn to my father , you must know , be the basis and foundation of we be -- as the root of a tree be the source and principle of its vegetation .-- it be inherent in the seed of all animal , and may be preserve sundry way , but principally in my opinion by consubstantial , impriment , and occludent .-- now this poor fellow , continue , point to the corporal , have have the misfortune to have hear some superficial empiric discourse upon this nice point .-- that he have , --say my father .-- very likely , say my uncle .-- I be sure of it -- quoth .-- . be call out to look at a cataplasm he have order , it give my father a opportunity of go on with another chapter in the - .-- ! cheer up , my lad ; I will show you land -- for when we have tug through that chapter , the book shall not be open again this twelve -month .-- !-- . --
-- five year with a bib under he ching ; four year in travel from - cross - row to ; a year and a half in learn to write he own name ; long year and more ( ) - e it , at and ; four year at he probation and he negation -- the fine statue still lie in the middle of the marble block , -- and nothing do , but he tool sharpen to how it out t!--'Tis a piteous delay !-- be not the great within a ace of never get he tool sharpen at all ? -- Forty - four year old be he before he could manage he greek ; -- and , lord bishop of , as all the world know , could not so much as read , when he be of man 's estate . -- and himself , as eminent as he turn out after , enter upon the law so late in life , that every body imagine he intend to be a advocate in the other world : no wonder , when , the son of , hear at seventy - five disputing about wisdom , that he ask gravely ,-- if the old man be yet dispute and enquir concern wisdom , -- what time will he have to make use of it ? listen to my father with great attention ; there be a seasoning of wisdom unaccountably mix up with he strangest whim , and he have sometimes such illumination in the darkest of he eclipse , as almost aton for they :-- be wary , , when you imitate he . I be convince , , continue my father , half reading and half discoursing , that there be a - west passage to the intellectual world ; and that the soul of man have shorter way of go to work , in furnishing itself with knowledge and instruction , than we generally take with it .-- but , alack ! all field have not a river or a spring run besides they ; -- every child , , have not a parent to point it out . -- the whole entirely depend , add my father , in a low voice , upon the auxiliary verb , . have trod upon 's snake , he could not have look more surprised .-- I be surprise too , cry my father , observe it , -- and I reckon it as one of the greatest calamity which ever befel the republic of letter , that those who have be entrust with the education of we child , and whose business it be to open they mind , and stock they early with idea , in order to set the imagination loose upon they , have make so little use of the auxiliary verb in do it , as they have do -- so that , except , and the elder , the last of which arrive to such perfection in the use of 'em , with he topic , that , in a few lesson , he could teach a young gentleman to discourse with plausibility upon any subject , pro and con , and to say and write all that could be speak or write concern it , without blott a word , to the admiration of all who beheld he .-- I should be glad , say , interrupt my father , to be make to comprehend this matter . you shall , say my father . the highest stretch of improveament a single word be capable of , be a high metaphor , -- for which , in my opinion , the idea be generally the worse , and not the better ; -- but be that as it may , -- when the mind have do that with it -- there be a end ,-- the mind and the idea be at rest ,-- until a second idea enter ; -- and so on . now the use of the Auxiliaries be , at once to set the soul a - go by herself upon the material as they be bring she ; and by the versability of this great engine , round which they be twist , to open new tract of enquiry , and make every idea engender million . you excite my curiosity greatly , say . for my own part , quoth my uncle , I have give it up .-- the , an' please you honour , quoth the corporal , who be on the left at the siege of , be all auxiliary . -- and very good one , say my uncle . -- but the auxiliary , , my brother be talk about , -- I conceive to be different thing .-- -- you do ? say my father , rise up . . my father take a single turn across the room , then sit down , and finish the chapter . the verb auxiliary we be concerned in here , continue my father , be , am ; be ; have ; have ; do ; do ; make ; make ; suffer ; shall ; should ; will ; would ; can ; could ; owe ; ought ; use ; or be wont . -- and these vari with tense , present , past , future , and conjugate with the verb see , -- or with these question add to they ; -- be it ? be it ? will it be ? would it be ? may it be ? might it be ? and these again put negatively , be it not ? be it not ? ought it not ?-- or affirmatively ,-- it be ; it be ; it ought to be . or chronologically , -- have it be always ? lately ? how long ago ?-- or hypothetically , --
-- if it be ? if it be not ? what would follow ? -- if the french should beat the ? if the go out of the ? now , by the right use and application of these , continue my father , in which a child 's memory should be exercise , there be no one idea can enter he brain , how barren soever , but a magazine of conception and conclusion may be draw forth from it .-- Didst thou ever see a white bear ? cry my father , turn he head round to , who stand at the back of he chair :-- no , an' please you honour , reply the corporal . -- but thou couldst discourse about one , , say my father , in case of need ?-- how be it possible , brother , quoth my uncle , if the corporal never see one ?-- ' Ti the fact I want , reply my father , -- and the possibility of it be as follow . a ! very well . have I ever see one ? might I ever have seen one ? be I ever to see one ? ought I ever to have seen one ? or can I ever see one ? would I have see a white bear ! ( for how can I imagine it ? ) if I should see a white bear , what should I say ? if I should never see a white bear , what then ? if I never have , can , must , or shall see a white bear alive ; have I ever see the skin of one ? do I ever see one paint ?--described ? have I never dream of one ? do my father , mother , uncle , aunt , brother or sister , ever see a white bear ? what would they give ? how would they behave ? how would the white bear have behave ? be he wild ? ? terrible ? ? ? -- be the white bear worth see ?-- -- be there no sin in it ?-- be it better than a ? . -- we will not stop two moment , my dear Sir ,-- only , as we have get through these five volume ( in the first edition , the sixth volume begin with this chapter . ) , ( do , , sit down upon a set -- they be better than nothing ) let we just look back upon the country we have pass ' through .-- -- what a wilderness have it be ! and what a mercy that we have not both of we be lose , or devoure by wild beasts in it ! do you think the world itself , , have contain such a number of they view ' and review ' we as we pass over the rivulet at the bottom of that little valley !-- and when we clim over that hill , and be just get out of sight -- good ! what a bray do they all set up together ! -- Prithee , shepherd ! who keep all those ?. . .. -- heaven be they comforter -- what ! be they never curry ?-- be they never take in in bray -- bray . Bray on , -- the world be deeply you debtor ;-- louder still -- that be nothing :-- in good sooth , you be ill - use :-- be I a , I solemnly declare , I would bray in g- sol - re - ut from morning , even unto night . . when my father have dance he white bear backward and forward through half a dozen page , he close the book for good a ' all , -- and in a kind of triumph redeliver it into 's hand , with a nod to lay it upon the ' scrutoire , where he find it , say he , shall be make to conjugate every word in the dictionary , backward and forward the same way ;--every word , , by this mean , you see , be convert into a thesis or a hypothesis ;-- every thesis and hypothesis have a off - spring of proposition ; -- and each proposition have its own consequence and conclusion ; every one of which lead the mind on again , into fresh track of enquiry and doubting .-- the force of this engine , add my father , be incredible in open a child 's head .--'Tis enough , brother , cry my uncle , to burst it into a thousand splinter .-- I presume , say , smile , -- it must be owe to this , --( for let logician say what they will , it be not to be account for sufficiently from the bare use of the ten predicament ) -- that the famous , amongst the many other astonishing feat of he childhood , of which the have give the world so exact a story , -- should be able to paste up in the public school at , so early as in the eighth year of he age , no less than four thousand five hundred and fifty different these , upon the most abstruse point of the most abstruse theology ; -- and to defend and maintain they in such sort , as to cramp and dumbfound he opponent .-- what be that , cry my father , to what be tell we of , who , almost in he nurse 's arm , learn all the sciences and liberal art without be teach any one of they ? -- what shall we say of the great Piereskius ?-- that be the very man , cry my uncle , I once tell you of , brother , who walk a matter of five hundred mile
mile , reckon from to , and from Shevling back again , merely to see 's fly chariot . -- he be a very great man ! add my uncle ( mean ) -- he be so , brother , say my father ( mean ) -- and have multiply he idea so fast , and increase he knowledge to such a prodigious stock , that , if we may give credit to a anecdote concern he , which we can not withhold here , without shak the authority of all anecdote whatever -- at seven year of age , he father commit entirely to he care the education of he younger brother , a boy of five year old , -- with the sole management of all he concern .-- be the father as wise as the son ? quoth my uncle should think not , say :-- but what be these , continue my father --( break out in a kind of enthusiasm ) -- what be these , to those prodigy of childhood in , , , , , , , and other -- some of which leave off they substantial form at nine year old , or sooner , and go on reasoning without they ;-- other go through they classic at seven ;-- write tragedy at eight ;-- be so wise at nine ,--'tbe think the be in he ; -- and at give such proof of he knowledge and goodness , that the monk imagine he be Antichrist , or nothing .-- other be master of fourteen language at ten ,-- finish the course of they rhetoric , poetry , logic , and ethic , at eleven , -- put forth they commentary upon and Capella at twelve , -- and at thirteen receive they degree in philosophy , law , and divinity :-- but you forget the great , quoth , who compose a work ( Nous aurion quelque interet , say , montrer qu'il n'a rien de ridicule 's 'il etoin veritable , au moin dan le send enigmatique que Erythraeus a ta he de lui donner . Cet auteur dit que pour comprendre comme Lipse , il a pu composer un ouvrage le premier jour de sa vie , il faut s'imaginer , que ce premier jour n'est pa celui de sa naissance charnelle , tmais celui au quel il a commence d'user de la raison ; il veut que c'ait ete a l'age de neuf and ; et il nous veut persuader que ce fut en cet age , que Lipse fit un poeme . -- tour est ingenieux , & c. & c. ) the day he be bear :-- they should have wip it up , say my uncle , and say no more about it . . when the cataplasm be ready , a scruple of decorum have unseasonably rise up in 's conscience , about hold the candle , whilst tie it on ; have not treat 's distemper with anodyne , -- and so a quarrel have ensue betwixt they . -- oh ! oh !--said Slop , cast a glance of undue freedom in 's face , as she decline the office ; -- then , I think I know you , madam -- you know I , ! cry fastidiously , and with a toss of she head , level evidently , not at he profession , but at the doctor himself , -- you know I ! cry again .-- doctor clap he finger and he thumb instantly upon he nostril ;-- 's spleen be ready to burst at it ;-- ' Tis false , say .-- come , come , , say , not a little elate with the success of he last thrust ,-- if you will not hold the candle , and look -- you may hold it and shut you eye :-- that be one of you popish shift , cry better , say , with a nod , than no shift at all , young woman ;-- I defy you , , cry , pull she shift sleeve below she elbow . it be almost impossible for two person to assist each other in a surgical case with a more splenetic cordiality . snatch up the cataplasm snatch up the candle ;-- a little this way , say ; look one way , and row another , instantly set fire to 's wig , which be somewhat bushy and unctuous withal , be burn out before it be well kindle .-- you impudent whore ! cry , --( for what be passion , but a wild beast ? ) -- you impudent whore , cry Slop , get upright , with the cataplasm in he hand ;-- I never be the destruction of any body 's nose , say , -- which be more than you can say :-- be it ? cry Slop , throw the cataplasm in she face ;-- yes , it be , cry , return the compliment with what be leave in the pan . . and file cross -bill against each other in the parlour ; which do , as the cataplasm have fail , they retire into the kitchen to prepare a fomentation for I ; -- and whilst that be do , my father determine the point as you will read . . you see ' ttis high time , say my father , address himself equally to my uncle and , to take this young creature out of these woman 's hand , and put he into those of a private governor . provide fourteen governors all at once to superintend he son Commodus 's education , -- and in six week he cashier five of they ;-- I know very well , continue my father , that 's mother be in love with a gladiator at the time of she conception , which account for a great many
many of 's cruelty when he become emperor ; -- but still I be of opinion , that those five whom dismiss , do 's temper , in that short time , more hurt than the other nine be able to rectify all they life long . now as I consider the person who be to be about my son , as the mirror in which he be to view himself from morning to night , by which he be to adjust he look , he carriage , and perhaps the inmost sentiment of he heart ;-- I would have one , , if possible , polished at all point , fit for my child to look into .-- this be very good sense , quoth my uncle to himself . -- there be , continue my father , a certain mien and motion of the body and all its part , both in acting and speak , which argue a man well within ; and I be not at all surprised that of , upon observe the hasty and untoward gesture of , should foretel he would one day become a apostate ; -- or that should turn he out of door , because of a indecent motion of he head , which go backwards and forward like a flail ; -- or that should conceive to be a scholar , from see he bind up a faggot , and thrust , as he do it , the small twig inwards .-- there be a thousand unnoticed opening , continue my father , which let a penetrate eye at once into a man 's soul ; and I maintain it , add he , that a man of sense do not lay down he hat in come into a room , -- or take it up in go out of it , but something escape , which discover he . it be for these reason , continue my father , that the governor I make choice of shall neither ( . . ) lisp , or squint , or wink , or talk loud , or look fierce , or foolish ; -- or bite he lip , or grind he tooth , or speak through he nose , or pick it , or blow it with he finger .- - he shall neither walk fast , -- or slow , or fold he arm , -- for that be laziness ; -- or hang they down , -- for that be folly ; or hide they in he pocket , for that be nonsense .-- he shall neither strike , or pinch , or tickle -- or bite , or cut he nail , or hawk , or spit , or snift , or drum with he foot or finger in company ; -- nor ( accord to ) shall he speak to any one in make water , -- nor shall he point to carrion or excrement .-- now this be all nonsense again , quoth my uncle to himself .-- I will have he , continue my father , cheerful , facete , jovial ; at the same time , prudent , attentive to business , vigilant , acute , argute , inventive , quick in resolve doubt and speculative question ; -- he shall be wise , and judicious , and learn :-- and why not humble , and moderate , and gentle - tempere , and good ? say :-- and why not , cry my uncle , free , and generous , and bountiful , and brave ?-- he shall , my dear , reply my father , get up and shake he by he hand .-- then , brother , answer my uncle , raise himself off the chair , and lay down he pipe to take hold of my father 's other hand , -- I humbly beg I may recommend poor 's son to you ;-- a tear of joy of the first water sparkle in my uncle 's eye , and another , the fellow to it , in the corporal 's , as the proposition be make ; -- you will see why when you read 's story :-- fool that I be ! nor can I recollect ( nor perhaps you ) without turn back to the place , what it be that hinder I from let the corporal tell it in he own word ; -- but the occasion be lose , -- I must tell it now in my own . . the story of . it be some time in the summer of that year in which be take by the ally , -- which be about seven year before my father come into the country , -- and about as many , after the time , that my uncle and have privately decamp from my father 's house in town , in order to lay some of the finest siege to some of the finest fortified city in -- when my uncle be one evening get he supper , with sit behind he at a small sideboard ,-- I say , sit -- for in consideration of the corporal 's lame knee ( which sometimes give he exquisite pain ) -- when my uncle dine or sup alone , he would never suffer the corporal to stand ; and the poor fellow 's veneration for he master be such , that , with a proper artillery , my uncle could have take Dendermond itself , with less trouble than he be able to gain this point over he ; for many a time when my uncle suppose the corporal 's leg be at rest , he would look back , and detect he stand behind he with the most dutiful respect : this breed more little squabble betwixt they , than all other cause for five - and - twenty year together -- but
but this be neither here nor there -- why do I mention it ?-- ask my pen ,-- it govern I , -- I govern not it . he be one evening sit thus at he supper , when the landlord of a little inn in the village come into the parlour , with a empty phial in he hand , to beg a glass or two of sack ; ' Tis for a poor gentleman ,-- I think , of the army , say the landlord , who have be take ill at my house four day ago , and have never hold up he head since , or have a desire to taste any thing , till just now , that he have a fancy for a glass of sack and a thin toast , -- I think , say he , take he hand from he forehead , it would comfort I .-- -- if I could neither beg , borrow , or buy such a thing -- add the landlord ,- - I would almost steal it for the poor gentleman , he be so ill .-- I hope in he will still mmend , continue he , -- we be all of we concerned for he . thou be a good - natured soul , I will answer for thee , cry my uncle ; and thou shalt drink the poor gentleman 's health in a glass of sack thyself , -- and take a couple of bottle with my service , and tell he he be heartily welcome to they , and to a dozen more if they will do he good . though I be persuade , say my uncle , as the landlord shut the door , he be a very compassionate fellow -- , -- yet I can not help entertaine a high opinion of he guest too ; there must be something more than common in he , that in so short a time should win so much upon the affections of he host ;-- and of he whole family , add the corporal , for they be all concerned for he ,.-- step after he , say my uncle , -- do , -- and ask if he know he name . -- I have quite forget it truly , say the landlord , come back into the parlour with the corporal , -- but I can ask he son again :-- have he a son with he then ? say my uncle .-- a boy , reply the landlord , of about eleven or twelve year of age ; -- but the poor creature have taste almost as little as he father ; he do nothing but mourn and lament for he night and day :- - he have not stir from the bed - side these two day . my uncle lay down he knife and fork , and thrust he plate from before he , as the landlord give he the account ; and , without be order , take away , without say one word , and in a few minute after bring he he pipe and tobacco . -- stay in the room a little , say my uncle . Tre !--say my uncle , after he lighte he pipe , and smoak would about a dozen whiff .-- Tre come in front of he master , and make he bow ; -- my uncle would on , and say no more .-- Corporal ! say my uncle -- the corporal make he bow .-- my uncle proceed no farther , but finish he pipe . Trim ! say my uncle , I have a project in my head , as it be a bad night , of wrap myself up warm in my roquelaure , and pay a visit to this poor gentleman . -- you honour 's roquelaure , reply the corporal , have not once be have on , since the night before you honou receive you wound , when we mount guard in the trench before the gate of ; -- and besides , it be so cold and rainy a night , that what with the roquelaure , and what with the weather , ot will be enough to give you honour you death , and bring on you honour 's torment in you groin . I fear so , reply my uncle ; but I be not at rest in my mind , , since the account the landlord have give I .-- I wish I have not know so much of this affair ,-- add my uncle , -- or that I have know more of it :--How shall we manage it ? leave it , a n't please you honour , to I , quoth the corporal ;-- I will take my hat and stick and go to the house and reconnoitre , and act accordingly ; and I will bring you honou a full account in a hour .-- thou shal go , , say my uncle , and here be a shilling for thee to drink with he servant .-- I shall get it all out of he , say the corporal , shutt the door . my uncle fill he second pipe ; and have it not be , that he now and then wander from the point , with consider whether it be not full as well to have the curtain of the tennaile a straight line , as a crooked one , -- he might be say to have think of nothing else but poor and he boy the whole time he smoak it . . the story of . it be not till my uncle have knock the ash out of he third pipe , that corporal Trim return from the inn , and give he the follow account . I despaire , at first , say the corporal , of
of be able to bring back you honour any kind of intelligence concern the poor sick lieutenant -- be he in the army , then ? say my uncle -- he be , say the corporal -- and in what regiment ? say my uncle -- I will tell you honour , reply the corporal , every thing straight forward , as I lear not it .-- then , , I will fill another pipe , say my uncle , and not interrupt thee till thou hast do ; so sit down at thy ease , , in the window - seat , and begin thy story again . the corporal make he old bow , which generally speak as plain as a bow could speak it -- you honour be good :-- and have do that , he sit down , as he be order , -- and begin the story to my uncle over again in pretty near the same word . I despaire at first , say the corporal , of be able to bring back any intelligence to you honour , about the lieutenant and he son ; for when I ask where he servant be , from whom i make myself sure of know every thing which be proper to be ask ,-- that be a right distinction , , say my uncle -- I be answer , an' please you honour , that he have no servant with he ; -- that he have come to the inn with hire horse , which , upon find himself unable to proceed ( to join , I suppose , the regiment ) , he have dismiss the morning after he come .-- if I get better , my dear , say he , as he give he purse to he son to pay the man , -- we can hire horse from hence .-- but alas ! the poor gentleman will never get from hence , say the landlady to I , -- for I hear the death - watch all night long ; -- and when he die , the youth , he son , will certainly die with he ; for he be break - heart already . I be hear this account , continue the corporal , when the youth come into the kitchen , to order the thing toast the landlord speak of ; -- but I will do it for my father myself , say the youth .-- pray let my save you the trouble , young gentleman , say I , take up a fork for the purpose , and offer he my chair to sit down upon by the fire , whilst I do it .-- I believe , , say he , very modestly , I can please he best myself .-- I be sure , say I , he honou will not like the toast the worse for be toast by a old soldier .-- the youth take hold of my hand , and instantly burst into tear . -- poor youth ! say my uncle , -- he have be breed up from a infant in the army , and the name of a soldier , , sound in he ear like the name of a friend ;--I wish I have he here . -- I never , in the longest march , say the corporal , have so great a mind to my dinner , as I have to cry with he for company :-- what could be the matter with I , a ' please you honour ? nothing in the world , , say my uncle , blow he nose , -- but that thou be a good - natured fellow . when I give he the toast , continue the corporal , I think it be proper to tell he I be captain 's servant , and that you honour ( though a stranger ) be extremely concerned for he father ; -- and that if there be any thing in you house or cellar --( and thou might 'st have add my purse too , say my uncle ) , -- he be heartily welcome to it :-- he make a very low bow ( which be mean to you honour ) , but no answer -- for he heart be full -- so he go up stair with the toast ;-- I warrant you , my dear , say I , as I open the kitchen - door , you father will be well again .-- 's curate be smoke a pipe by the kitchen fire , -- but say not a word good or bad to comfort the youth .-- I think it wrong ; add the corporal -- I think so too , say my uncle . when the lieutenant have take he glass of sack and toast , he feel himself a little revived , and send down into the kitchen , to let I know , that in about ten minute he should be glad if I would step up stair .-- I believe , say the landlord , he be go to say he prayer , -- for there be a book lay upon the chair by he bed - side , and as I shut the door , I see he son take up a cushion .-- I think , say the curate , that you gentleman of the army , , never say you prayer at all .-- I hear the poor gentleman say he prayer last night , say the landlady , very devoutly , and with my own ears , or I could not have believe it .-- be you sure of it ? reply the curate .-- a soldier , an' please you reverence , say I , pray as often ( of he own accord ) as a parson ; -- and when he be fight for he king ,
, and for he own life , and for he honour too , he have the most reason to pray to of any one in the whole world --'Twas well say of thee , , say my uncle . -- but when a soldier , say I , an' please you reverence , have be stand for twelve hour together in the trench , up to he knee in cold water , -- or engage , say I , for month together in long and dangerous march ; -- harass , perhaps , in he rear to - day ; -- harasse other to - morrow ; -- detach here ; -- countermand there ; -- rest this night out upon he arm ; -- beat up in he shirt the next ; -- benumb in he joint ;--perhaps without straw in he tent to kneel on ;-- must say he prayer how and when he can .-- I believe , say I ,-- for I be pique , quoth the corporal , for the reputation of the army ,-- I believe , an' please you reverence , say I , that when a soldier get time to pray , -- he pray as heartily as a parson , -- though not with all he fuss and hypocrisy .-- thou shouldst not have say that , , say my uncle , -- for only know who be a hypocrite , and who be not :-- at the great and general review of we all , corporal , at the day of judgment ( and not till then ) -- it will be see who have do they duty in this world , -- and who have not ; and we shall be advanced , Trim , accordingly .-- I hope we shall , say Trim .-- it be in the , say my uncle ; and I will show it thee to - morrow :-- in the mean time we may depend upon it , , for we comfort , say my uncle , that be so good and just a governor of the world , that if we have but do we duty in it , -- it will never be enquire into , whether we have do they in a red coat or a black one :-- I hope not , say the corporal -- but go on , , say my uncle , with thy story . when I go up , continue the corporal , into the lieutenant 's room , which I do not do till the expiration of the ten minute , -- he be lie in he bed with he head raise upon he hand , with he elbow upon the pillow , and a clean white cambrick handkerchief beside it :-- the youth be just stoop down to take up the cushion , upon which I suppose he have be knee , -- the book be laid upon the bed , -- and , as he rise , in take up the cushion with one hand , he reach out he other to take it away at the same time .-- let it remain there , my dear , say the lieutenant . he do not offer to speak to I , till I have walk up close to he bed - side :-- if you be 's servant , say he , you must present my thanks to you master , with my little boy 's thanks along with they , for he courtesy to I ; -- if he be of 's -- say the lieutenant .-- I tell he you honour be -- then , say he , I serve three campaigns with he in Flander , and remember he , -- but ' ti most likely , as I have not the honour of any acquaintance with he , that he know nothing of I .-- you will tell he , however , that the person he good - nature have lay under obligation to he , be one , a lieutenant in 's -- but he know I not , -- say he , a second time , musing ;-- possibly he may my story -- add he -- pray tell the captain , I be the ensign at , whose wife be most unfortunately kill with a musket - shot , as she lay in my arm in my tent .-- I remember the story , a n't please you honour , say I , very well .-- do you so ? say he , wip he eye with he handkerchief -- then well may I .-- in say this , he draw a little ring out of he bosom , which seem tie with a black ribband about he neck , and kiss ' it twice -- here , , say he , -- the boy fly across the room to the bed - side , -- and fall down upon he knee , take the ring in he hand , and kiss it too , -- then kiss he father , and sit down upon the bed and wept . I wish , say my uncle , with a deep sigh ,-- I wish , , I be asleep . you honour , reply the corporal , be too much concerned ; -- shall I pour you honour out a glass of sack to you pipe ?-- , , say my uncle . I remember , say my uncle , sigh again , the story of the ensign and he wife , with a circumstance he modesty omit ; -- and particularly well that he , as well as she , upon some account or other ( I forget what ) be universally pitie by the whole regiment ; -- but finish the story thou be upon :--'Tis finish already , say the corporal , -- for I could stay no longer , -- so
so wish he honour a good night ; young rise from off the bed , and see I to the bottom of the stair ; and as we go down together , tell I , they have come from , and be on they route to join the regiment in Flanders .-- but alas ! say the corporal , -- the lieutenant 's last day 's march be over .-- then what be to become of he poor boy ? cry my uncle . . the story of . it be to my uncle 's eternal honour ,-- though I tell it only for the sake of those , who , when coop would in betwixt a natural and a positive law , know not , for they soul , which way in the world to turn themselves -- that notwithstand my uncle be warmly engage at that time in carry on the siege of , parallel with the ally , who press theirs on so vigorously , that they scarce allow he time to get he dinner -- that nevertheless he give up , though he have already make a lodgment upon the counterscarp ; -- and bend he whole thought towards the private distress at the inn ; and except that he order the garden gate to be bolt up , by which he might be say to have turn the siege of into a blockade , -- he leave to itself -- to be relieve or not by the french king , as the french king think good ; and only consider how he himself should relieve the poor lieutenant and he son . -- that kind , who be a friend to the friendless , shall recompence thee for this . thou hast leave this matter short , say my uncle to the corporal , as he be put he to bed , -- and I will tell thee in what , .-- in the first place , when thou madest a offer of my service to , -- as sickness and travelling be both expensive , and thou knowest he be but a poor lieutenant , with a son to subsist as well as himself out of he pay , -- that thou didst not make a offer to he of my purse ; because , have he stand in need , thou knowest , , he have be as welcome to it as myself . -- you honour know , say the corporal , I have no order ;-- true , quoth my uncle , -- thou didst very right , , as a soldier , -- but certainly very wrong as a man . in the second place , for which , indeed , thou hast the same excuse , continue my uncle , -- when thou offeredst he whatever be in my house , -- thou shouldst have offer he my house too :-- a sick brother officer should have the best quarter , , and if we have he with we , -- we could tend and look to he :-- thou be a excellent nurse thyself , ,-- and what with thy care of he , and the old woman 's and he boy 's , and mine together , we might recruit he again at once , and set he upon he leg .-- -- in a fortnight or three week , add my uncle , smile , -- he might march . -- he will never march ; an' please you honour , in this world , say the corporal :-- he will march ; say my uncle , rise up from the side of the bed , with one shoe off :-- a ' please you honour , say the corporal , he will never march but to he grave :-- he shall march , cry my uncle , march the foot which have a shoe on , though without advancee a inch , -- he shall march to he regiment .-- he can not stand it , say the corporal ; -- he shall be support , say my uncle ;-- he will drop at last , say the corporal , and what will become of he boy ?-- he shall not drop , say my uncle , firmly .-- a - well - og day , -- do what we can for he , say , maintain he point , -- the poor soul will die :-- he shall not die , by , cry my uncle . -- the , which flow up to heaven 's chancery with the oath , blush ' as he give it in ; -- and the recording angel , as he write it down , dropp would a tear upon the word , and blot it out for ever . . -- my uncle go to he bureau , -- put he purse into he breech pocket , and have order the corporal to go early in the morning for a physician , -- he go to bed , and fall asleep . . the story of . the sun look bright the morning after , to every eye in the village but 's and he afflict son 's ; the hand of death press heavy upon he eye - lid , -- and hardly could the wheel at the cistern turn round its circle , -- when my uncle , who have rise up a hour before he wont time , enter the lieutenant 's room , and without preface or apology , sit himself down upon the chair by the bed - side , and , independently of all mode and custom , open the curtain in the manner a old friend and brother officer would have do it , and ask he how he do , -- how he have rest in the night , -- what be he complaint ,-- where be he pain ,
, -- and what he could do to help he :-- and without give he time to answer any one of the enquiry , go on , and tell he of the little plan which he have be concert with the corporal the night before for he .-- -- you shall go home directly , , say my uncle , to my house , -- and we will send for a doctor to see what be the matter , -- and we will have a apothecary , -- and the corporal shall be you nurse ; -- and I will be you servant , . there be a frankness in my uncle , -- not the effect of familiarity , -- but the cause of it , -- which let you at once into he soul , and shew you the goodness of he nature ; to this there be something in he look , and voice , and manner , superad , which eternally beckon to the unfortunate to come and take shelter under he , so that before my uncle have half finish the kind offer he be make to the father , have the son insensibly press up close to he knee , and have take hold of the breast of he coat , and be pull it towards he .-- the blood and spirit of , which be wax cold and slow within he , and be retreat to they last citadel , the heart -- rally back , -- the film forsook he eye for a moment , -- he look up wishfully in my uncle 's face , -- then cast a look upon he boy , -- and that ligament , fine as it be , -- be never break .-- instantly ebb would again , -- the film return to its place , -- the pulse flutter -- stopp ' -- go on -- throbb ' -- stopp would again -- move -- stopp ' -- shall I go on ?-- no . . I be so impatient to return to my own story , that what remains of young 's , that be , from this turn of he fortune , to the time my uncle recommend he for my preceptor , shall be tell in a very few word in the next chapter .-- all that be necessary to be add to this chapter be as follow .-- that my uncle , with young in he hand , attend the poor lieutenant , as chief mourner , to he grave . that the governor of pay he obsequy all military honour , -- and that , not to be behind - hand -- pay he all ecclesiastic -- for he bury he in he chancel :-- and it appear likewise , he preach a funeral sermon over he -- I say it appear , -- for it be 's custom , which I suppose a general one with those of he profession , on the first leaf of every sermon which he compose , to chronicle down the time , the place , and the occasion of its be preach : to this , he be ever wo nt to add some short comment or stricture upon the sermon itself , seldom , indeed , much to its credit :-- for instance , this sermon upon the jewish dispensation -- I do not like it at all ;-- though I own there be a world of - Landish knowledge in it ;-- but ' ti all tritical , and most tritically put together .- - this be but a flimsy kind of a composition ; what be in my head when I make it ? -- . the excellency of this text be , that it will suit any sermon , -- and of this sermon , -- that it will suit any text .-- -- for this sermon I shall be hang , -- for I have steal the greatest part of it . find I out . > set a thief to catch a thief .-- on the back of half a dozen I find write , so , so , and no more -- and upon a couple Moderato ; by which , as far as one may gather from 's italian dictionary , -- but mostly from the authority of a piece of green whipcord , which seem to have be the unravelling of 's whip - lash , with which he have leave we the two sermon mark , and the half dozen of so , so , tie fast together in one bundle by themselves , -- one may safely suppose he mean pretty near the same thing . there be but one difficulty in the way of this conjecture , which be this , that the moderato' be five time better than the so , so be ; -- show ten time more knowledge of the human heart ; -- have seventy time more wit and spirit in they ;--( and , to rise properly in my climax ) -- discover a thousand time more genius ; -- and to cry all , be infinitely more entertaining than those tie up with they :-- for which reason , whene 'er 's dramatic sermon be offer to the world , though I shall admit but one out of the whole number of the so , so 's , I shall , nevertheless , adventure to print the two moderato 's without any sort of scruple . what could mean by the word lentament , -- tenute ,-- grave , -- and sometimes adagio , -- as apply to theological composition , and with which he have characterise some of these sermon , I dare not venture to guess .-- I be more puzzl still upon find a l'octava alta ! upon one ;-- con strepito upon the back of another ;-- upon a third ;--
;-- capella upon a fourth ;-- Con l'arco upon this ; -- l'arco upon that .-- all I know is , that they be musical term , and have a meaning ; -- and as he be a musical man , I will make no doubt , but that by some quaint application of such metaphor to the composition in hand , they impress very distinct idea of they several character upon he fancy ,-- whatever they may do upon that of other . amongst these , there be that particular sermon which have unaccountably lead I into this digression -- the funeral sermon upon poor , write out very fairly , as if from a hasty copy .-- I take notice of it the more , because it seem to have be he favourite composition -- it be upon mortality ; and be tie length - way and cross -way with a yarn thrum , and then roll up and twist round with a half - sheet of dirty blue paper , which seem to have be once the cast cover of a general review , which to this day smell horribly of horse drug .-- whether these mark of humiliation be design , -- I somethe doubt ; -- because at the end of the sermon ( and not at the beginning of it ) -- very different from he way of treat the rest , he have write -- ! -- though not very offensively , -- for it be at two inche , at least , and a half 's distance from , and below the concluding line of the sermon , at the very extremity of the page , and in that right hand corner of it , which , you know , be generally cover with you thumb ; and , to do it justice , it be write besides with a crow 's quill so faintly in a small italian hand , as scarce to solicit the eye towards the place , whether you thumb be there or not ,-- so that from the manner of it , it stand half excuse ; and be write moreover with very pale ink , dilute almost to nothing ,--'ti more like a ritratto of the shadow of vanity , than of herself -- of the two ; resembl rather a faint thought of transient applause , secretly stirr up in the heart of the composer ; than a gross mark of it , coarsely obtrude upon the world . with all these extenuation , I be aware , that in publish this , I do no service to 's character as a modest man ; -- but all man have they failings ! and what lessen this still farther , and almost wipe it away , be this ; that the word be strike through sometime afterwards ( as appear from a different tint of the ink ) with a line quite across it in this manner , ( cross out ) -- as if he have retract , or be asham of the opinion he have once entertained of it . these short characters of he sermon be always write , except in this one instance , upon the first leaf of he sermon , which serve as a cover to it ; and usually upon the inside of it , which be turn towards the text ; -- but at the end of he discourse , where , perhaps , he have five or six page , and sometimes , perhaps , a whole score to turn himself in , -- he take a large circuit , and , indeed , a much more mettlesome one ; -- as if he have snatch the occasion of unlacing himself with a few more frolicksome stroke at vice , than the straitness of the pulpit allow .-- these , though hussar - like , they skirmish lightly and out of all order , be still auxiliary on the side of virtue ; -- tell I then , , why they should not be print together ? . when my uncle have turn every thing into money , and settle all account betwixt the agent of the regiment and , and betwixt and all mankind , -- there remain nothing more in my uncle 's hand , than a old regimental coat and a sword ; so that my uncle find little or no opposition from the world in take administration . the coat my uncle give the corporal ; -- wear it , , say my uncle , as long as it will hold together , for the sake of the poor lieutenant -- and this , -- say my uncle , take up the sword in he hand , and draw it out of the scabbard as he speak -- and this , , I will save for thee ,-- ' tis all the fortune , continue my uncle , hang it up upon a crook , and point to it ,--'tis all the fortune , my dear , which have leave thee ; but if he have give thee a heart to fight thy way with it in the world , -- and thou doest it like a man of honour ,--'tis enough for we . as soon as my uncle have lay a foundation , and teach he to inscribe a regular polygon in a circle , he send he to a public school , where , except and , at which time the corporal be punctually dispatch for he , -- he remain to the spring of the year , seventeen ; when the story of the emperor 's send he army into against the Turk , kindl a spark of fire in he bosom , he leave he and without , and throw himself upon he knee before my uncle , beg he father 's sword , and my uncle 's
's leave along with it , to go and try he fortune under .-- do my uncle forget he wound and cry out , ! I will go with thee , and thou shalt fight beside I -- and twice he lay he hand upon he groin , and hang down he head in sorrow and disconsolation .-- my uncle take down the sword from the crook , where it have hang untouched ever since the lieutenant 's death , and deliver it to the corporal to brighten up ; -- and have detain a single fortnight to equip he , and contract for he passage to , -- he put the sword into he hand . -- if thou be brave , , say my uncle , this will not fail thee , -- but , say he ( muse a little ) , -- -- and if she do , -- add my uncle , embrace he , come back again to I , , and we will shape thee another course . the greatest injury could not have oppress the heart of more than my uncle 's paternal kindness ; -- he part from my uncle , as the best of son from the best of fathers -- both drop tear -- and as my uncle give he he last kiss , he slipp sixty guinea , tie up in a old purse of he father 's , in which be he mother 's ring , into he hand , -- and bid bless he . . get up to the Imperial army just time enough to try what metal he sword be make of , at the defeat of the before ; but a series of unmerited mischance have pursue he from that moment , and trod close upon he heel for four year together after ; he have withstood these buffeting to the last , till sickness overtake he at , from whence he write my uncle word , he have lose he time , he service , he health , and , in short , every thing but he sword ; -- and be wait for the first ship to return back to he . as this letter come to hand about six week before 's accident , be hourly expect ; and be uppermost in my uncle 's mind all the time my father be give he and a description of what kind of a person he would chuse for a preceptor to I : but as my uncle think my father at first somewhat fanciful in the accomplishment he require , he forbore mention 's name , -- till the character , by 's inter-position , end unexpectedly , in one , who should be gentle - tempere , and generous , and good , it impress the image of , and he interest , upon my uncle so forcibly , he rise instantly off he chair ; and lay down he pipe , in order to take hold of both my father 's hand -- I beg , brother , say my uncle , I may recommend poor 's son to you -- I beseech you do , add -- he have a good heart , say my uncle -- and a brave one too , an' please you honour , say the corporal . -- the best heart , , be ever the bravest , reply my uncle .-- and the greatest coward , an' please you honour , in we regiment , be the greatest rascal in it .-- there be serjeant , and ensign -- -- we will talk of they , say my father , another time . . what a jovial and a merry world would this be , may it please you worship , but for that inextricable labyrinth of debt , car , woe , want , grief , discontent , melancholy , large jointure , imposition , and lie ! , like a son of a w . . . , as my father call he for it , -- to exal himself , -- debase I to death , -- and make ten thousand time more of 's accident , than there be any grounds for ; so that in a week 's time , or less , it be in every body 's mouth , that poor master . . .entirely .-- and fame , who love to double every thing , -- in three day more , have sworn , positively she see it , -- and all the world , as usual , give credit to she evidence --' that the nursery window have not only . . . ;-- but that . . . 's also . ' could the world have be sue like a body - corporate , -- my father have bring a action upon the case , and trounce it sufficiently ; but to fall foul of individual about it -- as every soul who have mention the affair , do it with the greatest pity imaginable ;--'twa like fly in the very face of he best friend :-- and yet to acquiesce under the report , in silence -- be to acknowledge it openly , -- at least in the opinion of one half of the world ; and to make a bustle again , in contradict it , -- be to confirm it as strongly in the opinion of the other half .-- -- be ever poor devil of a country gentleman so hamper ? say my father . I would show he publickly , say my uncle , at the market cross . --'Twill have no effect , say my father . . -- I will put he , however , into breech , say my father , -- let the world say what it will . . there be a thousand resolution , , both in church and state , as
as well as in matter , Madam , of a more private concern ;-- which , though they have carry all the appearance in the world of be take , and enter upon in a hasty , hare - brain , and unadvised manner , were , notwithstand this , ( and could you or I have get into the cabinet , or stand behind the curtain , we should have find it be so ) weigh , poize , and perpend -- argue upon -- canvass through -- enter into , and examine on all side with so much coolness , that the goddess of Coolness herself ( I do not take upon I to prove she existence ) could neither have wish it , or do it better . of the number of these be my father 's resolution of put I into breech ; which , though determine at once , -- in a kind of huff , and a defiance of all mankind , have , nevertheless , be pro' and conn' , and judicially talk over betwixt he and my mother about a month before , in two several bed of justice , which my father have hold for that purpose . I shall explain the nature of these bed of justice in my next chapter ; and in the chapter follow that , you shall step with I , Madam , behind the curtain , only to hear in what kind of manner my father and my mother debate between themselves , this affair of the breech , -- from which you may form a idea , how they debat all lesser matters . . the ancient Goth of , who ( the learned be positive ) be first seat in the country between the and the Oder , and who afterwards incorporate the , the , and some other clans to th'ey -- have all of they a wise custom of debating every thing of importance to they state , twice , that be , -- once drunk , and once sober :-- -- that they councils might not want vigour ; -- and sober -- that they might not want discretion . now my father be entirely a water - drinker , -- be a long time gravell almost to death , in turn this as much to he advantage , as he do every other thing which the ancient do or say ; and it be not till the seventh year of he marriage , after a thousand fruitless experiment and device , that he hit upon a expedient which answer the purpose ; -- and that be , when any difficult and momentous point be to be settle in the family , which require great sobriety , and great spirit too , in its determination ,- - he fix and set apart the first night in the month , and the night which immediately proceed it , to argue it over , in bed with my mother : by which contrivance , if you consider , , with yourself , . . .. these my father , humorously enough , call he bed of justice ; -- for from the two different counsel take in these two different humours , a middle one be generally find out which touch the point of wisdom as well , as if he have get drunk and sober a hundred time . I must not be make a secret of to the world , that this answer full as well in literary discussion , as either in military or conjugal ; but it be not every author that can try the experiment as the and do it -- or , if he can , may it be always for he body 's health ; and to do it , as my father do it , -- be I sure it would be always for he soul 's . my way be this :-- in all nice and ticklish discussion , --( of which , heaven know , there be but too many in my book ) -- where I find I can not take a step without the danger of have either they worship or they reverence upon my back -- I write one - half full , -- and t'other fasting ; -- or write it all full , -- and correct it fast ; -- or write it fast , -- and correct it full , for they all come to the same thing :-- so that with a less variation from my father 's plan , than my father 's from the -- I feel myself upon a par with he in he first bed of justice , -- and no way inferior to he in he second .-- these different and almost irreconcileable effect , flow uniformly from the wise and wonderful mechanism of nature , -- of which , -- be she be the honour .-- all that we can do , be to turn and work the machine to the improvement and better manufactory of the art and science .-- now , when I write full , -- I write as if I be never to write fast again as long as I live ; -- that be , I write free from the car as well as the terror of the world .-- i count not the number of my scars , -- nor do my fancy go forth into dark entry and bye - corner to ante - date my stab .-- in a word , my pen take its course ; and I write on as much from the fulness of my heart , as my stomach .-- but when , a ' please you honour , I indite fasting , ' ti a different history .-- I pay the world all possible attention and respect , -- and have as great a share ( whilst
whilst it last ) of that under strapping virtue of discretion as the best of you .-- so that betwixt both , I write a careless kind of a civil , nonsensical , good - humoured book , which will do all you heart good -- -- and all you head too ,-- provide you understand it . . we should begin , say my father , turn himself half round in bed , and shift he pillow a little towards my mother 's , as he open the debate -- we should begin to think , . , of put this boy into breech .-- we should so , --say my mother .-- we defer it , my dear , quoth my father , shamefully .-- I think we do , , -- say my mother . -- not but the child look extremely well , say my father , in he vest and tunick .-- -- he do look very well in they , -- reply my mother .-- -- and for that reason it would be almost a sin , add my father , to take he out of th'ey .-- -- it would so , --say my mother :-- but indeed he be grow a very tall lad ,- - rejoin my father . -- he be very tall for he age , indeed , -- say my mother .-- -- I can not ( make two syllable of it ) imagine , quoth my father , who the deuce he take after .-- I can not conceive , for my life , say my mother .-- !--say my father . ( the dialogue cease for a moment . ) -- ( I be very short myself , -- continue my father gravely . you be very short , , -- say my mother . Humph ! quoth my father to himself , a second time : in mutter which , he pluck he pillow a little further from my mother 's , -- and turn about again , there be a end of the debate for three minute and a half . -- when he get these breech make , cry my father in a higher tone , he will look like a beast in 'em . he will be very awkward in they at first , reply my mother . -- and ot will be lucky , if that be the worst o not , add my father . it will be very lucky , answer my mother . I suppose , reply my father , -- make some pause first , -- he will be exactly like other people 's child .-- exactly , say my mother .-- -- though I shall be sorry for that , add my father : and so the debate stopp would again .-- -- they should be of leather , say my father , turn he about again .-- they will last he , say my mother , the longest . but he can have no lining to th'ey , reply my father .-- he cannot , say my mother . ' Twere better to have they of fustian , quoth my father . nothing can be better , quoth my mother .-- -- dimity , --reply my father :--'Tis best of all , -- reply my mother . -- one must not give he he death , however ,-- interrupt my father . by no means , say my mother :-- and so the dialogue stand still again . I be resolve , however , quoth my father , break silence the fourth time , he shall have no pocket in they .-- -- there be no occasion for any , say my mother .-- I mean in he coat and waistcoat , -- cry my father . -- I mean so too , -- reply my mother . -- though if he get 's a gig or top -- poor soul ! it be a crown and a sceptre to they , -- they should have where to secure it .-- order it as you please , , reply my mother .-- -- but do not you think it right ? add my father , press the point home to she . perfectly , say my mother , if it please you , .-- -- there be for you ! cry my father , lose he temper -- Please I !-- you never will distinguish , . , nor shall I ever teach you to do it , betwixt a point of pleasure and a point of convenience .-- this be on the night :-- and further this chapter sayeth not . . after my father have debat the affair of the breech with my mother , -- he consult upon it ; and use my father ten time worse in the consultation ( if possible ) than even my father have use my mother : for as have write a quarto express , re ,-- it be 's business to have give my father some light . -- on the contrary , my father might as well have think of extract the seven cardinal virtue out of a long beard , -- as of extract a single word out of upon the subject . upon every other article of ancient dress , be very communicative to my father ; -- give he a full satisfactory account of the , or loose gown . the Chlamy . the Ephod . the , or . the . the . the , with its Cucullus . the Paludamentum . the Praetexta . the , or soldier 's jerkin . the Trabea : of which , accord to , there be three kind .-- -- but what be all these to the breech ? say my father . throw he down upon the counter all kind of shoe which have be in fashion with the .-- there be ,
, the open shoe . the close shoe . the slip shoe . the wooden shoe . the soc . the buskin . and the military shoe with hobnail in it , which take notice of . there be , the clog . the pattin . the pantoufle . the brogue . the sandal , with latchet to they . there be , the feel shoe . the linen shoe . the laced shoe . the braided shoe . the calceus incisus . and the calceus rostratus . shew my father how well they all fit , -- in what manner they lace on , -- with what point , strap , thong , latchet , ribband , jagg , and end .-- -- but I want to be inform about the breech , say my father . inform my father that the manufacture stuff of various fabric , -- some plain , -- some striped ,-- other diaper throughout the whole contexture of the wool , with silk and gold -- that line do not begin to be in common use till towards the declension of the empire , when the come to settle amongst they , bring it into vogue . -- that person of quality and fortune distinguished themselves by the fineness and whiteness of they clothes ; which colour ( next to , which be appropriate to the great office ) they most affect , and wear on they birth - day and public rejoicing .-- that it appear from the best historian of those time , that they frequently send they clothes to the fuller , to be clean have and whiten :-- but that the inferior people , to avoid that expence , generally wore brown clothes , and of a something coarser texture ,-- till towards the beginning of 's reign , when the slave dress like he master , and almost every distinction of habiliment be lose , but the . and what be the ? say my father . tell he , that the point be still litigat amongst the learn :-- that , , , , , , , , and , all differ from each other , -- and he from they : that some take it to be the button , -- some the coat itself , -- other only the colour of it ;-- that the great in he Wardrobe of the Ancient , chap . 12-- honestly say , he know not what it be , -- whether a tibula , -- a stud ,-- a button , -- a loop , -- a buckle , -- or clasp and keeper .-- -- my father lose the horse , but not the saddle -- they be hook and eye , say my father -- and with hook and eye he order my breech to be make . . we be now go to enter upon a new scene of event .-- -- leave we then the breech in the taylor 's hand , with my father stand over he with he cane , read he as he sit at work a lecture upon the latus clavus , and point to the precise part of the waistband , where he be determined to have it sew on .-- leave we my mother --( truest of all the Poco-curante 's of she sex ! ) -- careless about it , as about every thing else in the world which concern she ; -- that be ,-- indifferent whether it be do this way or that , -- provide it be but do at all .-- leave we likewise to the full profit of all my dishonour .-- leave we poor to recover , and get home from as he can .- - and last of all , -- because the hardest of all -- let we leave , if possible , myself :-- but ' ttis impossible ,-- I must go along with you to the end of the work . . if the reader have not a clear conception of the rood and the half of ground which lay at the bottom of my uncle 's kitchen - garden , and which be the scene of so many of he delicious hour , -- the fault be not in I , -- but in he imagination ; -- for I be sure I give he so minute a description , I be almost asham of it . when be look forwards one afternoon , into the great transaction of future time , -- and recollect for what purpose this little plot , by a decree fast bound down in iron , have be destin , -- she give a nod to ,--'twas enough -- throw half a spade full of she kindliest compost upon it , with just so much clay in it , as to retain the form of angles and indenting , -- and so little of it too , as not to cling to the spade , and render work of so much glory , nasty in foul weather . my uncle come down , as the reader have be inform , with plan along with he , of almost every fortified town in and ; so let the duke of , or the ally , have set down before what town they please , my uncle be prepare for they . he way , which be the simplest one in the world , be this ; as soon as ever a town be invest --( but sooner when the design be know ) to take the plan of it ( let it be what tow it would ) , and enlarge it upon a scale to the exact size of he bowling - green ; upon the surface of which , by means of a large role of packthread , and a number of small piquet drive into the ground , at the several
several angles and redan , he transfer the line from he paper ; then take the profile of the place , with its work , to determine the depth and slope of the ditch , -- the talus of the glacis , and the precise height of the several banquet , parapet , &c .-- he set the corporal to work -- and sweetly go it on :-- the nature of the soil , -- the nature of the work itself , -- and above all , the good - nature of my uncle Toby sit by from morning to night , and chat kindly with the corporal upon past - do deed ,-- leave little else but the ceremony of the name . when the place be finish in this manner , and put into a proper posture of defence , -- it be invest , -- and my uncle and the corporal begin to run they first parallel .-- I beg I may not be interrupt in my story , by be tell , that the first parallel should be at least three hundred toise distant from the main body of the place , -- and that I have not leave a single inch for it ; -- for my uncle take the liberty of incroach upon he kitchen - garden , for the sake of enlarge he work on the bowling - green , and for that reason generally run he first and second parallel betwixt two row of he cabbage and he cauliflower ; the convenience and inconvenience of which will be consider at large in the history of my uncle Toby and the corporal 's campaigns , of which , this I be now write be but a sketch , and will be finish , if I conjecture right , in three page ( but there be no guessing ) -- the campaigns themselves will take up as many book ; and therefore I apprehend it would be hang too great a weight of one kind of matter in so flimsy a performance as this , to rhapsodize they , as I once intend , into the body of the work -- surely they have better be print apart , -- we will consider the affair -- so take the follow sketch of they in the mean time . . when the town , with its work , be finish , my uncle and the corporal begin to run they first parallel -- not at random , or any how -- but from the same point and distance the ally have begin to run theirs ; and regulate they approach and attack , by the account my uncle receive from the daily papers , -- they go on , during the whole siege , step by step with the ally . when the duke of make a lodgment , -- my uncle make a lodgment too .-- and when the face of a bastion be batter down , or a defence ruin , -- the corporal take he mattock and do as much , -- and so on ; -- gain ground , and make themselves master of the work one after another , till the town fall into they hand . to one who take pleasure in the happy state of other , -- there could not have be a greater sight in world , than on a post morning , in which a practicable breach have be make by the duke of , in the main body of the place , -- to have stood behind the horn - beam hedge , and observe the spirit with which my uncle , with behind he , sally forth ; -- the one with the Gazette in he hand , -- the other with a spade on he shoulder to execute the contents .-- what a honest triumph in my uncle 's look as he march up to the rampart ! what intense pleasure swim in he eye as he stand over the corporal , read the paragraph ten time over to he , as he be at work , lest , peradventure , he should make the breach a inch too wide , -- or leave it a inch too narrow . -- but when the chamade be beat , and the corporal help my uncle up it , and follow with the colour in he hand , to fix they upon the rampart -- ! ! !-- but what avail apostroph ?--with all you element , wet or dry , ye never compound so intoxicat a dratch . in this track of happiness for many year , without one interruption to it , except now and then when the wind continue to blow due west for a week or ten day together , which detain the Flander mail , and keep they so long in torture , -- but still ' tbe the torture of the happy -- in this track , I say , do my uncle and move for many year , every year of which , and sometimes every month , from the invention of either the one or the other of they , add some new conceit or quirk of improvement to they operation , which always open fresh spring of delight in carry they on . the first year 's campaign be carry on from beginning to end , in the plain and simple method I have relate . in the second year , in which my uncle take and , he think he might afford the expence of four handsome draw - bridge ; of two of which I have give a exact description in the former part of my work . at the latter end of the same year he add a couple of gate with port - cullise :-- these last be convert afterwards into orgue , as the better thing ; and during the winter
winter of the same year , my uncle , instead of a new suit of clothes , which he always have at , treat himself with a handsome sentry - box , to stand at the corner of the bowling - green , betwixt which point and the foot of the glacis , there be leave a little kind of a esplanade for he and the corporal to confer and hold councils of war upon . -- the sentry - box be in case of rain . all these be paint white three time over the ensue spring , which enable my uncle to take the field with great splendour . my father would often say to , that if any mortal in the whole universe have do such a thing except he brother , it would have be look upon by the world as one of the most refin satire upon the parade and prance manner in which . from the beginning of the war , but particularly that very year , have take the field -- but ' tis not my brother 's nature , kind soul ! my father would add , to insult any one . -- but let we go on . . I must observe , that although in the first year 's campaign , the word town be often mention , -- yet there be no town at that time within the polygon ; that addition be not make till the summer follow the spring in which the bridge and sentry - box be pain , which be the third year of my uncle 's campaigns , -- when upon he take , , and , and and , one after another , a thought come into the corporal 's head , that to talk of take so many town , without one town to show for it , -- be a very nonsensical way of go to work , and so propose to my uncle , that they should have a little model of a town built for they ,- - to be run up together of slit deal , and then paint , and clap within the interior polygon to serve for all . my uncle feel the good of the project instantly , and instantly agree to it , but with the addition of two singular improvement , of which he be almost as proud as if he have be the original inventor of the project itself . the one be , to have the town build exactly in the style of those of which it be most likely to be the representative :-- with grated window , and the gable end of the house , face the street , &c . &c .-- as those in and , and the rest of the town in and . the other be , not to have the house run up together , as the corporal propose , but to have every house independent , to hook on , or off , so as to form into the plan of whatever town they please . this be put directly into hand , and many and many a look of mutual congratulation be exchange between my uncle and the corporal , as the carpenter do the work . -- it answer prodigiously the next summer -- the town be a perfect Proteus - - it be , and , and , and , and , -- and then it be and , and and . -- surely never do any town act so many part , since and , as my uncle 's town do . in the fourth year , my uncle Toby think a town look foolishly without a church , add a very fine one with a steeple .-- be for have bell in it ;--my uncle say , the metal have better be cast into cannon . this lead the way the next campaign for half a dozen brass field - piece , to be plan three and three on each side of my uncle 's sentry - box ; and in a short time , these lead the way for a train of somewhat larger , -- and so on --( as must always be the case in hobby - horsical affair ) from piece of half a inch bore , till it come at last to my father 's jack boot . the next year , which be that in which be besiege , and at the close of which both and fall into we hand , -- my uncle be sadly put to it for proper ammunition ;-- I say proper ammunition -- because he great artillery would not bear powder ; and ' twas well for the Shandy family they would not -- for so full be the papers , from the beginning to the end of the siege , of the incessant firing keep up by the besieger , -- and so heat be my uncle 's imagination with the account of they , that he have infallibly shot away all he estate . something therefore be want as a succedaneum , especially in one or two of the more violent paroxysm of the siege , to keep up something like a continual firing in the imagination , -- and this something , the corporal , whose principal strength lay in invention , supply by a entire new system of battering of he own ,--without which , this have be object to by military critic , to the end of the world , as one of the great desiderata of my uncle 's apparatus . this will not be explain the worse , for set off , as I generally do , at a little distance from the subject . . with two or three other trinket , small in themselves , but of great regard , which poor , the corporal 's unfortunate brother
brother , have send he over , with the account of he marriage with the 's widow -- there be a Montero-cap and two turkish tobacco -pipe . the Montero-cap I shall describe by and bye .-- the Turkish tobacco -pipe have nothing particular in they , they be fitte up and ornament as usual , with flexible tube of leather and gold wire , and mount at they end , the one of they with ivory , -- the other with black ebony , tipp would with silver . my father , who see all thing in light different from the rest of the world , would say to the corporal , that he ought to look upon these two present more as token of he brother 's nicety , than he affection .-- do not care , , he would say , to put on the cap , or to smoke in the tobacco - pipe of a .-- bless you honour , the corporal would say ( give a strong reason to the contrary ) --how can that be ? the Montero-cap be scarlet , of a superfine spanish cloth , dye in grain , and mount all round with fur , except about four inch in the front , which be face with a light blue , slightly embroider , -- and seem to have be the property of a quarter - master , not of foot , but of horse , as the word denote . the corporal be not a little proud of it , as well for its own sake , as the sake of the giver , so seldom or never put it on but upon - day ; and yet never be a -cap put to so many use ; for in all controvert point , whether military or culinary , provide the corporal be sure he be in the right , -- it be either he oath , -- he wager , -- or he gift . --' Tbe he gift in the present case . I will be bound , say the corporal , speak to himself , to give away my -cap to the first beggar who come to the door , if I do not manage this matter to he honour 's satisfaction . the completion be no further off , than the very next morning ; which be that of the storm of the counterscarp betwixt the , to the right , and the gate , -- and on the left , between 's and the river . as this be the most memorable attack in the whole war , -- the most gallant and obstinate on both side , -- and I must add the most bloody too , for it cost the ally themselves that mor above eleven hundr man ,-- my uncle prepare himself for it with a more than ordinary solemnity . the eve which proceed , as my uncle go to bed , he order he ramallie wig , which have laid inside out for many year in the corner of a old campaigning trunk , which stand by he bedside , to be take out and laid upon the lid of it , ready for the morning ; -- and the very first thing he do in he shirt , when he have step out of bed , my uncle , after he have turn the rough side outwards , -- put it on :-- this do , he proceed next to he breech , and have button the waist - band , he forthwill buck on he sword - belt , and have get he sword half way in , -- when he consider he should want shaving , and that it would be very inconvenient do it with he sword on , -- so take it off :-- in essay to put on he regimental coat and waistcoat , my uncle find the same objection in he wig , -- so that go off too :-- so that what with one thing and what with another , as always fall out when a man be in the most haste ,--'twa ten o'clock , which be half a hour later than he usual time , before my uncle sally out . . my uncle have scarce turn the corner of he yew hedge , which separate he kitchen - garden from he bowling - green , when he perceive the corporal have begin the attack without he .-- let I stop and give you a picture of the corporal 's apparatus ; and of the corporal himself in the height of he attack , just as it strike my uncle , as he turn towards the sentry - box , where the corporal be at work ,- - for in nature there be not such another , -- nor can any combination of all that be grotesque and whimsical in she work produce its equal . the corporal -- -- Tread lightly on he ash , ye man of genius , -- for he be you kinsman : we he grave clean , ye man of goodness , -- for he be you brother .-- oh corporal ! have I thee , but now , -- now , that I be able to give thee a dinner and protection , -- how would I cherish thee ! thou should 'st wear thy Montero - cap every hour of the day , and every day of the week .-- and when it be wear out , I would purchase thee a couple like it :-- but alas ! alas ! alas ! now that I can do this in spite of they reverence -- the occasion be lost -- for thou be gone ; -- thy genius fle up to the star from whence it come ; -- and that warm heart of thine , with all its generous and open
open vessel , compress into a clod of the valley ! -- but what -- what be this , to that future and dread page , where I look towards the velvet pall , decorate with the military ensign of thy master - - the first -- the foremost of create being ;-- where , I shall see thee , faithful servant ! lay he sword and scabbard with a trembling hand across he coffin , and then return pale as ash to the door , to take he mourning horse by the bridle , to follow he hearse , as he direct thee ; -- where -- all my father 's system shall be baffle by he sorrow ; and , in spite of he philosophy , I shall behold he , as he inspect the lackered plate , twice take he spectacle from off he nose , to wipe away the dew which nature have she upon they -- when I see he cast in the rosemary with a air of disconsolation , which cry through my ear ,-- of ! in what corner of the world shall I seek thy fellow ? -- gracious power ! which erst have open the lip of the dumb in he distress , and make the tongue of the stammerer speak plain -- when I shall arrive at this dread page , deal not with I , then , with a stinted hand . . the corporal , who the night before have resolve in he mind to supply the grand desideratum , of keep up something like a incessant firing upon the enemy during the heat of the attack , -- have no further idea in he fancy at that time , than a contrivance of smoking tobacco against the town , out of one of my uncle 's six field - piece , which be plan on each side of he sentry - box ; the means of effecting which occur to he fancy at the same time , though he have pledge he cap , he think it in no danger from the miscarriage of he project . upon turn it this way , and that , a little in he mind , he soon begin to find out , that by means of he two turkish tobacco -pipe , with the supplement of three smaller tube of wash - leather at each of they lower end , to be tagg ' by the same number of tin - pipe fit to the touch - hole , and seal with clay next the cannon , and then tie hermetically with waxed silk at they several insertion into the tube , -- he should be able to fire the six field -piece all together , and with the same ease as to fire one .-- -- let no man say from what tagg and jagg hint may not be cut out for the advancement of human knowledge . let no man , who have read my father 's first and second bed of justice , ever rise up and say again , from collision of what kind of body light may or may not be strike out , to carry the art and sciences up to perfection .--Heaven ! thou knowest how I love they ; -- thou knowest the secret of my heart , and that I would this moment give my shirt -- thou be a fool , , say , for thou hast but a dozen in the world , -- and 'twill break thy set .-- no matter for that , ; I would give the shirt off my back to be burn into tinder , be it only to satisfy one feverish enquirer , how many spark at one good stroke , a good flint and steel could strike into the tail of it .-- think ye not that in strike these in , -- he might , per - adventure , strike something out ? as sure as a gun .-- -- but this project , by the bye . the corporal sit up the best part of the night , in bring he to perfection ; and have make a sufficient proof of he cannon , with charge they to the top with tobacco , -- he go with contentment to bed . . the corporal have slip out about ten minute before my uncle , in order to fix he apparatus , and just give the enemy a shot or two before my uncle come . he have draw the six field - piece for this end , all close up together in front of my uncle 's sentry - box , leave only a interval of about a yard and a half betwixt the three , on the right and leave , for the convenience of charging , &c .-- and the sake possibly of two battery , which he might think double the honour of one . in the rear and face this opening , with he back to the door of the sentry - box , for fear of be flank , have the corporal wisely take he post :-- he hold the ivory pipe , appertain to the battery on the right , betwixt the finger and thumb of he right hand , -- and the ebony pipe tipp would with silver , which appertain to the battery on the left , betwixt the finger and thumb of the other -- and with he right knee fix firm upon the ground , as if in the front rank of he platoon , be the corporal , with he Montero - cap upon he head , furiously play off he two cross battery at the same time against the counter -guard , which face the counterscarp , where the attack be to be make that morning . he first intention , as I say , be no more than
than give the enemy a single puff or two ; -- but the pleasure of the puffs , as well as the puffing , have insensibly get hold of the corporal , and draw he on from puff to puff , into the very height of the attack , by the time my uncle join he . ' Twas well for my father , that my uncle have not he will to make that day . . my uncle take the ivory pipe out of the corporal 's hand , -- look at it for half a minute , and return it . in less than two minute , my uncle take the pipe from the corporal again , and raise it half way to he mouth -- then hastily give it back a second time . the corporal redouble the attack , -- my uncle smile , -- then look grave , -- then smile for a moment , -- then look serious for a long time ;-- give I hold of the ivory pipe , , say my uncle -- my uncle put it to he lip , -- draw it back directly , -- give a peep over the horn - beam hedge ; -- never do my uncle 's mouth water so much for a pipe in he life .-- my uncle retire into the sentry - box with the pipe in he hand .-- -- dear uncle ! do not go into the sentry - box with the pipe ,-- there be no trusting a man 's self with such a thing in such a corner . . I beg the reader will assist I here , to wheel off my uncle 's ordnance behind the scene , -- to remove he sentry - box , and clear the theatre , if possible , of horn - work and half moons , and get the rest of he military apparatus out of the way ; -- that do , my dear friend , we will snuff the candle bright , -- sweep the stage with a new broom , -- draw up the curtain , and exhibit my uncle dress in a new character , throughout which the world can have no idea how he will act : and yet , if pity be a - kin to love , -- and bravery no alien to it , you have see enough of my uncle in these , to trace these family likeness , betwixt the two passion ( in case there be one ) to you heart 's content . ! thou assistest we in no case of this kind -- and thou puzzlest we in every one . there be , Madam , in my uncle , a singleness of heart which misl he so far out of the little serpentine track in which thing of this nature usually go on ; you can -- you can have no conception of it : with this , there be a plainness and simplicity of think , with such a unmistrusting ignorance of the ply and folding of the heart of woman ; -- and so naked and defenceless do he stand before you , ( when a siege be out of he head , ) that you might have stand behind any one of you serpentine walk , and shoot my uncle ten time in a day , through he liver , if nine time in a day , madam , have not serve you purpose . with all this , madam , -- and what confound every thing as much on the other hand , my uncle have that unparalleled modesty of nature I once tell you of , and which , by the bye , stand eternal sentry upon he feeling , that you might as soon -- but where be I go ? these reflection crowd in upon I ten page at least too soon , and take up that time , which I ought to bestow upon fact . . of the few legitimate son of whose breast never feel what the sting of love be , --( maintain first , all mysogynist to be bastard , ) -- the greatest heroe of ancient and modern story have carry off amongst they nine part in ten of the honour ; and I wish for they sake I have the key of my study , out of my draw - well , only for five minute , to tell you they name -- recollect they I can not -- so be content to accept of these , for the present , in they stead . there be the great king , and , and , and , and , and , -- to say nothing of the iron - hear Charles the , whom the Countess of ..... herself could make nothing of .-- there be , and , and Polixene , and , and , not one of whom ( except and , who be both a little suspect ) ever once bow down he breast to the goddess -- the truth be , they have all of they something else to do -- and so have my uncle -- till Fate -- till Fate I say , envie he name the glory of be hand down to posterity with 's and the rest , -- she basely patch up the peace of . -- believe I , Sirs , ' tbe the worst deed she do that year . . amongst the many ill consequence of the treaty of , it be within a point of give my uncle a surfeit of siege ; and though he recover he appetite afterwards , yet itself leave not a deeper scar in 's heart , than upon my uncle 's . to the end of he life he never could hear mention upon any account whatever , -- or so much as
as read a article of news extract out of the , without fetch a sigh , as if he heart would break in twain . my father , who be a great motive - Monger , and consequently a very dangerous person for a man to sit by , either laugh or cry , -- for he generally know you motive for do both , much better than you know it yourself -- would always conseal my uncle upon these occasion , in a way , which shew plainly , he imagine my uncle grieve for nothing in the whole affair , so much as the loss of he hobby - horse .-- never mind , brother , he would say , -- by 's bless we shall have another war break out again some of these day ; and when it do , -- the belligerent power , if they would hang themselves , can not keep we out of play .-- I defy th'ey , my dear , he would add , to take country without take town , -- or town without siege . my uncle never take this back - stroke of my father 's at he hobby - horse kindly . -- he think the stroke ungenerous ; and the more so , because in strike the horse he hit the rider too , and in the most dishonourable part a blow could fall ; so that upon these occasion , he always lay down he pipe upon the table with more fire to defend himself than common . I tell the reader , this time two year , that my uncle be not eloquent ; and in the very same page give a instance to the contrary :-- I repeat the observation , and a fact which contradict it again . -- he be not eloquent , -- it be not easy to my uncle to make long harangue , -- and he hate florid one ; but there be occasion where the stream overflow the man , and run so counter to its usual course , that in some part my uncle , for a time , be at least equal to -- but in other , in my own opinion , infinitely above he . my father be so highly pleased with one of these apologetical oration of my uncle 's , which he have deliver one evening before he and , that he write it down before he go to bed . I have have the good fortune to meet with it amongst my father 's papers , with here and there a insertion of he own , betwixt two crook , thus ( . . . ) , and be endorse , my 's justification of he own principles and conduct in Wishing to continue the War . I may safely say , I have read over this apologetical oration of my uncle 's a hundred time , and think it so fine a model of defence , -- and shew so sweet a temperament of gallantry and good principle in he , that I give it the world , word for word ( interlineation and all ) , as I find it . . my uncle 's . I be not insensible , brother , that when a man whose profession be arm , wish , as I have do , for war , -- it have a ill aspect to the world ;- - and that , how just and right soever he motives the intention may be , -- he stand in a uneasy posture in vindicating himself from private view in do it . for this cause , if a soldier be a prudent man , which he may be without be a jot the less brave , he will be sure not to utter he wish in the hearing of a enemy ; for say what he will , a enemy will not believe he .-- he will be cautious of do it even to a friend , -- lest he may suffer in he esteem :-- but if he heart be overcharge , and a secret sigh for arm must have it 's vent , he will reserve it for the ear of a brother , who know he character to the bottom , and what he true notion , disposition , and principle of honou be : what , I hope , I have be in all these , brother , would be unbecoming in I to say :--much worse , I know , have I be than I ink , -- and something worse , perhaps , than I think : but such as I be , you , my dear brother , who have suck the same breast with I ,- - and with whom I have be bring up from my cradle , -- and from whose knowledge , from the first hour of we boyish pastime , down to this , I have conceal no one action of my life , and scarce a thought in it -- such as I be , brother , you must by this time know I , with all my vex , and with all my weakness too , whether of my age , my temper , my passion , or my understanding . tell I then , my dear brother , upon which of they it be , that when I condemn the peace of , and grieve the war be not carry on with vigou a little longer , you should think you brother do it upon unworthy view ; or that in wishing for war , he should be bad enough to wish more of he fellow - creature slain , -- more slave make , and more family drive from they peaceful habitation , merely for he own pleasure :-- tell I , brother , upon what one deed of
of mine do you ground it ? ( the a deed do I know of , dear , but one for a hundred pound , which I lent thee to carry on these curse siege . ) if , when I be a school - boy , I could not hear a drum beat , but my heart beat with it -- be it my fault ? -- I plant the propensity there ? -- I sound the alarm within , or ? when , of , and and , and and , and the of , be hand around the school , -- be they not all purchase with my own pocket -money ? be that selfish , brother ? when we read over the siege of , which last ten year and eight month ,-- though with such a train of artillery as we have at , the town might have be carry in a week -- be I not as much concerned for the destruction of the Greeks and Trojans as any boy of the whole school ? have I not three stroke of a ferula give I , two on my right hand , and one on my left , for call a bitch for it ? do any one of you shed more tear for Hector ? and when king come to the camp to beg he body , and return weeping back to without it , -- you know , brother , I could not eat my dinner .-- -- do that bespeak I cruel ? or because , brother , my blood fly out into the camp , and my heart pan for war , -- be it a proof it could not aco for the distress of war too ? of brother ! ' ttis one thing for a soldier to gather laurel , -- and ' ti another to scatter cypress .--( who tell thee , my dear , that cypress be use by the antient on mournful occasion ? ) t--'Tis one thing , brother , for a soldier to hazard he own life -- to leap first down into the trench , where he be sure to be cut in piece :-- ' tTis one thing , from public spirit and a thirst of glory , to enter the breach the first man , -- to stand in the foremost rank , and march bravely on with drum and trumpet , and colour fly about he ear t:--'Tis one thing , I say , brother Shandy , to do this , -- and ' ttis another thing to reflect on the misery of war ; -- to view the desolation of whole country , and consider the intolerable fatigue and hardship which the soldier himself , the instrument who work they , be force ( for sixpence a day , if he can get it ) to undergo . need I be tell , dear , as I be by you , in 's funeral sermon , that so soft and gentle a creature , bear to love , to mercy , and kindness , as man be , be not shape for this ? -- but why do you not add , , -- if not by -- that he be so by necessity ?-- for what be war ? what be it , , when fight as ours have be , upon principle of liberty , and upon principle of honour -- what be it , but the get together of quiet and harmless people , with they sword in they hand , to keep the ambitious and the turbulent within bound ? and heaven be my witness , brother , that the pleasure I have take in these thing , -- and that infinite delight , in particular , which have attend my siege in my bowling - green , have arise within I , and I hope in the corporal too , from the consciousness we both have , that in carry they on , we be answer the great end of we creation . . I tell the reader -- I say -- hope he be one -- and if he be not , I be sorry for it -- and only beg he will consider the matter with himself , and not lay the blame entirely upon this book -- I tell he , -- for in good truth , when a man be tell a story in the strange way I do mine , he be oblige continually to be go backwards and forward to keep all tight together in the reader 's fancy -- which , for my own part , if I do not take heed to do more than at first , there be so much unfixed and equivocal matter start up , with so many break and gap in it , -- and so little service do the star afford , which , nevertheless , I hang up in some of the darkest passage , know that the world be apt to lose its way , with all the light the sun itself at noon -day can give it -- and now you see , I be lose myself !-- -- but ' ti my father 's fault ; and whenever my brain come to be dissect , you will perceive , without spectacle , that he have leave a large uneven thread , as you sometimes see in a unsaleable piece of cambrick , run along the whole length of the web , and so untowardly , you can not so much as cut out a . . . , ( here I hang up a couple of light again ) -- or a fillet , or a thumb - stall , but it be see or feel .-- id diligentia in tliberis procreandi cavendum , sayeth . all which be consider , and that you see '
' ttis morally impracticable for I to wind this round to where I set out -- I begin the chapter over again . . I tell the reader in the beginning of the chapter which proceed my uncle 's apologetical oration , -- though in a different trope from what I should make use of now , that the peace of be within a ace of create the same shyness betwixt my uncle and he hobby - horse , as it do betwixt the queen and the rest of the confederating power . there be a indignant way in which a man sometimes dismount he horse , which , as good as say to he , ' I will go afoot , , all the day of my life before I would ride a single mile upon you back again . ' now my uncle could not be say to dismount he horse in this manner ; for in strictness of language , he could not be say to dismount he horse at all -- he horse rather flng he -- and somewhat viciously , which make my uncle take it ten time more unkindly . let this matter be settle by state - jocky as they like .-- it create , I say , a sort of shyness betwixt my uncle and he hobby - horse .-- he have no occasion for he from the month of to , which be the summer after the article be sign , except it be now and then to take a short ride out , just to see that the fortification and harbour of be demolish , accord to stipulation . the french be so backwards all that summer in set about that affair , and , the deputy from the magistrate of , present so many affect petition to the queen , -- beseech she majesty to cause only she thunderbolt to fall upon the martial work , which might have incur she displeasure , -- but to spare -- to spare the mole , for the mole 's sake ; which , in its naked situation , could be no more than a object of pity -- and the queen ( who be but a woman ) be of a pitiful disposition , -- and she minister also , they not wish in they heart to have the town dismantle , for these private reason ,. . .--. . . ; so that the whole go heavily on with my uncle ; insomuch , that it be not within three full month , after he and the corporal have construct the town , and put it in a condition to be destroy , that the several commandant , commissary , deputy , negociator , and intendant , would permit he to set about it .-- fatal interval of inactivity ! the corporal be for begin the demolition , by make a breach in the rampart , or main fortification of the town -- no , -- that will never do , corporal , say my uncle , for in go that way to work with the town , the english garrison will not be safe in it a hour ; because if the french be treacherous -- they be as treacherous as devils , an' please you honour , say the corporal -- it give I concern always when I hear it , , say my uncle ; -- for they do not want personal bravery ; and if a breach be make in the rampart , they may enter it , and make themselves master of the place when they please :-- let they enter it , say the corporal , lift up he pioneer 's spade in both he hand , as if he be go to lay about he with it , -- let they enter , an' please you honour , if they dare .-- in casis like this , corporal , say my uncle , slipp he right hand down to the middle of he cane , and hold it afterwards truncheon - wise with he fore - finger extend ,--'tis no part of the consideration of a commandant , what the enemy dare , -- or what they dare not do ; he must act with prudence . we will begin with the outwork both towards the sea and the land , and particularly with fort , the most distant of they all , and demolish it first , -- and the rest , one by one , both on we right and leave , as we retreat towards the town ; -- then we will demolish the mole , -- next fill up the harbour , -- then retire into the citadel , and blow it up into the air : and have do that , corporal , we will embark for .-- we be there , quoth the corporal , recollect himself -- very true , say my uncle -- look at the church . . a delusive , delicious consultation or two of this kind , betwixt my uncle and , upon the demolition of , -- for a moment rally back the idea of those pleasure , which be slipp from under he :-- still -- still all go on heavily -- the magic leave the mind the weaker -- Stillness , with Silence at she back , enter the solitary parlour , and draw they gauzy mantle over my uncle 's head ;-- and listlessness , with she lax fibre and undirect eye , sit quietly down beside he in he arm -chair .-- no longer and , and , and , and , in one year , -- and the prospect of , and , and , and , the next ,-- hurrie on the blood :-- no longer do sap , and mine , and blind , and gabion , and palisadoe , keep out this fair enemy
enemy of man 's repose :-- no more could my uncle , after pass the french line , as he eat he egg at supper , from thence break into the heart of , -- cross over the , and with all open behind he , march up to the gate of , and fall asleep with nothing but idea of glory :-- no more be he to dream , he have fix the royal standard upon the tower of the Bastile , and awake with it stream in he head . -- vision , -- gentler vibration stole sweetly in upon he slumber ; -- the trumpet of war fall out of he hand , -- he take up the lute , sweet instrument ! of all other the most delicate ! the most difficult !-- how will thou touch it , my dear uncle ? . now , because I have once or twice say , in my inconsiderate way of talking , that I be confident the follow memoir of my uncle 's courtship of widow , whenever I get time to write they , would turn out one of the most complete system , both of the elementary and practical part of love and love - make , that ever be address to the world -- be you to imagine from thence , that I shall set out with a description of what love be ? whether part and part , as will have it -- -- or by a more critical equation , and suppose the whole of love to be as ten -- to determine with , ' how many part of it -- the one , -- and how many the other ;' -- or whether it be all of it one great , from head to tail , as have take upon he to pronounce ; concern which conceit of he , I shall not offer my opinion :-- but my opinion of be this ; that he appear , from this instance , to have be a man of much the same temper and way of reasoning with doctor , who be a great enemy to blister , as imagine that half a dozen of th'ey at once , would draw a man as surely to he grave , as a herse and six -- rashly conclude , that the himself be nothing in the world , but one great bouncing Cantharidis .-- I have nothing to say to people who allow themselves this monstrous liberty in arguing , but what cry out ( that be , polemically ) to -- ' ( ) ! ' of rare ! ' ttis fine reasoning , indeed !--' ( ) ' and most nobly do you aim at truth , when you philosophize about it in you mood and passion . be it to be imagine , for the same reason , I should stop to inquire , whether love be a disease , -- or embroil myself with and , whether the seat of it be in the brain or liver ; -- because this would lead I on , to a examination of the two very opposite manners , in which patient have be treat -- the one , of , who always begin with a cool clyster of hempseed and bruise cucumber ; -- and follow on with thin potation of water - lily and purslane -- to which he add a pinch of snuff , of the herb Hanea ; -- and where Aoetius durst venture it , -- he topaz - ring . -- the other , that of , who ( in he cap. 15 . ) direct they should be thrash , 'ad putorem usque , '-- till they stink again . these be disquisition which my father , who have laid in a great stock of knowledge of this kind , will be very busy with in the progress of my uncle 's affair : I must anticipate thus much , that from he theory of love , ( with which , by the way , he contrive to crucify my uncle 's mind , almost as much as he amour themselves , ) -- he take a single step into practice ; -- and by means of a camphorate cerecloth , which he find means to impose upon the taylor for buckram , whilst he be make my uncle a new pair of breech , he produce 's effect upon my uncle without the disgrace . what change this produce , will be read in its proper place : all that be needful to be add to the anecdote , be this -- that whatever effect it have upon my uncle , -- it have a vile effect upon the house ; -- and if my uncle have not smoak it down as he do , it might have have a vile effect upon my father too . . --'Twill come out of itself by and bye .-- all I contend for is , that I be not oblige to set out with a definition of what love be ; and so long as I can go on with my story intelligibly , with the help of the word itself , without any other idea to it , than what I have in common with the rest of the world , why should I differ from it a moment before the time ?-- when I can get on no further , -- and find myself entangle on all side of this mystic labyrinth , -- my will then come in , in course , -- and lead I out . at present , I hope I shall be sufficiently understand , in tell the reader , my uncle fall in love : -- not that the phrase be at all to my liking : for to say a man be fall in love , --
-- or that he be deeply in love , -- or up to the ear in love , -- and sometimes even over head and ear in it , -- carry a idiomatical kind of implication , that love be a thing below a man :-- this be recurr again to 's opinion , which , with all he divinityship , -- I hold to be damnable and heretical :-- and so much for that . let love therefore be what it will , -- my uncle fall into it . -- and possibly , gentle reader , with such a temptation -- so wouldst thou : for never do thy eye behold , or thy concupiscence covet any thing in this world , more concupiscible than widow . . to conceive this right ,-- call for pen and ink -- here 's paper ready to you hand .-- sit down , , paint she to you own mind -- as like you mistress as you can -- as unlike you wife as you conscience will let you --'ti all one to I -- please but you own fancy in it . ( blank page ) -- be ever any thing in so sweet !-- so exquisite ! -- then , dear , how could my uncle resist it ? happy book ! thou will have one page , at least , within thy cover , which Malice will not blacken , and which ignorance can not misrepresent . . as be inform by a express from , of my uncle 's fall in love with she mistress fifteen day before it happen , -- the contents of which express , communicate to my mother the next day , -- it have just give I a opportunity of entering upon my uncle 's amour a fortnight before they existence . I have a article of news to tell you , , quoth my mother , which will surprise you greatly .-- now my father be then hold one of he second bed of justice , and be muse within himself about the hardship of matrimony , as my mother break silence .-- ' -- my brother , ' quoth she , 'is go to be marry to . ' -- then he will never , quoth my father , be able to lie diagonally in he bed again as long as he life . it be a consume vexation to my father , that my mother never ask the meaning of a thing she do not understand . -- that she be not a woman of science , my father would say -- be she misfortune -- but she might ask a question .-- my mother never do .-- in short , she go out of the world at last without know whether it turn round , or stand still .-- my father have officiously tell she above a thousand time which way it be , -- but she always forget . for these reason , a discourse seldom go on much further betwixt they , than a proposition , -- a reply , and a rejoinder ; at the end of which , it generally take breath for a few minute ( as in the affair of the breech ) , and then go on again . if he marry , 'twill be the worse for we , -- quoth my mother . not a cherry - stone , say my father , -- he may as well batter away he mean upon that , as any thing else , -- to be sure , say my mother : so here end the proposition -- the reply , -- and the rejoinder , I tell you of . it will be some amusement to he , too , -- say my father . a very great one , answer my mother , if he should have child .-- -- have mercy upon I , -- say my father to himself --. . .. . I be now begin to get fairly into my work ; and by the help of a vegetable diet , with a few of the cold seed , I make no doubt but I shall be able to go on with my uncle 's story , and my own , in a tolerable straight line . now , ( four very squiggly line across the page sign and ) these be the four line I move in through my first , second , third , and fourth volume ( Allud to the first edition . ) -- in the fifth volume I have be very good , -- the precise line I have describe in it be this : ( one very squiggly line across the page with loops mark ) by which it appear , that except at the curve , mark a . where I take a trip to , -- and the indented curve B. which be the short airing when I be there with the and she page ,-- I have not take the least frisk of a digression , till 's devils lead I the round you see mark d .-- for as for they be nothing but parentheses , and the common in and outs incident to the life of the greatest ministers of state ; and when compare with what man have do , -- or with my own transgression at the letter Abd -- they vanish into nothing . in this last volume I have do better still -- for from the end of 's episode , to the beginning of my uncle 's campaigns ,-- I have scarce step a yard out of my way . if I mmend at this rate , it be not impossible -- by the good leave of he grace of 's devils -- but I may arrive hereafter at the excellency of go on even thus : ( straight line across
across the page ) which be a line draw as straight as I could draw it , by a writing - master 's ruler ( borrowed for that purpose ) , turn neither to the right hand or to the left . this right line , -- the path - way for to walk in ! say divine -- -- the emblem of moral rectitude ! say -- -- the best line ! say cabbage planter -- be the shortest line , say , which can be draw from one give point to another .-- I wish you ladyship would lay this matter to heart , in you next birth - day suits ! -- what a journey ! pray can you tell I , -- that be , without anger , before I write my chapter upon straight line -- by what mistake -- who tell they so -- or how it have come to pass , that you man of wit and genius have all along confound this line , with the line of ? . no --i think , I say , I would write two volume every year , provide the vile cough which then torment I , and which to this hour I dread worse than the devil , would but give I leave -- and in another place --( but where , I can not recollect now ) speak of my book as a machine , and lay my pen and ruler down cross -wise upon the table , in order to gain the greater credit to it -- I swore it should be keep a go at that rate these forty year , if it please but the fountain of life to bless I so long with health and good spirit . now as for my spirit , little have I to lay to they charge -- nay so very little ( unless the mount I upon a long stick and play the fool with I nineteen hour out of the twenty - four , be accusation ) that on the contrary , I have much -- much to thank them for : cheerily have ye make I tread the path of life with all the burthen of it ( except its care ) upon my back ; in no one moment of my existence , that I remember , have ye once desert I , or tinge the object which come in my way , either with sable , or with a sickly green ; in dangers ye gild my horizon with hope , and when himself knock at my door -- ye bad he come again ; and in so gay a tone of careless indifference , do ye do it , that he doubt of he commission -- ' -- there must certainly be some mistake in this matter , ' quoth he . now there be nothing in this world I abominate worse , than to be interrupt in a story -- and I be that moment tell Eugenius a most tawdry one in my way , of a nun who fancie herself a shell - fish , and of a monk damn ' for eat a muscle , and be shew he the grounds and justice of the procedure -- ' -- do ever so grave a personage get into so vile a scrape ? ' quoth death . thou hast have a narrow escape , , say , take hold of my hand as I finish my story -- but there be no living , , reply I , at this rate ; for as this son of a whore have find out my lodging -- -- you call he rightly , say , -- for by sin , we be tell , he enter would the world -- I care not which way he enter ' , quoth I , provide he be not in such a hurry to take I out with he -- for I have forty volume to write , and forty thousand thing to say and do which no body in the world will say and do for I , except thyself ; and as thou seest he have get I by the throat ( for could scarce hear I speak across the table ) , and that I be no match for he in the open field , have I not better , whilst these few scatter would spirit remain , and these two spider leg of mine ( hold one of they up to he ) be able to support I -- have I not better , , fly for my life ? ' tTis my advice , my dear Tristram , say -- then by heaven ! I will lead he a dance he little think of -- for I will gallop , quoth I , without look once behind I , to the bank of the ; and if I hear he clatter at my heel -- I will scamper away to mount -- from thence to , and from to the world 's end ; where , if he follow I , I pray he may break he neck -- -- he run more risk there , say , than thou . 's wit and affection bring blood into the cheek from whence it have be some month banish ' -- 'tbe a vile moment to bid adieu in ; he lead I to my chaise -- Allons ! say I ; the post -boy give a crack with he whip -- off I go like a cannon , and in half a dozen bound get into . . now hang it ! quoth I , as I look ' towards the french coast -- a man should know something of he own country too , before he go abroad -- and I never give a peep into church , or take notice of the dock of ,
, or visit at , though they all three laid in my way -- -- but mine , indeed , be a particular case -- so without argue the matter further with , or any one else -- I skip would into the boat , and in five minute we get under sail , and scud away like the wind . , , quoth I , as I be go down into the cabin , be a man never overtake by in this passage ? why , there be not time for a man to be sick in it , reply he -- what a curse lyar ! for I be sick as a horse , quoth I , already -- what a brain !-- upside down !-- hey -day ! the cell be break loose one into another , and the blood , and the lymph , and the nervous juice , with the fix have and volatile salt , be all jumble into one mass -- good g ..! every thing turn round in it like a thousand whirlpool -- I would give a shilling to know if I sha not write the clearer for it -- ! sick ! sick ! sick !-- -- when shall we get to land ? captain -- they have heart like stone -- o I be deadly sick !-- reach I that thing , boy --'ti the most discomfit sickness -- I wish I be at the bottom-- Madam ! how be it with you ? ! undone ! un . . .-- o ! undone ! sir -- what the first time ?-- no , ' ti the second , third , sixth , tenth time , sir , -- hey - day !-- what a trampling over head !-- hollo ! cabin boy ! what be the matter ? the wind chopp would about ! -- then I shall meet he full in the face . what luck !--'tis chopp would about again , master -- of the chop it -- , quoth she , for heaven 's sake , let we get ashore . . it be a great inconvenience to a man in a haste , that there be three distinct roads between and , in behalf of which there be so much to be say by the several deputy from the town which lie along they , that half a day be easily lose in settling which you will take . first , the road by and , which be the most about -- but most interesting , and instruct . the second , that by , which you may go , if you would see -- and that by , which you may go , if you will . for this reason a great many chuse to go by . . ' now before I quit , ' a travel - writer would say , ' it would not be amiss to give some account of it .' -- now I think it very much amiss -- that a man can not go quietly through a town and let it alone , when it do not meddle with he , but that he must be turn about and draw he pen at every kennel he cross over , merely of ' my conscience for the sake of draw it ; because , if we may judge from what have be write of these thing , by all who have write and gallop ' -- or who have gallop ' and write , which be a different way still ; or who , for more expedition than the rest , have write galloping , which be the way I do at present -- from the great , who do it with he satchel of school book hang at he a . . . , and galle he beast 's crupper at every stroke -- there be not a gallopper of we all who might not have go on ambling quietly in he own ground ( in case he have any ) , and have write all he have to write , dry - shod , as well as not . for my own part , as heaven be my judge , and to which I shall ever make my last appeal -- I know no more of ( except the little my barber tell I of it as he be whett he razor ) than I do this moment of ; for it be dusky in the evening when I land , and dark as pitch in the morning when I set out , and yet by merely know what be what , and by draw this from that in one part of the town , and by spelling and put this and that together in another -- I would lay any travel odd , that I this moment write a chapter upon as long as my arm ; and with so distinct and satisfactory a detail of every item , which be worth a stranger 's curiosity in the town -- that you would take I for the town - clerk of itself -- and where , sir , would be the wonder ? be not , who laugh ten time more than I -- town - clerk of ? and be not ( I forget he name ) who have more discretion than we both , town - clerk of ?-- it should be penn have moreover , sir , with so much knowledge and good sense , and truth , and precision -- -- Nay -- if you do not believe I , you may read the chapter for you pain . . , , , . this town , if we may trust its archive , the authority of which I see no reason to call in question in this place -- be once no more than a small village belong to one
one of the first count ; and as it boast at present of no less than fourteen thousand inhabitant , exclusive of four hundred and twenty distinct family in the basse ville , or suburb -- it must have grow up by little and little , I suppose , to its present size . though there be four convent , there be but one parochial church in the whole town ; I have not a opportunity of take it be exact dimension , but it be pretty easy to make a tolerable conjecture of 'em -- for as there be fourteen thousand inhabitant in the town , if the church hold they all it must be considerably large -- and if it will not --'ti a very great pity they have not another -- it be build in form of a cross , and dedicate to the ; the steeple , which have a spire to it , be place in the middle of the church , and stand upon four pillars elegant and light enough , but sufficiently strong at the same time -- it be decorate with eleven altar , most of which be rather fine than beautiful . the great altar be a master - piece in its kind ; ' tis of white marble , and , as I be tell , near sixty foot high -- have it be much higher , it have be as high as mount itself -- therefore , I suppose it must be high enough in all conscience . there be nothing strike I more than the great ; tho' I can not say ' tis either well pave or well build ; but ' tis in the heart of the town , and most of the street , especially those in that quarter , all terminate in it ; could there have be a fountain in all , which it seem there cannot , as such a object would have be a great ornament , it be not to be doubt , but that the inhabitant would have have it in the very centre of this square , -- not that it be properly a square , -- because ' ttis forty foot longer from east to west , than from north to south ; so that the french in general have more reason on they side in call they place than , which , strictly speak , to be sure , they be not . the town - house seem to be but a sorry building , and not to be keep in the best repair ; otherwise it have be a second great ornament to this place ; it answer however its destination , and serve very well for the reception of the magistrate , who assemble in it from time to time ; so that ' ttis presumable , justice be regularly distribute . I have hear much of it , but there be nothing at all curious in the Courgain ; ' ti a distinct quarter of the town , inhabit solely by sailor and fisherman ; it consist of a number of small street , neatly build and mostly of brick ; ' tis extremely populious , but as that may be account for , from the principle of they diet , -- there be nothing curiious in that neither .-- a traveller may see it to satisfy himself -- he must not omin however take notice of , upon any account ; ' tis so call from its particular destination , because in war it serve to discover and give notice of the enemy which approach the place , either by sea or land ; -- but ' ti monstrous high , and catch the eye so continually , you can not avoid take notice of it if you would . it be a singular disappointment to I , that I could not have permission to take a exact survey of the fortification , which be the strongest in the world , and which , from first to last , that be , for the time they be set about by of , of , to the present war , wherein many reparation be make , have cost ( as I learn afterwards from a engineer in ) --above a hundred million of livre . it be very remarkable , that at the , and where the town be naturally the weakest , they have expend the most money ; so that the outwork stretch a great way into the campaign , and consequently occupy a large tract of ground -- however , after all that be say and do , it must be acknowledge that be never upon any account so considerable from itself , as from its situation , and that easy entrance which it give we ancestor , upon all occasion , into : it be not without its inconvenience also ; be no less troublesome to the in those time , than have be to we , in ours ; so that it be deservedly look upon as the key to both kingdom , which no doubt be the reason that there have arisen so many contention who should keep it : of these , the siege of , or rather the blockade ( for it be shut up both by land and sea ) , be the most memorable , as it with - stand the effort of the a whole year , and be not terminate at last but by famine and extreme misery ; the gallantry of , who first offer himself a victim for he fellow - citizen , have rank would he name with heroe . as it will not take up above fifty page , it would be injustice to the reader , not to give he a minute account of that romantic transaction , as well as of the siege itself , in
in 's own word : . -- but courage ! gentle reader !-- I scorn it --'ti enough to have thee in my power -- but to make use of the advantage which the fortune of the pen have now gain over thee , would be too much -- no --! by that all - powerful fire which warm the visionary brain , and light the spirits through unworldly tract ! ere I would force a helpless creature upon this hard service , and make thee pay , poor soul ! for fifty page , which I have no right to sell thee , -- naked as I be , I would browse upon the mountain , and smile that the north wind bring I neither my tent or my supper . -- so put on , my brave boy ! and make the best of thy way to . . Boulogne !--hah !--so we be all get together -- debtor and sinner before heaven ; a jolly set of we -- but I can not stay and quaff it off with you -- I be pursue myself like a hundred devils , and shall be overtaken , before I can well change horse :-- for heaven 's sake , make haste --'Tis for high - treason , quoth a very little man , whisper as low as he could to a very tall man , that stand next he -- or else for murder ; quoth the tall man -- well throw , size - ace ! quoth I . no ; quoth a third , the gentleman have be commit -- ah ! ma chere fille ! say I , as she tripp would by from she matin -- you look as rosy as the morning ( for the sun be rise , and it make the compliment the more gracious ) -- no ; it can not be that , quoth a fourth --( she make a curt 'sy to I -- I kiss would my hand ) ' ttis debt , continue he : certainly for debt ; quoth a fifth ; I would not pay that gentleman 's debt , quoth , for a thousand pound ; nor would I , quoth , for six time the sum -- well throw , size - ace , again ! quoth I ; -- but I have no debt but the debt of , and I want but patience of she , and I will pay she every farthing I owe she -- how can you be so hard - hear , Madam , to arrest a poor traveller go along without molestation to any one upon he lawful occasion ? do stop that death - look , long - striding scoundrel of a scare - sinner , who be post after I -- he never would have follow I but for you -- if it be but for a stage or two , just to give I start of he , I beseech you , madam -- do , dear lady -- -- now , in troth , ' tis a great pity , quoth mine irish host , that all this good courtship should be lose ; for the young gentlewoman have be after go out of hearing of it all along .-- -- ! quoth I . -- so you have nothing else in worth see ? -- by ! there be the finest for the Humanity -- -- there can not be a finer ; quoth I . . when the precipitancy of a man 's wish hurry on he idea ninety time faster than the vehicle he ride in -- woe be to truth ! and woe be to the vehicle and it be tackling ( let th'ey be make of what stuff you will ) upon which he breath forth the disappointment of he soul ! as I never give general character either of man or thing in choler , ' the most haste the worse speed , ' be all the reflection I make upon the affair , the first time it happen would ; -- the second , third , fourth , and fifth time , I confin it respectively to those time , and accordingly blame only the second , third , fourth , and fifth post -boy for it , without carry my reflection further ; but the event continue to befal I from the fifth , to the sixth , seventh , eighth , ninth , and tenth time , and without one exception , I then could not avoid make a national reflection of it , which I do in these word ; that something be always wrong in a french post-chaise , upon first set out . or the proposition may stand thus : a french postilion have always to alight before he have get three hundred yard out of town . what be wrong now ?-- Diable !--a rope 's broke !-- a knot have slipt !-- a staple 's draw !-- a bolt 's to whittle !-- a tag , a rag , a jag , a strap , a buckle , or a buckle 's tongue , want altering . now true as all this be , I never think myself impower to excommunicate thereupon either the post-chaise , or its driver -- nor do I take it into my head to swear by the liive , I would rather go a - foot ten thousand time -- or that I will be dam n' , if ever I get into another -- but I take the matter coolly before I , and consider , that some tag , or rag , or jag , or bolt , or buckle , or buckle 's tongue , will ever be a want or want altering , travel where I will -- so I never chaff , but take the good and the bad
bad as they fall in my road , and get on :-- do so , my lad ! say I ; he have lose five minute already , in alighting in order to get at a luncheon of black bread , which he have cramm would into the chaise - pocket , and be remounted , and go leisurely on , to relish it the better .-- get on , my lad , say I , briskly -- but in the most persuasive tone imaginable , for I jingle a four - and - twenty sous piece against the glass , take care to hold the flat side towards he , as he look ' back : the dog grinn would intelligence from he right ear to he left , and behind he sooty muzzle discover such a pearly row of tooth , that would have pawn ' she jewel for they . just heaven ! what masticator !--/ what bread !-- and so as he finish the last mouthful of it , we enter the town of . . there be not a town in all which , in my opinion , look better in the map , than ;-- I own , it do not look so well in the book of post - road ; but when you come to see it -- to be sure it look most pitifully . there be one thing , however , in it at present very handsome ; and that be , the inn -keeper 's daughter : she have be eighteen month at , and six at , in go through she class ; so knit , and sew , and dance , and do the little coquetry very well .-- -- a slut ! in run they over within these five minute that I have stand look at she , she have let fall at least a dozen loops in a white thread stock -- yes , yes -- I see , you cunn gipsy !--'tis long and taper -- you need not pin it to you knee -- and that ' ti you own -- and fit you exactly .-- -- that should have tell this creature a word about a statue 's thumb ! -- but as this sample be worth all they thumb -- besides , I have she thumb and finger in at the bargain , if they can be any guide to I , -- and as ( for that be she name ) stand so well for a drawing -- may I never draw more , or rather may I draw like a dratch - horse , by main strength all the day of my life , -- if I do not draw she in all she proportion , and with as determine a pencil , as if I have she in the wettest drapery .-- -- but you worship chuse rather that I give you the length , breadth , and perpendicular height of the great parish - church , or draw of the facade of the abbey of which have be transport from Artois hither -- every thing be just I suppose as the mason and carpenters leave they , -- and if the belief in continues so long , will be so these fifty year to come -- so you worship and reverence may all measure they at you leisure -- but he who measure thee , , must do it now -- thou carriest the principle of change within thy frame ; and consider the chance of a transitory life , I would not answer for thee a moment ; ere twice twelve month be pass and go , thou mayest grow out like a pumpkin , and lose thy shape -- or thou mayest go off like a flower , and lose thy beauty -- nay , thou mayest go off like a hussy -- and lose thyself .-- I would not answer for my aunt , be she alive --' faith , scarce for she picture -- be it but pain by Reynolds -- but if I go on with my drawing , after name that son of , I will be shot -- so you must e'en be content with the original ; which , if the evening be fine in passing throg , you will see at you chaise - door , as you change horse : but unless you have as bad a reason for haste as I have -- you have better stop :-- she have a little of the devote : but that , sir , be a terce to a nine in you favour -- - L ... help I ! I could not count a single point : so have be pique and repique , and capot to the devil . . all which be consider , and that death moreover might be much nearer I than I imagine -- I wish I be at , quoth I , be it only to see how they card and spin -- so off we set . ( . of french post -road , page 36 . edition of 1762 . ) a - poste et demi de a --- poste de a --- poste de Nouvion a poste -- but the carder and spinner be all go to bed . . what a vast advantage be travel ! only it heat one ; but there be a remedy for that , which you may pick out of the next chapter . . be I in a condition to stipulate with death , as I be this moment with my apothecary , how and where I will take he clyster -- I should certainly declare against submitting to it before my friend ; and therefore I never seriously think upon the mode and manner of this great catastrophe , which generally take up and torment my thought as much as the catastrophe
catastrophe itself ; but I constantly draw the curtain across it with this wish , that the Disposer of all thing may so order it , that it happen not to I in my own house -- but rather in some decent inn -- at home , I know it , -- the concern of my friend , and the last service of wip my brows , and smoothe my pillow , which the quiver hand of pale affection shall pay I , will so crucify my soul , that I shall die of a distemper which my physician be not aware of : but in a inn , the few cold office I want , would be purchase with a few guinea , and pay I with a undisturbed , but punctual attention -- but . this inn should not be the inn at -- if there be not another inn in the universe , I would strike that inn out of the capitulation : so let the horse be in the chaise exactly by four in the morning -- yes , by four , , -- or by ! I will raise a clatter in the house shall wake the dead . . ' make they like unto a wheel , ' be a bitter sarcasm , as all the learn know , against the grand tour , and that restless spirit for make it , which prophetically foresee would haunt the child of man in the latter day ; and therefore , as thinketh the great bishop hall , ' ti one of the severest imprecation which ever utter would against the enemy of the -- and , as if he have say , 'I wish they no worse luck than always to be roll about .' -- so much motion , continue he ( for he be very corpulent ) -- be so much unquietness ; and so much of rest , by the same analogy , be so much of heaven . now , I ( be very thin ) think differently ; and that so much of motion , be so much of life , and so much of joy -- and that to stand still , or get on but slowly , be death and the devil -- Hollo ! !-- the whole world 's asleep !-- bring out the horse -- grease the wheel -- tie on the mail -- and drive a nail into that moulding -- I will not lose a moment -- now the wheel we be talk of , and whereintoo ( but not whereontoo , for that would make a 's wheel of it ) he curseth he enemy , accord to the bishop 's habit of body , should certainly be a post-chaise wheel , whether they be set up in at that time or not -- and my wheel , for the contrary reason , must as certainly be a cart - wheel groan round its revolution once in a age ; and of which sort , be I to turn commentator , I should make no scruple to affirm , they have great store in that hilly country . I love the Pythagorean ( much more than ever I dare tell my dear ) for they ' ( ) ' --( they ) ' get out of the body , in order to think well . ' no man think right , whilst he be in it ; blinded as he must be , with he congenial humours , and draw differently aside , as the bishop and myself have be , with too lax or too tense a fibre -- be , half of it , sense ; and the measure of heaven itself be but the measure of we present appetite and concoction .-- -- but which of the two , in the present case , do you think to be mostly in the wrong ? you , certainly : quoth she , to disturb a whole family so early . . -- but she do not know I be under a vow not to shave my beard till I get to ;-- yet I hate to make mystery of nothing ;--'ti the cold cautiousness of one of those little soul from which ( lib . 13 . de moribus divinis , cap. 24 . ) hath make he estimate , wherein he setteth forth , that one Dutch mile , cubically multiplied , will allow room enough , and to spare , for eight hundred thousand million , which he suppose to be as great a number of soul ( count from the fall of ) as can possibly be damn ' to the end of the world . from what he have make this second estimate -- unless from the parental goodness of -- I do not know -- I be much more at a loss what could be in 's head , who pretend that no less a space than one of two hundred italian mile multiply into itself , will be sufficient to hold the like number -- he certainly must have go upon some of the old soul , of which he have read , without reflec how much , by a gradual and most tabid decline , in the course of eighteen hundred year , they must unavoidably have shrunk so as to have come , when he write , almost to nothing . in 's time , who seem the cooler man , they be as little as can be imagine -- -- we find they less now -- and next winter we shall find they less again ; so that if we go on from little to less , and from less to nothing , I hesitate not one moment to affirm , that in half a century at this rate , we shall have no soul at all ; which be the period beyond
beyond which I doubt likewise of the existence of the faith , 'twill be one advantage that both of th'ey will be exactly wear out together . ! and bless every other heathan and goddess ! for now ye will all come into play again , and with Priapus at you tail -- what jovial time !-- but where be I ? and into what a delicious riot of thing be I rush ? I -- I who must be cut short in the midst of my day , and taste no more of th'ey than what I borrow from my imagination -- peace to thee , generous fool ! and let I go on . . --'So hate , I say , to make mystery of nothing ' -- I intrust it with the post -boy , as soon as ever I get off the stone ; he give a crack with he whip to balance the compliment ; and with the thill - horse trotting , and a sort of a up and a down of the other , we dance it along to au clocher , fam in day of yore for the finest chime in the world ; but we dance through it without music -- the chime be greatly out of order --( as in truth they be through all ) . and so make all possible speed , from Ailly au clocher , I get to , from I get to , and from , I get to , concern which town I have nothing to inform you , but what I have inform you once before -- and that be -- that go there to school . . in the whole catalogue of those whiffl vexation which come puffe across a man 's canvass , there be not one of a more teasing and torment nature , than this particular one which I be go to describe -- and for which ( unless you travel with a avance - courier , which number do in order to prevent it ) -- there be no help : and it be this . that be you in never so kindly a propensity to sleep -- though you be pass perhaps through the finest country -- upon the best road , and in the easiest carriage for do it in the world -- nay , be you sure you could sleep fifty mile straight forwards , without once open you eye -- nay , what be more , be you as demonstratively satisfied as you can be of any truth in , that you should upon all account be full as well asleep as awake -- nay , perhaps better -- yet the incessant return of pay for the horse at every stage , -- with the necessity thereupon of put you hand into you pocket , and count out from thence three livre fifteen sous ( sous by sous ) , put a end to so much of the project , that you can not execute above six mile of it ( or suppose it be a post and a half , that be but nine ) -- be it to save you soul from destruction . -- I will be even with 'em , quoth I , for I will put the precise sum into a piece of paper , and hold it ready in my hand all the way : ' now I shall have nothing to do , ' say I ( compose myself to rest ) , ' but to drop this gently into the post -boy 's hat , and not say a word .'-- then there want two sous more to drink -- or there be a twelve sous piece of . which will not pass -- or a livre and some odd liard to be bring over from the last stage , which have forgot ; which altercation ( as a man can not dispute very well asleep ) rouse he : still be sweet sleep retrievable ; and still might the flesh weigh down the spirit , and recover itself of these blow -- but then , by heaven ! you have pay but for a single post--wherea ' ttis a post and a half ; and this oblige you to pull out you book of post - road , the print of which be so very small , it force you to open you eye , whether you will or no : then le cure offer you a pinch of snuff -- or a poor soldier shew you he leg -- or a shaveling he box -- or the priestesse of the cistern will water you wheel -- they do not want it -- but she swear by she priesthood ( throw it back ) that they do :-- then you have all these point to argue , or consider over in you mind ; in do of which , the rational power get so thoroughly awaken -- you may get th'ey to sleep again as you can . it be entirely owe to one of these misfortune , or I have pass would clean by the stable of -- -- but the postillion first affirme , and then persist in it to my face , that there be no mark upon the two sous piece , I open would my eye to be convince -- and see the mark upon it as plain as my nose -- I leap would out of the chaise in a passion , and so see every thing at in spite .-- I try it but for three post and a half , but believe ' tis the best principle in the world to travel speedily upon ; for as few object look very inviting in that mood -- you have little or nothing to stop you ; by which mean it be that I pass through , without turn my
my head so much as on one side towards the -- -- of they treasury ! stuff and nonsense !-- bat they jewel , which be all false , I would not give three sous for any one thing in it , but 's lantern -- nor for that either , only as it grow dark , it might be of use . , crack --crack , crack --crack , crack -- so this be ! quoth I ( continue in the same mood ) -- and this be !--humph !-- Paris! cry I , repeat the name the third time -- the first , the finest , the most brilliant -- the street however be nasty . but it look , I suppose , better than it smell -- crack , crack -- crack , crack - - what a fuss thou makest ! -- as if it concern the good people to be inform , that a man with pale face and clad in black , have the honour to be drive into at nine o'clock at night , by a postillion in a tawny yellow jerkin , turn up with red calamanco -- crack , crack -- crack , crack -- crack , crack , -- I wish thy whip -- -- but ' ti the spirit of thy nation ; so crack -- crack on . !-- and no one give the wall !-- but in the of herself , if the wall be besh ..t -- how can you do otherwise ? and prithee when do they light the lamps ? what ?--never in the summer month !-- ! ' ttis the time of sallad .-- of rare ! sallad and soup -- soup and sallad -- sallad and soup , encore -- --'Tis too much for sinner . now I can not bear the barbarity of it ; how can that unconscionable coachman talk so much bawdy to that lean horse ? do not you see , friend , the street be so villanously narrow , that there be not room in all to turn a wheelbarrow ? in the grandest city of the whole world , it would not have be amiss , if they have be leave a thought wider ; nay , be it only so much in every single street , as that a man might know ( be it only for satisfaction ) on which side of it he be walk . one --two--three--four--five--six--seven --eight --nine --ten .--Ten cook shop ! and twice the number of barber ! and all within three minute drive ! one would think that all the cook in the world , on some great merry - meeting with the barber , by not consent have say -- come , let we all go live at : the french love good eat -- they be all gourmand -- we shall rank high ; if they god be they belly -- they cook must be gentleman : and forasmuch as the periwig maketh the man , and the periwig - maker maketh the periwig -- ergo , would the barber say , we shall rank higher still -- we shall be above you all -- we shall be ( in , & c. & c. & c. ) at least -- pardi ! we shall all wear sword -- -- and so , one would swear , ( that be , by candle - light , -- but there be no depending upon it , ) they continue to do , to this day . . the french be certainly misunderstood :-- but whether the fault be theirs , in not sufficientely explain themselves ; or speak with that exact limitation and precision which one would expect on a point of such importance , and which , moreover , be so likely to be conteste by we -- or whether the fault may not be altogether on we side , in not understand they language always so critically as to know ' what they would be at '-- I shall not decide ; but ' tis evident to I , when they affirm , ' that they who have see , have see every thing ,' they must mean to speak of those who have see it by day - light . as for candle - light -- I give it up -- I have say before , there be no depending upon it -- and I repeat it again ; but not because the light and shade be too sharp -- or the tints confound -- or that there be neither beauty or keep , &c .. . . for that be not truth -- but it be a uncertain light in this respect , that in all the five hundred grand hotel , which they number up to you in -- and the five hundred good thing , at a modest computation ( for ' tis only allow one good thing to a ) , which by candle - light be best to be see , feel , hear , and understood ( which , by the bye , be a quotation from ) -- the a one of we out of fifty , can get we head fairly thrust in amongst they . this be no part of the french computation : ' tis simply this , that by the last survey take in the year one thousand seven hundred and sixteen , since which time there have be considerable augmentation , doth contain nine hundred street ; ( viz ) in the quarter call the City -- there be fifty - three street . in of the Shamble , fifty - five streets . in , thirty - four streets . in the quarter of the Louvre , twenty - five streets . in the , or , forty - nine streets . in . , forty - one streets . in ,
, twenty - nine streets . in the Halle , twenty - seven streets . in , fifty - five streets . in , fifty - four streets . in , or the , twenty - seven streets . the Greve , thirty - eight streets . in , or the , nineteen streets . in the , or the Temple , fifty - two streets . in . 's , sixty - eight streets . in the place Maubert , eighty - one streets . in , sixty streets . in , fifty - one streets . in the quarter of the Luxembourg , sixty - two streets . and in that of , fifty - five streets , into any of which you may walk ; and that when you have see they with all that belong to they , fairly by day - light -- they gate , they bridge , they square , they statue . . . and have crusad it moreover , through all they parish - church , by no means omitt and . . . and to cry all , have take a walk to the four palace , which you may see , either with or without the statue and picture , just as you chuse -- -- then you will have see -- -- but ' ti what no one needeth to tell you , for you will read of it yourself upon the portico of the , in these word , Earth no such folk !-- no folk E'er such a town as be ! -- , , , . ( non orbis gentem , non thurbey gen habet ullam -- ulla parem . ) the french have a gay way of treat every thing that be great ; and that be all can be say upon it . . in mention the word gay ( as in the close of the last chapter ) it put one ( i.e. a author ) in mind of the word spleen -- especially if he have any thing to say upon it : not that by any analysis -- or that from any table of interest or genealogy , there appear much more ground of alliance betwixt they , than betwixt light and darkness , or any two of the most unfriendly opposite in nature -- only ' ttis a undercraft of author to keep up a good understanding amongst word , as politician do amongst man -- not know how near they may be under a necessity of place they to each other -- which point be now gain ' , and that I may place mine exactly to my mind , I write it down here -- . this , upon leave Chantilly , I declare to be the best principle in the world to travel speedily upon ; but I give it only as matter of opinion . I still continue in the same sentiment -- only I have not then experience enough of its working to add this , that though you do get on at a tearing rate , yet you get on but uneasily to yourself at the same time ; for which reason I here quit it entirely , and for ever , and ' tis heartily at any one 's service -- it have spoil I the digestion of a good supper , and bring on a bilious diarrhoea , which have bring I back again to my first principle on which I set out -- and with which I shall now scamper it away to the bank of the -- -- no ;-- I can not stop a moment to give you the character of the people -- they genius -- they manners -- they custom -- they law -- they religion -- they government -- they manufacture -- they commerce -- they finances , with all the resource and hide spring which sustain they : qualified as I may be , by spend three day and two night amongst they , and during all that time make these thing the entire subject of my enquiry and reflection -- -- still I must away -- the roads be pave -- the post be short -- the day be long --'tis no more than noon -- I shall be at before the king -- -- be he go there ? not that I know -- of the . volume the fourth . non eni be excursus hic ejus , s opus ipsum est . . . . 6 . Si quid urbaniuscule lusum a nobis , per Musas et Charitas et omnium poetarum , te , ne I male capias . a dedication to a great man . have , a priori , intend to dedicate the Amour of my uncle to ...-- I see more reason , a posteriori , for do it to ........ I should lament from my soul , if this expose I to the jealousy of they Reverence ; because a posteriori , in - latin , signify the kissing hand for preferment -- or any thing else -- in order to get it . my opinion of ....... be neither better nor worse , than it be of .... Honours , like impression upon coin , may give a ideal and local value to a bit of base metal ; but Gold and silver will pass all the world over without any other recommendation than they own weight . the same good - will that make I think of offer up half a hour 's amusement to ... when out of place -- operate more forcibly at present , as half a hour 's amusement will be more serviceable and refresh after labour and sorrow , than after a philosophical repast . nothing be so perfectly amusement as a total change of idea ; no idea be so totally different as those of , and innocent lover :
: for which reason , when I come to talk of and , and set such mark upon they as will prevent confusion and mistake concern they for the future -- I propose to dedicate that volume to some gentle shepherd , whose thought proud never teach to stray , Far as the 's walk or Patriot - way ; yet simple to he hope have give out of a cloud - capp would head a humbler heaven ; some untam have World in depth of wood embrace -- some happier island in the wat 'ry - waste -- and where admit to that equal sky , he faithful dog should bear he company . in a word , by thus introduce a entire new set of object to he imagination , I shall unavoidably give a diversion to he passionate and love -sick Contemplation . in the mean time , I be the author . the Life and opinion of , . . now I hate to hear a person , especially if he be a traveller , complain that we do not get on so fast in as we do in ; whereas we get on much faster , considerati considerandi ; thereby always meane , that if you weigh they vehicle with the mountain of baggage which you lay both before and behind upon they -- and then consider they puny horse , with the very little they give they t--'tis a wonder they get on at all : they suffering be most unchristian , and ' ttis evident thereupon to I , that a french post -horse would not know what in the world to do , be it not for the two word ...... and ...... in which there be as much sustenance , as if you give he a peck of corn : now as these word cost nothing , I long from my soul to tell the reader what they be ; but here be the question -- they must be tell he plainly , and with the most distinct articulation , or it will answer no end -- and yet to do it in that plain way -- though they reverence may laugh at it in the bed - chamber -- full well I wot , they will abuse it in the parlour : for which cause , I have be volve and revolve in my fancy some time , but to no purpose , by what clean device or facette contrivance I might so modulate they , that whilst I satisfy that ear which the reader chuse to lend I -- I might not dissatisfy the other which he keep to himself . -- my ink burn my finger to try -- and when I have --'twill have a worse consequence -- it will burn ( I fear ) my paper . -- no ;--i dare not -- but if you wish to know how the abbess of Andouillets and a novice of she convent get over the difficulty ( only first wish myself all imaginable success ) -- I will tell you without the least scruple . . the abbess of , which if you look into the large set of provincial map now publish at , you will find situate amongst the hill which divide from , be in danger of a Anchylosis or stiff joint ( the sinovia of she knee become hard by long matin ) , and have try every remedy -- first , prayer and thanksgive ; then invocation to all the saint in heaven promiscuously -- then particularly to every saint who have ever have a stiff leg before she -- then touch it with all the relique of the convent , principally with the thigh - bone of the man of , who have be impotent from he youth -- then wrap it up in she veil when she go to bed -- then cross -wise she rosary -- then bring in to she aid the secular arm , and anoint it with oil and hot fat of animal - - then treat it with emollient and resolve fomentation -- then with poultice of marsh - mallow , mallow , bonus , white lilly and fenugreek -- then take the wood , I mean the smoak of th'ey , hold she scapulary across she lap -- then decoction of wild chicory , water - cress , chervil , sweet cecily and cochlearia -- and nothing all this while answer , be prevail on at last to try the hot - bath of -- so have first obtain leave of the visitor -general to take care of she existence -- she order all to be get ready for she journey : a novice of the convent of about seventeen , who have be trouble with a whitloe in she middle finger , by stick it constantly into the abbess 's cast poultice , &c . -- have gain such a interest , that overlook a sciatical old nun , who might have be set up for ever by the hot - bath of , , the little novice , be elect as the companion of the journey . a old calesh , belong to the abbesse , line with green frize , be order to be draw out into the sun -- the gardener of the convent be choose muleteer , lead out the two old mule , to clip the hair from the rump - end of they tail , whilst a couple of lay - sister be busy , the one in darn the lining , and the other in sew on the shred of yellow binding , which the tooth of time have unravelled -- the under - gardener dress would the muleteer 's hat in hot wine - lees -- and a taylor sit musically at it , in a shed over -against the convent , in assorting four dozen of
of bell for the harness , whistl to each bell , as he tie it on with a thong .-- -- the carpenter and the smith of Andouillets hold a council of wheel ; and by seven , the morning after , all look would spruce , and be ready at the gate of the convent for the hot - bath of -- two row of the unfortunate stood ready there a hour before . the abbess of Andouillets , support by the novice , advance slowly to the calesh , both clad in white , with they black rosary hang at they breast -- -- there be a simple solemnity in the contrast : they enter the calesh ; the nun in the same uniform , sweet emblem of innocence , each occupy a window , and as the abbess and look ' up -- each ( the sciatical poor nun accept ) -- each stream ' out the end of she veil in the air -- then kiss would the lilly hand which let it go : the good abbess and lay they hand saint - wise upon they breast -- look ' up to heaven -- then to they -- and look ' ' bless you , dear sister . ' I declare I be interested in this story , and wish I have be there . the gardener , whom I shall now call the muleteer , be a little , hearty , broad - set , good - natured , chatter , top kind of a fellow , who trouble he head very little with the how and when of life ; so have mortgage a month of he conventical wage in a borrachio , or leathern cask of wine , which he have dispose behind the calesh , with a large russet - colou riding - coat over it , to guard it from the sun ; and as the weather be hot , and he not a niggard of he labour , walk ten time more than he ride -- he find more occasion than those of nature , to fall back to the rear of he carriage ; till by frequent come and go , it have so happe nhave , that all he wine have leak have out at the legal vent of the borrachio , before one half of the journey be finish ' . Man be a creature bear to habitude . the day have be sultry -- the evening be delicious -- the wine be generous -- the Burgundian hill on which it grow be steep -- a little tempting bush over the door of a cool cottage at the foot of it , hang vibrating in full harmony with the passion -- a gentle air rust distinctly through the leave --'Come -- come , thirsty muleteer , -- come in . ' -- the muleteer be a son of , I need not say a word more . he give the mule , each of 'em , a sound lash , and look in the abbess 's and 's face ( as he do it ) -- as much as to say ' here I be ' -- he give a second good crack -- as much as to say to he mule , ' get on ' -- so slink behind , he enter would the little inn at the foot of the hill . the muleteer , as I tell you , be a little , joyous , chirping fellow , who think not of to - morrow , nor of what have go before , or what be to follow it , provide he get but he scantling of , and a little chit - chat along with it ; so enter into a long conversation , as how he be chief gardener to the convent of Andouillets , & c . & c. and out of friendship for the abbess and , who be only in she noviciate , he have come along with they from the confines of , & c . &c.- - and as how she have get a white swelling by she devotion -- and what a nation of herb he have procure to mollify she humours , &c . & c. and that if the water of do not mmend that leg -- she might as well be lame of both -- &c. &c . &c .-- he so contrive he story , as absolutely to forget the heroine of it -- and with she the little novice , and what be a more ticklish point to be forget than both -- the two mule ; who be creature that take advantage of the world , inasmuch as they parent take it of they -- and they not be in a condition to return the obligation downward ( as man and woman and beasts be ) -- they do it side - way , and long - way , and back - way -- and up hill , and down hill , and which way they can .-- Philosopher , with all they ethick , have never consider this rightly -- how should the poor muleteer , then in he cup , consider it at all ? he do not in the least -- ' ttis time we do ; let we leave he then in the vortex of he element , the happiest and most thoughtless of mortal man -- and for a moment let we look after the mule , the abbess , and . by virtue of the muleteer 's two last stroke the mule have go quietly on , follow they own conscience up the hill , till they have conquer would about one half of it ; when the elder of they , a shrewd crafty old , at the turn of a angle , give a side glance , and no muleteer behind
behind they ,-- by my fig ! say she , swear , I will go no further -- and if I do , reply the other , they shall make a drum of my hide .-- and so with one consent they stopp would thus -- . -- get on with you , say the abbess . -- wh ...ysh -- ysh --cry . Sh...a--shu..u--shu..u--sh..aw -- shaw would the abbess . -- Whu--v--w--whew --w--w--whuvhave , purse up she sweet lip betwixt a hoot and a whistle . Thump--thump--thump--obstreperate the abbess of Andouillets with the end of she gold - head cane against the bottom of the calesh -- the old mule let a f ... . we be ruin have and undone , my child , say the abbess to , -- we shall be here all night -- we shall be plunder ' -- we shall be ravish -- -- we shall be ravish ' , say , as sure as a gun . ! cry the abbess ( forget the o ! ) -- why be I govern would by this wicked stiff joint ? why do I leave the convent of Andouillets ? and why didst thou not suffer thy servant to go unpolluted to she tomb ? of my finger ! my finger ! cry the novice , catche fire at the word servant -- why be I not contend to put it here , or there , any where rather than be in this strait ? ! say the abbess . --say the novice ; for terror have strike they understanding -- the one know not what she say -- the other what she answer ' . of my virginity ! virginity ! cry the abbess . ...inity ! ... inity ! say the novice , sobb . . my dear mother , quoth the novice , come a little to herself , -- there be two certain word , which I have be tell will force any horse , or ass , or mule , to go up a hill whether he will or no ; be he never so obstinate or ill - will ' , the moment he hear they utter ' , he obey . they be word magic ! cry the abbess in the utmost horror -- no ; reply calmly - - but they be word sinful -- what be they ? quoth the abbess , interrupt she : they be sinful in the first degree , answer , -- they be mortal -- and if we be ravish and die unabsolved of they , we shall both - but you may pronounce they to I , quoth the abbess of Andouillets -- they can not , my dear mother , say the novice , be pronounce at all ; they will make all the blood in one 's body fly up into one 's face -- but you may whisper they in my ear , quoth the abbess . ! hadst thou no guardian angel to delegate to the inn at the bottom of the hill ? be there no generous and friendly spirit unemploye -- no agent in nature , by some monitory shivering , creepe along the artery which lead to he heart , to rouse the muleteer from he banquet ?-- no sweet minstrelsy to bring back the fair idea of the abbess and , with they black rosary ! Rouse ! rouse !-- but ' ti too late -- the horrid word be pronounce this moment -- -- and how to tell they -- ye , who can speak of every thing exist , with unpolluted lip -- instruct I -- guide I -- . all sin whatever , quoth the abbess , turn casuist in the distress they be under , be hold by the confessor of we convent to be either mortal or venial : there be no further division . now a venial sin be the slightest and least of all sins -- be halve -- by take either only the half of it , and leave the rest -- or , by take it all , and amicably halve it betwixt yourself and another person -- in course become dilute into no sin at all . now I see no sin in say , bou , bou , bou , bou , bou , a hundred time together ; nor be there any turpitude in pronounce the syllable ger , ger , ger , ger , ger , be it from we matin to we vesper : therefore , my dear daughter , continue the abbess of Andouillets -- I will say bou , and thou shal say ger ; and then alternately , as there be no more sin in yofou than in bou -- thou shal say fou -- and I will come in ( like fa , sol , la , re , mus , ut , at we compline ) with ter . and accordingly the abbess , give the pitch note , set off thus : Abbess , ..... ) Bou...bou ... bout .. ,.. ) ---ger,..ger , ..ger . ,.. ) Fou...fou ... fout .. Abbess , ..... ) ---ter,..ter ,..ter . the two mule acknowledge the note by a mutual lash of they tail ; but it go no further --'Twill answer by a ' by , say the novice . , ..... ) . bou . bou . bou . bou . bou. ,.. ) --- ger , ger , ger , ger , ger , ger . quicker still , cry . , fou , fou , fou , fou , fou , fou , fou , fou . quicker still , cry . , bou , bou , bou , bou , bou , bou , bou , bou . quicker still -- preserve I ; say the abbess -- they do not understand we , cry -- but the ,
, say the abbess of Andouillets . . what a tract of country have I run !-- how many degree nearer to the warm sun be I advance , and how many fair and goodly city have I see , during the time you have be read and reflec , , upon this story ! there be , and Sens , and , and , and Dijon the capital of , and , and Macon the capital of the Maconese , and a score more upon the road to Lyons -- and now I have run they over --I might as well talk to you of so many market town in the moon , as tell you one word about they : it will be this chapter at the least , if not both this and the next entirely lose , do what I will -- -- why , ' tis a strange story ! Tristram . ! madam , have it be upon some melancholy lecture of the cross -- the peace of meekness , or the contentment of resignation -- I have not be incommod : or have I think of write it upon the purer abstraction of the soul , and that food of wisdom and holiness and contemplation , upon which the spirit of man ( when separate from the body ) be to subsist for ever -- you would have come with a better appetite from it -- -- I wish I never have write it : but as I never blot any thing out -- let we use some honest means to get it out of we head directly . -- pray reach I my fool 's cap -- I fear you sit upon it , Madam --' tis under the cushion -- I will put it on -- I ! you have have it upon you head this half hour .-- there then let it stay , with a Fa - ra diddle di and a fa -ri diddle and a high - dum -- dye - dum fiddle . . .dumb -c . and now , , we may venture , I hope a little to go on . . -- all you need say of ( in case you be ask ' ) be , that it stand about forty mile ( south something ) from , in the middle of a large forest -- that there be something great in it -- that the king go there once every two or three year , with he whole court , for the pleasure of the chace -- and that , during that carnival of sporting , any English gentleman of fashion ( you need not forget yourself ) may be accommodate with a nag or two , to partake of the sport , take care only not to out - gallop the king -- though there be two reason why you need not talk loud of this to every one . first , because 'twill make the say nag the harder to be get ; and , ' not a word of it true .-- Allons ! as for -- you may dispatch -- in a word --'' tTis a archiepiscopal see . ' -- for -- the less , I think , one say of it the better . but for -- I could go on for ever : for in my grand tour through , in which , after all , my father ( not care to trust I with any one ) attend I himself , with my uncle , and , and , and indeed most of the family , except my mother , who be take up with a project of knitt my father a pair of large worsted breech --( the thing be common sense ) -- and she not care to be put out of she way , she stay at home , at , to keep thing right during the expedition ; in which , I say , my father stop we two day at , and he research be ever of such a nature , that they would have find fruit even in a desert -- he have leave I enough to say upon : in short , wherever my father go -- but ' twas more remarkably so , in this journey through and , than in any other stage of he life -- he road seem to lie so much on one side of that , wherein all other traveller have go before he -- he see king and court and silk of all colour , in such strange light -- and he remark and reasoning upon the character , the manners , and custom of the country we pass would over , be so opposite to those of all other mortal man , particularly those of my uncle and --( to say nothing of myself ) -- and to cry all -- the occurrence and scrape which we be perpetually meet and get into , in consequence of he system and opiniotry -- they be of so odd , so mixhave and tragi - comical a contexture -- that the whole put together , it appear of so different a shade and tint from any tour of , which be ever execute -- that I will venture to pronounce -- the fault must be mine and mine only -- if it be not read by all traveller and travel - reader , till travel be no more , -- or which come to the same point -- till the world , finally , take it into it be head to stand still .-- -- but this rich bale be not to be open have now ; except a small thread or two of it , merely to unravel the mystery of my father 's stay at . -- as I have mention it --'tis too slight to be keep suspend
suspend ; and when ' tis wove in , there be a end of it . we will go , brother , say my father , whilst dinner be coddl -- to the abbey of , if it be only to see these body , of which have give such a recommendation .-- I will go see any body , quoth my uncle ; for he be all compliance through every step of the journey -- defend I ! say my father -- they be all mummy -- then one need not shave ; quoth my uncle -- shave ! no --cry my father --'twill be more like relation to go with we beard on -- so out we sally , the corporal lending he master he arm , and bring up the rear , to the abbey of . every thing be very fine , and very rich , and very superb , and very magnificent , say my father , address himself to the sacristan , who be a younger brother of the order of -- but we curiosity have lead we to see the body , of which have give the world so exact a description .-- the sacristan make a bow , and light a torch first , which he have always in the vestry ready for the purpose ; he lead we into the tomb of -- this , say the sacristan , lay he hand upon the tomb , be a renowned prince of the house of , who under the successive reign of , , and the , bear a great sway in the government , and have a principal hand in bring every thing into order and discipline -- then he have be as great , say my uncle , in the field , as in the cabinet -- I dare say he have be a gallant soldier -- he be a monk -- say the sacristan . my uncle and seek comfort in each other 's face -- but find it not : my father clap both he hand upon he cod -piece , which be a way he have when any thing hugely tick he : for though he hate a monk and the very smell of a monk worse than all the devils in hell -- yet the shot hit my uncle and so much harder than he , ' tbe a relative triumph ; and put he into the gayest humour in the world . -- and pray what do you call this gentleman ? quoth my father , rather sportingly : this tomb , say the young , look downward , contain the bone of , who come from na on purpose to touch the body -- -- of , say my father , pop in with he saint before he , -- they be two of the greatest saint in the whole martyrology , add my father -- excuse I , say the sacristan --'twa to touch the bone of , the builder of the abbey -- and what do she get by it ? say my uncle -- what do any woman get by it ? say my father -- ; reply the young Benedictine , make a bow down to the ground , and utter the word with so humble , but decisive a cadence , it disarm my father for a moment . ' Tis suppose , continue the , that have lain in this tomb four hundred year , and two hundred before she canonization --'Tis but a slow rise , brother , quoth my father , in this self - same army of martyr .-- a desperate slow one , a ' please you honour , say , unless one could purchase -- I should rather sell out entirely , quoth my uncle -- I be pretty much of you opinion , brother , say my father . -- ! say my uncle Toby low to himself , as we turn would from she tomb : she be one of the fairest and most beautiful lady either of or , continue the sacristan -- but who the duce have get alain down here , besides she ? quoth my father , point with he cane to a large tomb as we walk on -- it be , , answer the sacristan -- and properly be plac ' ! say my father : and what be 's story ? continue he . , reply the sacristan , be a bishop -- -- I think so , by heaven ! cry my father , interrupt he -- !- - how should fail ? so snatch out he pocket - book , and the young hold he the torch as he write , he set it down as a new prop to he system of Christian name , and I will be bold to say , so disinterested be he in the search of truth , that have he find a treasure in 's tomb , it would not have make he half so rich : ' Twas as successful a short visit as ever be pay to the dead ; and so highly be he fancy plea would with all that have pass in it , -- that he determine at once to stay another day in . -- I will see the rest of these good gentry to - morrow , say my father , as we cross ' over the square -- and while you be pay that visit , brother , quoth my uncle -- the corporal and I will mount the rampart . . -- now this be the most puzzled skein of all -- for in this last chapter , as far at least as it have help ' I through , I have be get forwards in two different journy together , and with the same dash of the pen-- for I have get entirely out of in
in this journey which I be write now , and I be get half way out of in that which I shall write hereafter -- there be but a certain degree of perfection in every thing ; and by push at something beyond that , I have bring myself into such a situation , as no traveller ever stand before I ; for I be this moment walk across the market - place of with my father and my uncle , in we way back to dinner -- and I be this moment also enter Lyons with my post -chaise break into a thousand piece -- and I be moreover this moment in a handsome pavillion build by ( the same , the celebrated spanish architect , of whom my cousin have make such honourable mention in a scholium to the inscribe to he name . Vid. p.129 , small edit . ) , upon the bank of the , which Mon . have lent I , and where I now sit rhapsodise all these affair . -- let I collect myself , and pursue my journey . . I be glad of it , say I , settle the account with myself , as I walk would into Lyons -- my chaise be all laid higgledy - piggledy with my baggage in a cart , which be move slowly before I -- I be heartily glad , say I , that ' ti all broke to piece ; for now I can go directly by water to , which will carry I on a hundred and twenty mile of my journey , and not cost I seven livre -- and from thence , continue I , bring forwards the account , I can hire a couple of mule -- or ass , if I like , ( for nobody know I , ) and cross the plain of Languedoc for almost nothing -- I shall gain four hundred livre by the misfortune clear into my purse : and pleasure ! worth -- worth double the money by it . with what velocity , continue I , clapp my two hand together , shall I fly down the rapid Rhone , with the Vivare on my right hand , and on my left , scarce see the ancient city of , , and . what a flame will it rekindle in the lamp , to snatch a blushing grape from the Hermitage and Cote roto , as I shoot by the foot of they ! and what a fresh spring in the blood ! to behold upon the bank advancing and retire , the castle of romance , whence courteous knights have whilome rescue the distress ' -- and see vertiginous , the rock , the mountain , the cataract , and all the hurry which be in with all she great work about she . as I go on thus , methotch my chaise , the wreck of which look would stately enough at the first , insensibly grow less and less in its size ; the freshness of the painting be no more -- the gilding lose its lustre -- and the whole affair appear so poor in my eye -- so sorry !-- so contemptible ! and , in a word , so much worse than the abbess of ' itself -- that I be just open my mouth to give it to the devil -- when a pert vamping chaise - undertaker , step nimbly across the street , demand if yoMonsieu would have he chaise refit -- no , no , say I , shak my head sideway -- would choose to sell it ? rejoin the undertaker -- with all my soul , say I -- the iron work be worth forty livre -- and the glass worth forty more -- and the leather you may take to live on . what a mine of wealth , quoth I , as he count I the money , have this post - chaise bring I in ? and this be my usual method of book - keep , at least with the disaster of life -- make a penny of every one of th'ey as they happen to I -- -- do , my dear , tell the world for I , how I behave under one , the most oppressive of its kind , which could befal I as a man , proud as he ought to be of he manhood -- ' enough , saidst thou , come close up to I , as I stand with my garter in my hand , reflect upon what have not pass would --' Tis enough , Tristram , and I be satisfied , saidst thou , whisper these word in my ear , .... .. .... ... ......;--...... ...-- any other man would have sink down to the centre -- -- every thing be good for something , quoth I . -- I will go into Wales for six week , and drink 's whey -- and I will gain seven year longer life for the accident . for which reason I think myself inexcusable , for blame so often as I have do , for pelt I all my life long , like a ungracious duchess , as I call would she , with so many small evils : surely , if I have any cause to be angry with she , ' tis that she have not send I great one -- a score of good curse , bounce loss , would have be as good as a pension to I . -- one of a hundr a year , or so , be all I wish -- I would not be at the plague of pay land - tax for a larger . . to those who call vexation , Vexation , as know what they be , there could not be a
a greater , than to be the best part of a day at , the most opulent and flourish city in , enrich with the most fragment of antiquity -- and not be able to see it . to be withheld upon any account , must be a vexation ; but to be withheld by a vexation -- must certainly be , what philosophy justly call upon . I have get my two dish of milk coffee ( which by the bye be excellently good for a consumption , but you must boil the milk and coffee together -- otherwise ' ttis only coffee and milk ) -- and as it be no more than eight in the morning , and the boat do not go off till noon , I have time to see enough of Lyons to tire the patience of all the friend I have in the world with it . I will take a walk to the cathedral , say I , look at my list , and see the wonderful mechanism of this great clock of of , in the first place -- now , of all thing in the world , I understand the least of mechanism -- I have neither genius , or taste , or fancy -- and have a brain so entirely unapt for every thing of that kind , that I solemnly declare I be never yet able to comprehend the principle of motion of a squirrel cage , or a common knife - grinder 's wheel -- tho ' I have many a hour of my life look ' up with great devotion at the one -- and stand by with as much patience as any ever could do , at the other -- I will go see the surprising movement of this great clock , say I , the very first thing I do : and then I will pay a visit to the great library of the Jesuits , and procure , if possible , a sight of the thirty volume of the general history of , write ( not in the , but ) in the chinese language , and in the chinese character too . now I almost know as little of the chinese language , as I do of the mechanism of 's clock - work ; so , why these should have jostle themselves into the two first article of my list -- I leave to the curiious as a problem of . I own it look like one of she ladyship 's obliquity ; and they who court she , be interested in find out she humour as much as I . when these curiosity be see , quoth I , half address myself to my valet de place , who stand behind I --ot will be no hurt if we go to the church of , and see the pillar to which be tie -- and after that , the house where liv at the next town , say the valet de place -- at ; I be glad of it , say I , rise briskly from my chair , and walk across the room with stride twice as long as my usual pace --' for so much the sooner shall I be at the of the two lover . ' what be the cause of this movement , and why I take such long stride in uttere this -- I might leave to the curiious too ; but as no principle of clock - work be concerned in it --'t will be as well for the reader if I explain it myself . . o ! there be a sweet aera in the life of man , when ( the brain be tender and fibrillous , and more like pap than any thing else ) -- a story read of two fond lover , separate from each other by cruel parent , and by still more cruel destiny -- Amandus -- he -- she -- each ignorant of the other 's course , he -- east she -- west Amandus take captive by the Turk , and carry to the emperor of 's court , where the princess of fal in love with he , keep he twenty year in prison for the love of he Amanda .-- she -- ( ) all the time wander barefoot , and with dishevell would hair , of 'er rock and mountain , enquir for !-- ! Amandus !--mak every hill and valley to echo back he name -- ! Amandus ! at every town and city , sit down forlorn at the gate -- Has !-- have my Amandus enter would ?-- till , -- go round , and round , and round the world -- chance unexpected bring they at the same moment of the night , though by different way , to the gate of Lyons , they native city , and each in well - know accent call out aloud , be / be my Amanda still alive ? they fly into each other 's arm , and both drop down dead for joy . there be a soft aera in every gentle mortal 's life , where such a story afford more pabulum to the brain , than all the Frusts , and Crusts , and Rust of antiquity , which traveller can cook up for it . --'Tbe all that stuck on the right side of the cullender in my own , of what and other , in they account of , have straine into it ; and find , moreover , in some itinerary , but in what know -- that sacr to the fidelity of and , a tomb be build without the gate , where , to this hour , lover call upon they to attest they truth -- I never could get into a scrape of that kind in my life , but
but this tomb of the lover would , somehow or other , come in at the close -- nay such a kind of empire have it establish would over I , that I could seldom think or speak of Lyons -- and sometimes not so much as see even a Lyon - waistcoat , but this remnant of antiquity would present itself to my fancy ; and I have often say in my wild way of run on -- tho' I fear with some irreverence -- 'I think this shrine ( neglect as it be ) as valuable as that of , and so little short , except in wealth , of the itself , that some time or other , I would go a pilgrimage ( though I have no other business at Lyons ) on purpose to pay it a visit . ' in my list , therefore , of at , this , tho ' last , -- be not , you see , least ; so take a dozen or two of longer stride than usual cross my room , just whilst it pass my brain , I walk down calmly into the basse cour , in order to sally forth ; and have call for my bill -- as it be uncertain whether I should return to my inn , I have pay it -- have moreover give the maid ten sous , and be just receive the dernier compliment of , for a pleasant voyage down the -- when I be stop at the gate -- . --'Tbe by a poor ass , who have just turn in with a couple of large pannier upon he back , to collect eleemosynary turnip - top and cabbage - leave ; and stand dubious , with he two fore - foot on the inside of the threshold , and with he two hinder foot towards the street , as not know very well whether he be to go in or no . now , ' ti a animal ( be in what hurry I may ) I can not bear to strike -- there be a patient endurance of suffering , write so unaffectedly in he look and carriage , which plead so mightily for he , that it always disarm I ; and to that degree , that I do not like to speak unkindly to he : on the contrary , meet he where I will -- whether in town or country -- in cart or under pannier -- whether in liberty or bondage -- I have ever something civil to say to he on my part ; and as one word beget another ( if he have as little to do as I ) -- I generally fall into conversation with he ; and surely never be my imagination so busy as in fram he response from the etching of he countenance -- and where those carry I not deep enough -- in fly from my own heart into he , and see what be natural for a ass to think -- as well as a man , upon the occasion . in truth , it be the only creature of all the class of being below I , with whom I can do this : for parrot , jackdaw , &c .-- I never exchange a word with they -- nor with the ap , & c. for pretty near the same reason ; they act by rote , as the other speak by it , and equally make I silent : nay my dog and my cat , though I value they both --( and for my dog he would speak if he could ) -- yet somehow or other , they neither of they possess the talents for conversation -- I can make nothing of a discourse with they , beyond the proposition , the reply , and rejoinder , which terminate my father 's and my mother 's conversation , in he bed of justice -- and those utter ' -- there be a end of the dialogue -- -- but with a ass , I can commune for ever . , ! say I , -- see it be impracticable to pass betwixt he and the gate -- art thou for come in , or go out ? the ass twiste he head round to look up the street -- well -- reply I -- we will wait a minute for thy driver : -- he turn he head thoughtful about , and look wistfully the opposite way -- I understand thee perfectly , answer I -- if thou takest a wrong step in this affair , he will cudgel thee to death -- well ! a minute be but a minute , and if it save a fellow - creature a drubbing , it shall not be set down as ill - spend . he be eat the stem of a artichoke as this discourse go on , and in the little peevish contention of nature betwixt hunger and unsavouriness , have dropt it out of he mouth half a dozen time , and pick would it up again -- help thee , ! say I , thou hast a bitter breakfast of n't -- and many a bitter day 's labour , -- and many a bitter blow , I fear , for its wage --'tis all -- all bitterness to thee , whatever life be to other . -- and now thy mouth , if one know the truth of it , be as bitter , I dare say , as soot --( for he have cast aside the stem ) and thou hast not a friend perhaps in all this world , that will give thee a macaroon .-- in say this , I pull would out a paper of 'em , which I have just purchase , and give he one -- and at
at this moment that I be tell it , my heart smite I , that there be more of pleasantry in the conceit , of see how a ass would eat a macaroon -- than of benevolence in give he one , which preside in the act . when the ass have eat he macaroon , I press would he to come in -- the poor beast be heavy load -- he leg seem have to tremble under he -- he hang rather backward , and as I pull would at he halter , it break short in my hand - - he look would up pensive in my face --' do not thrash I with it -- but if you will , you may'-- if I do , say I , I will be d ....d . the word be but one - half of it pronounce , like the abbess of 's --( so there be no sin in it ) -- when a person come in , let fall a thundering bastinado upon the poor devil 's crupper , which put a end to the ceremony . out upon it ! cry I -- but the interjection be equivocal -- and , I think , wrong place too -- for the end of a osier which have start out from the contexture of the ass 's panier , have catch hold of my breech pocket , as he rush would by I , and rent it in the most disastrous direction you can imagine -- so that the out upon it ! in my opinion , should have come in here -- but this I leave to be settle by the reviewer of my Breech , which I have bring over along with I for that purpose . . when all be set to rights , I come down stairs again into the basse cour with my valet de place , in order to sally out towards the tomb of the two lover , &c .-- and be a second time stopp would at the gate -- not by the ass -- but by the person who strike he ; and who , by that time , have take possession ( as be not uncommon after a defeat ) of the very spot of ground where the ass stood . it be a commissary send to I from the post-office , with a rescript in he hand for the payment of some six livre odd sous . upon what account ? say I upon the part of the king , reply the commissary , heaive up both he shoulders -- -- my good friend , quoth I -- as sure as I be I -- and you be you -- -- and who be you ? say he .-- do not puzzle I ; say I . . -- but it be a indubitable verity , continue I , address myself to the commissary , change only the form of my asseveration -- that I owe the king of nothing but my good will ; for he be a very honest man , and I wish he all health and pastime in the world -- moi--reply the commissary , you be indebt to he six livre four sous , for the next post from hence to . , in you route to -- which be a post , you pay double for the horse and postillion --otherwise ' twould have amount to no more than three livre two sous -- -- but I do not go by land ; say I . -- you may if you please ; reply the commissary -- you most obedient servant -- say I , make he a low bow -- the commissary , with all the sincerity of grave good breeding -- make I one , as low again .-- I never be more disconcerted with a bow in my life . -- the take the serious character of these people ! quoth I -- ( aside ) they understand no more of irony than this -- the comparison be stand close by with he pannier -- but something seal ' up my lip -- I could not pronounce the name -- , say I , collect myself -- it be not my intention to take post -- -- but you may -- say he , persist in he first reply -- you may take post if you chuse -- -- and I may take salt to my pickle herr , say I , if I chuse -- -- but I do not chuse -- -- but you must pay for it , whether you do or no . aye ! for the salt ; say I ( I know ) -- -- and for the post too ; add he . defend I ! cry I -- I travel by water -- I be go down the this very afternoon -- my baggage be in the boat -- and I have actually pay nine livre for my passage -- est tout egal --'tis all one ; say he . ! what , pay for the way I go ! and for the way I do not go ! -- est tout egal ; reply the commissary -- -- the it be ! say I -- but I will go to ten thousand Bastile first -- of ! ! thout land of liberty , and climate of good sense , thout tenderest of mother -- and gentlest of nurse , cry I , knee upon one knee , as I be begin my apostrophe . when the director of 's conscience come in at that instant , and see a person in black , with a face as pale as ash , at he devotion -- look still paler by the contrast and distress of he drapery - - ask ' , if I stand in want of the aids of
of the church -- I go by -- say I -- and here be another will be for make I pay for go by Oil . . as I perceive the commissary of the post-office would have he six livre four sous , I have nothing else for it , but to say some smart thing upon the occasion , worth the money : and so I set off thus :-- -- and pray , , by what law of courtesy be a defenceless stranger to be use just the reverse from what you use a in this matter ? by no means ; say he . excuse I ; say I -- for you have begin , , with first tear off my breech - and now you want my pocket -- whereas -- have you first take my pocket , as you do with you own people -- and then leave I bear a .. would after -- I have be a beast to have complain' -- as it be -- --'Tis contrary to the law of nature . t--'Tis contrary to reason . t--'Tis contrary to the . but not to this -- say he -- put a print paper into my hand , . t--'Tis a pithy prolegomenon , quoth I -- and so read on . . .. -- by all which it appear , quoth I , have read it over , a little too rapidly , that if a man set out in a post-chaise from -- he must go on travelling in one , all the day of he life -- or pay for it .-- excuse I , say the commissary , the spirit of the ordinance be this -- that if you set out with a intention of running post from to , & c. you shall not change that intention or mode of travelling , without first satisfye the fermier for two post further than the place you repent at -- and ' tis foun , continue he , upon this , that the revenue be not to fall short through you fickleness -- -- of by heaven ! cry I -- if fickleness be taxable in -- we have nothing to do but to make the best peace with you we can -- and so the peace be make ; -- and if it be a bad one -- as lay the corner - stone of it -- nobody but ought to be hang . . though I be sensible I have say as many clever thing to the commissary as come to six livre four sous , yet I be determined to note down the imposition amongst my remark before I retire from the place ; so put my hand into my coat - pocket for my remark --( which , by the bye , may be a caution to traveller to take a little more care of they remark for the future ) 'my remark be stoleng -- never do sorry traveller make such a pother and racket about he remark as I do about mine , upon the occasion . heaven ! earth ! sea ! fire ! cry I , call in every thing to my aid but what I should -- my remark be steal !-- what shall I do ?-- ! pray do I drop any remark , as I stand besides you ?-- you dropp would a good many very singular one ; reply he -- ! say I , those be but a few , not worth above six livre two sous -- but these be a large parcel -- he shook he head -- ! ! do you see any papers of mine ?-- you may of the house ! run up stair -- ! run up after she -- -- I must have my remark -- they be the best remark , cry I , that ever be make -- the wisest -- the wittiest -- what shall I do ?-- which way shall I turn myself ? , when he lose he ass 's Furniture , do not exclaim more bitterly . . when the first transport be over , and the register of the brain be begin to get a little out of the confusion into which this jumble of cross accident have cast they -- it then presently occurr ' to I , that I have leave my remark in the pocket of the chaise -- and that in sell my chaise , I have sell my remark along with it , to the chaise - vamper . I leave this void space that the reader may swear into it any oath that he be most accustom to -- for my own part , if ever I swore a whole oath into a vacancy in my life , I think it be into that -- ......... , say I -- and so my remark through , which be as full of wit , as a egg be full of meat , and as well worth four hundred guinea , as the say egg be worth a penny -- have I be sell here to a chaise - vamper -- for four -- and give he a post-chaise ( by heaven ) worth six into the bargain ; have it be to , or , or any creditable bookseller , who be either leave off business , and want a post-chaise -- or who be begin it -- and want my remark , and two or three guinea along with they -- I could have borne it -- but to a chaise - vamper !-- show I to he this moment , , -- say I - - the valet de place put on he hat , and lead the way -- and I pull would off mine , as I pass would the commissary , and follow he . . when we arrive at the chaise
chaise - vamper 's house , both the house and the shop be shut up ; it be the eighth of , the nativity of the bless , mother of -- -- - ra -tan - tivi --to whole world be go out a - poling -- frisk here -- cape there -- no body car a button for I or my remark ; so I sit I down upon a bench by the door , philosophat upon my condition : by a better fate than usually attend I , I have not wait half a hour , when the mistress come in to take the papilliote from off she hair , before she go to the - pole -- the french woman , by the bye , love - pole , a la folie -- that be , as much as they matin -- give 'em but a - pole , whether in , , or -- they never count the time -- down it go --'tis meat , drink , wash , and lod to th'ey -- and have we but the policy , an' please you worship ( as wood be a little scarce in ) , to send they but plenty of - pole -- the woman would set they up ; and when they have do , they would dance round they ( and the man for company ) till they be all blind . the wife of the chaise - vamper stepp would in , I tell you , to take the papilliote from off she hair -- the toilet stand still for no man -- so she jerk would off she cap , to begin with they as she open ' the door , in do which , one of they fall upon the ground -- I instantly see it be my own writing -- of ! cry I -- you have get all my remark upon you head , !-- suis bien mortifiee , say she --'tis well , think I , they have stick there -- for could they have gone deeper , they would have make such confusion in a french woman 's noddle -- she have better have go with it unfrizled , to the day of eternity . --said she -- so without any idea of the nature of my suffering , she take they from she curl , and put they gravely one by one into my hat -- one be twist this way -- another twist that -- ey ! by my faith ; and when they be publish , quoth I ,-- they will be worse twist still . . and now for 's clock ! say I , with the air of a man , who have get thro ' all he difficulty -- nothing can prevent we see that , and the chinese history , & c. except the time , say -- for ' tis almost eleven -- then we must speed the faster , say I , strid it away to the cathedral . I can not say , in my heart , that it give I any concern in be tell by one of the minor canons , as I be enter the west door ,-- that 's great clock be all out of joint , and have not go for some year -- it will give I the more time , think I , to peruse the chinese history ; and besides I shall be able to give the world a better account of the clock in its decay , than I could have do in its flourishing condition -- -- and so away I post to the college of the Jesuits . now it be with the project of get a peep at the history of in chinese character -- as with many other I could mention , which strike the fancy only at a distance ; for as I come nearer and nearer to the point -- my blood cool ' -- the freak gradually go off , till at length I would not have give a cherry - stone to have it gratify -- the truth be , my time be short , and my heart be at the of the lover -- I wish to , say I , as I get the rapper in my hand , that the key of the library may be but lost ; it fall out as well -- for all the have get the cholic -- and to that degree , as never be know in the memory of the oldest practitioner . . as I know the geography of the of the lover , as well as if I have liv twenty year in Lyons , namely , that it be upon the turning of my right hand , just without the gate , lead to the -- I dispatch to the boat , that I might pay the homage I so long ow would it , without a witness of my weakness -- I walk ' with all imaginable joy towards the place -- when I see the gate which intercept the tomb , my heart glow within I -- -- and faithful spirit ! cry I , address myself to and -- long -- long have I tarry to drop this tear upon you tomb -- I come - - I come -- when I come -- there be no tomb to drop it upon . what would I have give for my uncle , to have whistle bullero ! . no matter how , or in what mood -- but I flow from the tomb of the lover -- or rather I do not fly from it --( for there be no such thing exist ) and just get time enough to the boat to save my passage ; -- and ere I have sail a hundred yard , the and the meet together ,
, and carry I down merrily betwixt they . but I have describe this voyage down the , before I make it -- -- so now I be at , and as there be nothing to see but the old house , in which the duke of reside , and nothing to stop I but a short remark upon the place , in three minute you will see I cross the bridge upon a mule , with upon a horse with my portmanteau behind he , and the owner of both , strid the way before we , with a long gun upon he shoulder , and a sword under he arm , lest peradventure we should run away with he cattle . have you see my breech in enter ,-- though you would have see they better , I think , as I mount -- you would not have think the precaution amiss , or find in you heart to have take it in dudgeon ; for my own part , I take it most kindly ; and determine to make he a present of they , when we get to the end of we journey , for the trouble they have put he to , of arm himself at all point against they . before I go further , let I get rid of my remark upon , which be this : that I think it wrong , merely because a man 's hat have be blow off he head by chance the first night he come to , -- that he should therefore say , ' be more subject to high wind than any town in all :' for which reason I lay no stress upon the accident till I have enquire of the master of the inn about it , who tell I seriously it be so -- and hearing , moreover , the windiness of speak of in the country about as a proverb -- I set it down , merely to ask the learn what can be the cause -- the consequence I see -- for they be all Dukes , , and count , there -- the duce a , in all -- so that there be scarce any talk to they on a windy day . Prithee , friend , say I , take hold of my mule for a moment -- for I want to pull off one of my jack - boot , which hurt my heel -- the man be stand quite idle at the door of the inn , and as I have take it into my head , he be someway concerned about the house or stable , I put the bridle into he hand -- so begun with the boot :-- when I have finish the affair , I turn about to take the mule from the man , and thank he -- -- but have walk in -- . I have now the whole south of , from the bank of the to those of the , to traverse upon my mule at my own leisure -- at my own leisure -- for I have leave , the know -- and he only -- how far behind I -- 'I have follow many a man thro' , quoth he -- but never at this mettlesome rate .'-- he follow , -- and still I fle he -- but I fle he cheerfully -- still he pursue -- but , like one who pursue he prey without hope -- as he lagg ' , every step he lose , soften he look -- why should I fly he at this rate ? so notwithstand all the commissary of the post-office have say , I change the mode of my travelling once more ; and , after so precipitate and ratt a course as I have run , I flatter my fancy with thinking of my mule , and that I should traverse the rich plain of upon he back , as slowly as foot could fall . there be nothing more pleasing to a traveller -- or more terrible to travel - writer , than a large rich plain ; especially if it be without great rivers or bridge ; and present nothing to the eye , but one unvaried picture of plenty : for after they have once tell you , that ' ttis delicious ! or delightful ! ( as the case happen ) -- that the soil be grateful , and that nature pour out all she abundance , & class . . . they have then a large plain upon they hand , which they know not what to do with -- and which be of little or no use to they but to carry they to some town ; and that town , perhaps of little more , but a new place to start from to the next plain -- and so on . -- this be most terrible work ; judge if I do not manage my plain better . . I have not go above two leagu and a half , before the man with he gun begin to look at he priming . I have three several time loiter would terribly behind ; half a mile at least every time ; once , in deep conference with a drum - maker , who be make drum for the fair of and -- I do not understand the principle -- the second time , I can not so properly say , I stopp' -- for meet a couple of straiten more for time than myself , and not be able to get to the bottom of what I be about -- I have turn would back with they -- the third , be a affair of trade with a gossip , for a hand - basket of Provence fig for four sous ; this would have be transact at once
once ; but for a case of conscience at the close of it ; for when the fig be pay for , it turn would out , that there be two dozen of egg cover over with vine - leave at the bottom of the basket -- as I have no intention of buy egg -- I make no sort of claim of they -- as for the space they have occupy -- what signify it ? I have fig enow for my money -- -- but it be my intention to have the basket -- it be the gossip 's intention to keep it , without which , she could do nothing with she egg -- and unless I have the basket , I could do as little with my fig , which be too ripe already , and most of 'em burst at the side : this bring on a short contention , which terminate in sundry proposal , what we should both do -- -- how we dispose of we egg and fig , I defy you , or the himself , have he not be there ( which I be persuade he be ) , to form the least probable conjecture : you will read the whole of it -- not this year , for I be hasten to the story of my uncle 's amour -- but you will read it in the collection of those which have arise out of the journey across this plain -- and which , therefore , I call my . how far my pen have be fatigue , like those of other traveller , in this journey of it , over so barren a track -- the world must judge -- but the trace of it , which be now all set o's vibrat together this moment , tell I ' ti the most fruitful and busy period of my life ; for as i have make no convention with my man with the gun , as to time -- by stop and talk to every soul I meet , who be not in a full trot -- join all party before I -- wait for every soul behind -- haile all those who be come through cross -roads --arrest all kind of beggar , pilgrim , fiddler , friar -- not pass by a woman in a mulberry - tree without commend she leg , and temp she into conversation with a pinch of snuff -- in short , by seize every handle , of what size or shape soever , which chance hold out to I in this journey -- I turn my plain into a city -- I be always in company , and with great variety too ; and as my mule love society as much as myself , and have some proposal always on he part to offer to every beast he meet -- I be confident we could have pass through - , or 's - , for a month together , with fewer adventur -- and see less of human nature . o ! there be that sprightly frankness , which at once unpind every plait of a 's dress -- that whatever be beneath it , it look so like the simplicity which poet s of in better day -- I will delude my fancy , and believe it be so . 'Tbe in the road betwixt and , where there be the best wine in all , and which by the bye belong to the honest canons of -- and foul befal the man who have drink it at they table , who grudge they a drop of it . -- the sun be set -- they have do they work ; the nymph have tie up they hair afresh -- and the swain be prepare for a carousal -- my mule make a dead point --'Tis the fife and tabourin , say I -- I be frighten ' to death , quoth he -- they be run at the ring of pleasure , say I , give he a prick -- by saint , and all the saint at the backside of the door of purgatory , say he --( make the same resolution with the abbesse of Andouillets ) I will not go a step further --'Tis very well , sir , say I -- I never will argue a point with one of you family , as long as I live ; so leape off he back , and kick off one boot into this ditch , and t'other into that -- I will take a dance , say I -- so stay you here . a sun - burnt daughter of rise up from the groupe to meet I , as I advanc towards they ; she hair , which be a dark chesnut approach rather to a black , be tie up in a knot , all but a single tress . we want a cavalier , say she , hold out both she hand , as if to offer they -- and a cavalier ye shall have ; say I , take hold of both of they . Hadst thou , , be array would like a duchesse ! -- but that curse slit in thy petticoat ! care not for it . we could not have do without you , say she , let go one hand , with self - teach politeness , lead I up with the other . a lame youth , whom have recompense with a pipe , and to which he have add a tabourin of he own accord , run sweetly over the prelude , as he sit upon the bank -- I up this tress instantly , say , put a piece of string into my hand -- it teach I to forget I be a stranger -- the whole knot fall down -- we have be
be seven year acquaint . the youth struck the note upon the tabourin -- he pipe follow , and off we bounde --' the duce take that slit ! ' the sister of the youth , who have steal she voice from heaven , sung alternately with she brother --'tbe a roundelay . ! ! the nymph join would in unison , and they swain a octave below they -- I would have give a crown to have it sow would up -- would not have give a sous -- la joia ! be in she lip -- ! be in she eyes . a transient spark of amity shot across the space betwixt we -- she look have amiable !-- why could I not live , and end my day thus ? just Disposer of we joy and sorrow , cry I , why could not a man sit down in the lap of content here -- and dance , and s , and say he prayer , and go to heaven with this nut - brown maid ? Capriciously do she bend she head on one side , and dance up insidious -- then ' ttis time to dance off , quoth I ; so change only partner and tune , I dance it away from to -- from thence to , -- I dance it along through , , and , till at last I dance myself into 's pavillion , where pull out a paper of black line , that I might go on straight forward , without digression or parenthesis , in my uncle 's amour -- I begin thus -- . -- but softly -- for in these sportive plain , and under this genial sun , where at this instant all flesh be run out piping , fiddl , and dance to the vintage , and every step that be take , the judgment be surprise by the imagination , I defy , notwithstand all that have be say upon straight line ( . Vol . III . ) in sundry page of my book -- I defy the best cabbage planter that ever exist , whether he plant backward or forward , it make little difference in the account ( except that he will have more to answer for in the one case than in the other ) -- I defy he to go on coolly , critically , and canonically , plan he cabbage one by one , in straight line , and stoical distance , especially if slit in petticoat be unsew ' up -- without ever and anon straddl out , or sidl into some bastardly digression -- in - land , Fog - land , and some other lands I wot of -- it may be do -- but in this clear climate of fantasy and perspiration , where every idea , sensible and insensible , get vent -- in this land , my dear -- in this fertile land of chivalry and romance , where I now sit , unskrew my ink - horn to write my uncle 's amour , and with all the meander of 's track in quest of she , in full view of my study window -- if thou comest not and takest I by the hand -- what a work it be likely to turn out ! let we begin it . . it be with love as with -- but now I be talk of begin a book , and have long have a thing upon my mind to be impart to the reader , which , if not impart now , can never be impart to he as long as I live ( whereas the may be impart to he any hour in the day ) -- I will just mention it , and begin in good earnest . the thing be this . that of all the several way of begin a book which be now in practice throughout the known world , I be confident my own way of do it be the best -- I be sure it be the most religious -- for I begin with write the first sentence -- and trust to for the second . 'Twould cure a author for ever of the fuss and folly of open he street - door , and call in he neighbour and friend , and kinsfolk , with the devil and all he imp , with they hammer and engine , & c. only to observe how one sentence of mine follow another , and how the plan follow the whole . I wish you see I half start out of my chair , with what confidence , as I grasp the elbow of it , I look up -- catch the idea , even sometimes before it half way reach I -- I believe in my conscience I intercept many a thought which heave intend for another man . and he ( . 's . ) be fool to I -- no martyr be ever so full of faith or fire -- I wish I could say of good work too -- but I have no or -- or or -- and till god and man agree together to call it by the same name -- the errantest Tartuffe , in science -- in politics -- or in religion , shall never kindle a spark within I , or have a worse word , or a more unkind greeting , than what he will read in the next chapter . . -- Bon jour !-- good morrow !-- so you have get you cloak on betime !-- but ' tis a cold morning , and you judge the matter rightly --'tis better to be well mount , than go of ' foot -- and obstruction in the gland be dangerous -- and how go it with thy concubine -- thy wife , -- and thy
thy little one of ' both side ? and when do you hear from the old gentleman and lady -- you sister , aunt , uncle , and cousin -- I hope they have get better of they cold , cough , clap , tooth - ach , fever , strangury , sciatica , swelling , and sore eye . -- what a devil of a apothecary ! to take so much blood -- give such a vile purge --puke --poultice --plaister--night-dratch --clyster--blister?--And why so many grains of calomel ? ! and such a dose of opium ! perus - clitating , pardi ! the whole family of ye , from head to tail -- by my great - aunt 's old black velvet mask ! I think there be no occasion for it . now this be a little bald about the ching , by frequently put off and on , before she be get with child by the coachman -- not one of we family would wear it after . to cover the mask afresh , be more than the mask be worth -- and to wear a mask which be bald , or which could be half see through , be as bad as have no mask at all -- this be the reason , may it please you reverence , that in all we numerous family , for these four generation , we count no more than one archbishop , a judge , some three or four alderman , and a single mountebank -- in the sixteenth century , we boast of no less than a dozen alchymist . . ' it be with love as with ' -- the suffering party be at least the third , but generally the last in the house who know any thing about the matter : this come , as all the world know , from have half a dozen word for one thing ; and so long , as what in this vessel of the human frame , be --may be hatred , in that -- sentiment half a yard higher -- and Nonsense -- no , Madam , -- not there -- I mean at the part I be now point to with my forefinger -- how can we help ourselves ? of all mortal , and immortal man too , if you please , who ever soliloquize upon this mystic subject , my uncle be the worst fit , to have push have he research , thro ' such a contention of feeling ; and he have infallibly let they all run on , as we do worse matter , to see what they would turn out -- have not Bridget 's pre-notification of they to , and 's repeat manifestoe thereupon to all the world , make it necessary for my uncle to look into the affair . . why weaver , gardener , and gladiator -- or a man with a pined leg ( proceed from some ailment in the foot ) --should ever have have some tender nymph break she heart in secret for they , be point well and duly settle and account for , by ancient and modern physiologist . a water - drinker , provide he be a profess have one , and do it without fraud or covin , be precisely in the same predicament : not that , at first sight , there be any consequence , or show of logic in it , ' that a rill of cold water dribbl through my inward part , should light up a torch in my 's --' -- the proposition do not strike one ; on the contrary , it seem to run opposite to the natural workings of cause and effect -- but it shew the weakness and imbecility of human reason . --' and in perfect good health with it ? ' -- the most perfect ,-- madam , that friendship herself could wish I -- ' and drink nothing !--nothing but water ? ' -- Impetuous fluid ! the moment thou pressest against the flood - gate of the brain -- see how they give way !-- in swim Curiosity , beckon to she damsel to follow -- they dive into the center of the current -- Fancy sit muse upon the bank , and with she eye follow the stream , turnd straw and bulrush into mast and bow-sprit -- and , with vest hold up to the knee in one hand , snatch at they , as they swim by she , with the other -- of ye water drinker ! be it then by this delusive fountain , that ye have so often govern and turn ' this world about like a mill - wheel -- grind the face of the impotent -- bepowder they rib -- bepepper they nos , and change sometimes even the very frame and face of nature -- if I be you , quoth , I would drink more water , -- and , if I be you , , reply , so would I . which shew they have both read -- for my own part , I be resolve never to read any book but my own , as long as I live . . I wish my uncle have be a water - drinker ; for then the thing have be account for , that the first moment see he , she feel something stirr within she in he favour -- something !--someth . -- something perhaps more than friendship -- less than love -- something -- no matter what -- no matter where -- I would not give a single hair off my mule 's tail , and be obliged to pluck it off myself ( indeed the villain have not many to spare , and be not a little vicious into the bargain ) , to be let by you worship into the secret
secret -- but the truth be , my uncle be not a water - drinker ; he drank it neither pure nor mix' , or any how , or any where , except fortuitously upon some advanced post , where better liquor be not to be have -- or during the time he be under cure ; when the surgeon tell he it would extend the fibre , and bring they sooner into contact --my uncle drank it for quietness sake . now as all the world know , that no effect in nature can be produce without a cause , and as it be as well know , that my uncle be neither a weaver -- a gardener , or a gladiator -- unless as a captain , you will need have he one -- but then he be only a captain of foot -- and besides , the whole be a equivocation -- there be nothing leave for we to suppose , but that my uncle 's leg -- but that will avail we little in the present hypothesis , unless it have proceed from some ailment in the foot --whereas he leg be not emaciate from any disorder in he foot -- for my uncle 's leg be not emaciate at all . it be a little stiff and awkward , from a total disuse of it , for the three year he lay confine at my father 's house in town ; but it be plump and muscular , and in all other respects as good and promise a leg as the other . I declare , I do not recollect any one opinion or passage of my life , where my understanding be more at a loss to make end meet , and torture the chapter I have be write , to the service of the chapter follow it , than in the present case : one would think I take a pleasure in run into difficulty of this kind , merely to make fresh experiment of get out of th'ey -- inconsiderate soul that thou art ! what ! be not the unavoidable distress with which , as a author and a man , thou be hemm have in on every side of thee -- be they , , not sufficient , but thou must entangle thyself still more ? be it not enough that thou be in debt , and that thou hast ten cart - load of thy fifth and sixth volume ( Allud to the first edition . ) still -- still unsold , and art almost at thy wit 's end , how to get they off thy hand ? to this hour art thou not torment with the vile asthma that thou gattest in skating against the wind in Flanders ? and be it but two month ago , that in a fit of laughter , on see a cardinal make water like a quirister ( with both hand ) thou brakest a vessel in thy lung , whereby , in two hour , thou lose as many quart of blood ; and hadst thou lose as much more , do not the faculty tell thee -- it would have amount to a gallon ?-- . -- but for heaven 's sake , let we not talk of quart or gallon -- let we take the story straight before we ; it be so nice and intricate a one , it will scarce bear the transposition of a single tittle ; and , somehow or other , you have get I thrust almost into the middle of it -- -- I beg we may take more care . . my uncle and the corporal have post down with so much heat and precipitation , to take possession of the spot of ground we have so often speak of , in order to open they campaign as early as the rest of the ally ; that they have forget one of the most necessary article of the whole affair , it be neither a pioneer 's spade , a pickax , or a shovel -- -- it be a bed to lie on : so that as - be at that time unfurnish ; and the little inn where poor die , not yet build ; my uncle be constrain to accept of a bed at 's , for a night or two , till corporal ( who to the character of a excellent valet , groom , cook , sempster , surgeon , and engineer , super - add that of a excellent upholsterer too ) , with the help of a carpenter and a couple of taylor , construct one in my uncle 's house . a daughter of , for such be widow , and ' tis all the character I intend to give off she -- --' that she be a perfect woman --' have better be fifty leagu off -- or in she warm bed -- or play with a case - knife -- or any thing you please -- than make a man the object of she attention , when the house and all the furniture be she own . there be nothing in it out of door and in broad day - light , where a woman have a power , physically speak , of view a man in more light than one - - but here , for she soul , she can see he in no light without mix something of she own goods and chattel along with he -- till by reiterate act of such combination , he get foist into she inventory -- -- and then good night . but this be not matter of ; for I have deliver that above -- nor be it matter of -- for I make no man 's creed but my own -- nor matter of fact -- at least that I know
know of ; but ' tis matter copulative and introductory to what follow . . I do not speak it with regard to the coarseness or cleanness of they -- or the strength of they gusset -- but pray do not night - shift differ from day - shift as much in this particular , as in any thing else in the world ; that they so far exceed the other in length , that when you be lay down in they , they fall almost as much below the foot , as the day - shift fall short of they ? 's night - shift ( as be the mode I suppose in 's and 's reign ) be cut however after this fashion ; and if the fashion be change ( for in Italy they be come to nothing ) --so much the worse for the public ; they be two Flemish ell and a half in length , so that allow a moderate woman two ell , she have half a ell to spare , to do what she would with . now from one little indulgence gain after another , in the many bleak and decemberly night of a seven year widow - hood , thing have insensibly come to this pass , and for the two last year have get establish have into one of the ordinance of the bed- chamber -- that as soon as be put to bed , and have get she leg stretch down to the bottom of it , of which she always give notice -- , with all suitable decorum , have first open have the bed - clothes at the foot , take hold of the half - ell of cloth we be speak of , and have gently , and with both she hand , draw it downwards to its furthest extension , and then contract it again side - long by four or five even plait , she take a large corking - pin out of she sleeve , and with the point direct towards she , pinn would the plait all fast together a little above the hem ; which do , she tick would all in tight at the foot , and wish ' she mistress a good night . this be constant , and without any other variation than this ; that on shivering and tempestuous night , when untuck have the foot of the bed , &c. to do this -- she consult no thermometer but that of she own passion ; and so perform it stand -- knee -- or squatt , accord to the different degree of faith , hope , and charity , she be in , and bear towards she mistress that night . in every other respect , the etiquette be sacr , and might have vy with the most mechanical one of the most inflexible bed - chamber in . the first night , as soon as the corporal have conduct my uncle up stair , which be about ten -- . throw herself into she arm - chair , and cross she left knee with she right , which form a resting - place for she elbow , she reclin would she cheek upon the palm of she hand , and lean forwards , ruminate till midnight upon both side of the question . the second night she go to she bureau , and have order to bring she up a couple of fresh candle and leave they upon the table , she take out she marriage - settlement , and read it over with great devotion : and the third night ( which be the last of my uncle 's stay ) when have pull have down the night - shift , and be assay to stick in the corking pin -- -- with a kick of both heel at once , but at the same time the most natural kick that could be kick ' in she situation -- for suppose ......... to be the sun in its meridian , it be a north - east kick -- she kick would the pin out of she finger -- the etiquette which hang upon it , down -- down it fall to the ground , and be shiver ' into a thousand atom . from all which it be plain that widow be in love with my uncle . . my uncle 's head at that time be full of other matter , so that it be not till the demolition of , when all the other civility of be settle , that he find leisure to return this . this make a armistice ( that be , speak with regard to my uncle -- but with respect to , a vacancy ) -- of almost eleven year . but in all case of this nature , as it be the second blow , happen at what distance of time it will , which make the fray -- I chuse for that reason to call these the amour of my uncle with , rather than the amour of with my uncle . this be not a distinction without a difference . it be not like the affair of a old hat cock would -- and a cock would old hat , about which you reverence have so often be at odd with one another -- but there be a difference here in the nature of thing -- and let I tell you , gentry , a wide one too . . now as widow do love my uncle -- and my uncle do not love widow Wadman , there be nothing for widow Wadman to do , but to go on and love my uncle -- or let it alone . would do neither the one or the other . -- gracious heaven !-- but I forget I be a little of she temper myself
myself ; for whenever it so fall out , which it sometimes do about the equinox , that a earthly goddess be so much this , and that , and t'other , that I can not eat my breakfast for she -- and that she careth not three halfpence whether I eat my breakfast or no -- -- curse on she ! and so I send she to , and from to , and so on to the devil : in short , there be not a infernal nitch where I do not take she divinityship and stick it . but as the heart be tender , and the passion in these tide ebb and flow ten time in a minute , I instantly bring she back again ; and as I do all thing in extreme , I place she in the very center of the milky - way -- Brightest of star ! thou will shed thy influence upon some one -- -- the duce take she and she influence too -- for at that word I lose all patience -- much good may it do he !-- by all that be hirsute and gashly ! I cry , take off my furr would cap , and twist it round my finger -- I would not give sixpence for a dozen such ! -- but ' ttis a excellent cap too ( put it upon my head , and press it close to my ear ) -- and warm -- and soft ; especially if you streak it the right way -- but alas ! that will never be my luck --( so here my philosophy be shipwreck have again . ) -- no ; I shall never have a finger in the pye ( so here I break my metaphor ) - - and and out top and bottom -- I detest it , I hate it , I repudiate it -- I be sick at the sight of it -- ' Tis all pepper , garlick , staragen , salt , and 's dung -- by the great arch - cook of cook , who do nothing , I think , from morning to night , but sit down by the fire - side and invent inflammatory dish for we , I would not touch it for the world -- -- of Tristram ! Tristram ! cry . of ! ! reply I , and so go on with the thirty - sixth chapter . . --' not touch it for the world , ' do I say -- , how I have heat my imagination with this metaphor ! . which shew , let you reverence and worship say what you will of it ( for as for think -- all who do think -- think pretty much alike both upon it and other matter ) -- be certainly , at least alphabetically speak , one of the most a gitating b ewitch onfound evilish affair of life -- the most e xtravagant of utilitous g alligaskinish h andy - dandyish I racundulous ( there be no to it ) and l yrical of all human passion : at the same time , the most be isgive and innyhammer of bstipating 's tridulous be idiculous -- though by the bye the should have go first -- but in short ' tis of such a nature , as my father once tell my uncle upon the close of a long dissertation upon the subject --' you can scarce , ' say he , ' combine two idea together upon it , brother , without a hypallage '-- what be that ? cry my uncle . the cart before the horse , reply my father -- -- and what be he to do there ? cry my uncle . nothing , quoth my father , but to get in -- or let it alone . now widow Wadman , as I tell you before , would do neither the one or the other . she stand however ready harness and caparison at all point , to watch accident . . the Fates , who certainly all fore - knew of these amour of widow and my uncle , have , from the first creation of matter and motion ( and with more courtesy than they usually do thing of this kind ) , establish such a chain of cause and effect hang so fast to one another , that it be scarce possible for my uncle to have dwelt in any other house in the world , or to have occupy any other garden in , but the very house and garden which join would and laid parallel to 's ; this , with the advantage of a thickset arbour in 's , but plan in the hedge - row of my uncle 's , put all the occasion into she hand which love -militancy want ; she could observe my uncle 's motion , and be mistress likewise of he councils of war ; and as he unsuspecting heart have give leave to the corporal , through the mediation of , to make she a wicker - gate of communication to enlarge she walk , it enable she to carry on she approaches to the very door of the sentry - box ; and sometimes out of gratitude , to make a attack , and endeavou to blow my uncle up in the very sentry - box itself . . it be a great pity -- but ' ti certain from every day 's observation of man , that he may be set on fire like a candle , at either end -- provide there be a sufficient wick stand out ; if there be not -- there be a end of the affair ; and if there be -- by light it at the bottom , as the flame in that case have the misfortune generally
generally to put out itself -- there be a end of the affair again . for my part , could I always have the ordering of it which way I would be burnt myself -- for I can not bear the thought of be burn like a beast -- I would oblige a housewife constantly to light I at the top ; for then I should burn down decently to the socket ; that be , from my head to my heart , from my heart to my liver , from my liver to my bowel , and so on by the meseraick vein and arteries , through all the turn and lateral insertion of the intestine and they tunicle to the blind gut -- -- I beseech you , doctor , quoth my uncle , interrupt he as he mention the blind gut , in a discourse with my father the night my mother be bring to be of I -- I beseech you , quoth my uncle , to tell I which be the blind gut ; for , old as I be , I vow I do not know to this day where it lie . the blind gut , answer doctor Slop , lie betwixt the and -- in a man ? say my father . --'Tis precisely the same , cry doctor , in a woman .-- that be more than I know ; quoth my father . . -- and so to make sure of both system , predetermine to light my uncle neither at this end or that ; but , like a prodigal 's candle , to light he , if possible , at both end at once . now , through all the lumber room of military furniture , include both of horse and foot , from the great arsenal of to the of ( exclusive ) , if have be rummage for seven year together , and with to help she , she could not have find any one blind or mantelet so fin for she purpose , as that which the expediency of my uncle 's affair have fix would up ready to she hand . I believe I have not tell you -- but I do not know -- possibly I have -- be it as it will , ' ttis one of the number of those many thing , which a man have better do over again , than dispute about it -- that whatever town or fortress the corporal be at work upon , during the course of they campaign , my uncle always take care , on the inside of he sentry - box , which be towards he left hand , to have a plan of the place , fasten ' up with two or three pin at the top , but loose at the bottom , for the conveniency of hold it up to the eye , & c . . . as occasion require ; so that when a attack be resolve upon , have nothing more to do , when she have get advanced to the door of the sentry - box , but to extend she right hand ; and edge in she left foot at the same movement , to take hold of the map or plan , or upright , or whatever it be , and with out - stretch neck meet it half way , -- to advance it towards she ; on which my uncle 's passion be sure to catch fire -- for he would instantly take hold of the other corner of the map in he left hand , and with the end of he pipe in the other , begin a explanation . when the attack be advanc to this point ; -- the world will naturally enter into the reason of 's next stroke of generalship -- which be , to take my uncle 's tobacco - pipe out of he hand as soon as she possibly could ; which , under one pretence or other , but generally that have point more distinctly at some redoubt or breastwork in the map , she would effect before my uncle ( poor soul ! ) have well march would above half a dozen toise with it . -- it oblige my uncle to make use of he forefinger . the difference it make in the attack be this ; that in go upon it , as in the first case , with the end of she fore - finger against the end of my uncle 's tobacco - pipe , she might have travel with it , along the line , from to , have my uncle 's line reach would so far , without any effect : for as there be no arterial or vital heat in the end of the tobacco - pipe , it could excite no sentiment -- it could neither give fire by pulsation -- or receive it by sympathy --'tbe nothing but smoke . whereas , in follow my uncle 's forefinger with hers , close thro ' all the little turn and indenting of he work -- press sometimes against the side of it -- then tread upon its nail -- then trip it up -- then touch it here -- then there , and so on -- it set something at least in motion . this , tho ' slight skirmishing , and at a distance from the main body , yet draw on the rest ; for here , the map usually fall with the back of it , close to the side of the sentry - box , my uncle , in the simplicity of he soul , would lay he hand flat upon it , in order to go on with he explanation ; and , by a manoeuvre as quick as thought , would as certainly place she be close beside it
it ; this at once open a communication , large enough for any sentiment to pass or re-pass , which a person skill would in the elementary and practical part of love - make , have occasion for -- by bring up she forefinger parallel ( as before ) to my uncle 's -- it unavoidably bring the thumb into action -- and the forefinger and thumb be once engage , as naturally bring in the whole hand . Thine , dear uncle ! be never now in 't right place -- . have it ever to take up , or , with the gentlest pushing , protrusion , and equivocal compressions , that a hand to be remove be capable of receive -- to get it press would a hair breadth of one side out of she way . whilst this be do , how could she forget to make he sensible , that it be she leg ( and no one 's else ) at the bottom of the sentry - box , which slightly press ' against the calf of he -- so that my uncle Toby be thus attack would and sore push would on both he wing -- be it a wonder , if now and then , it put he centre into disorder ?-- -- the duce take it ! say my uncle . . these attack of , you will readily conceive to be of different kind ; varie from each other , like the attack which history be full of , and from the same reason . a general looker - on would scarce allow they to be attack at all -- or if he do , would confound they all together -- but I write not to they : it will be time enough to be a little more exact in my description of they , as I come up to they , which will not be for some chapter ; have nothing more to add in this , but that in a bundle of original papers and drawing which my father take care to roll up by themselves , there be a plan of in perfect preservation ( and shall be keep so , whilst I have power to preserve any thing ) , upon the lower corner of which , on the right hand side , there be still remain the mark of a snuffy finger and thumb , which there be all the reason in the world to imagine , be 's ; for the opposite side of the margin , which I suppose to have be my uncle 's , be absolutely clean : this seem a authenticated record of one of these attack ; for there be vestigia of the two puncture partly grow up , but still visible on the opposite corner of the map , which be unquestionably the very holes , through which it have be prick up in the sentry - box -- by all that be priestly ! I value this precious relick , with its stigmata and prick , more than all the relick of the church -- always except , when I be write upon these matters , the prick which enter the flesh of in the desert , which in you road from to , the nun of that name will show you for love . . I think , a ' please you honour , quoth , the fortification be quite destroy -- and the bason be upon a level with the mole -- I think so too ; reply my uncle with a sigh half suppress ' -- but step into the parlour , Trim , for the stipulation -- it lie upon the table . it have lain there these six week , reply the corporal , till this very morning that the old woman kindle the fire with it -- -- then , say my uncle , there be no further occasion for we service . the more , an' please you honour , the pity , say the corporal ; in uttering which he cast he spade into the wheel - barrow , which be beside he , with a air the most expressive of disconsolation that can be imagine , and be heavily turn about to look for he pickax , he pioneer 's shovel , he picquet , and other little military store , in order to carry they off the field -- when a heigh - ho ! from the sentry - box , which be make of thin slit deal , reverberate the sound more sorrowfully to he ear , forbad he . -- no ; say the corporal to himself , I will do it before he honour rise to - morrow morning ; so take he spade out of the wheel - barrow again , with a little earth in it , as if to level something at the foot of the glacis -- but with a real intent to approach nearer to he master , in order to divert he -- he loosen would a sod or two -- par they edge with he spade , and have give they a gentle blow or two with the back of it , he sit himself down close by my uncle 's foot and begin as follow . . it be a thousand pity -- though I believe , an' please you honour , I be go to say but a foolish kind of a thing for a soldier -- a soldier , cry my uncle , interrupt the corporal , be no more exempt from say a foolish thing , , than a man of letter -- but not so often , a ' please you honour , reply the corporal -- my uncle give a nod . it be a thousand pity then , say the corporal , caste he eye upon , and the mole ,
, as , in return out of ( when he sail from towards ) , do upon and -- --' it be a thousand pity , an' please you honour , to destroy these work -- and a thousand pity to have let they stand .'-- -- thou be right , , in both case ; say my uncle .-- this , continue the corporal , be the reason , that from the beginning of they demolition to the end -- I have never once whistle , or sung , or laugh ' , or cry' , or talk would of past do deed , or tell you honour one story good or bad -- -- thou hast many excellency , , say my uncle , and I hold it not the least of they , as thou happenest to be a story - teller , that of the number thou hast tell I , either to amuse I in my painful hour , or divert I in my grave one -- thou hast seldom tell I a bad one -- -- because , an' please you honour , except one of a of and he seven castle , -- they be all true ; for they be about myself -- I do not like the subject the worse , , say my uncle , on that score : but prithee what be this story ? thou hast accit my curiosity . I will tell it you honour , quoth the corporal , directly -- provide , say my uncle , look earnestly towards and the mole again--provide it be not a merry one ; to such , , a man should ever bring one half of the entertainment along with he ; and the disposition I be in at present would wrong both thee , , and thy story -- it be not a merry one by any means , reply the corporal -- would I have it altogether a grave one , add my uncle -- it be neither the one nor the other , reply the corporal , but will suit you honour exactly -- then I will thank thee for it with all my heart , cry my uncle ; so prithee begin it , . the corporal make he reverence ; and though it be not so easy a matter as the world imagine , to pull off a lank Montero - cap with -- or a whit less difficult , in my conception , when a man be sit squat upon the ground , to make a bow so teem with respect as the corporal be wont ; yet by suffer the palm of he right hand , which be towards he master , to slip backward upon the grass , a little beyond he body , in order to allow it the greater sweep -- and by a unforced compression , at the same time , of he cap with the thumb and the two forefinger of he leave , by which the diameter of the cap become reduced , so that it might be say , rather to be insensibly squeez ' -- than pull would off with a flatus -- the corporal acquit himself of both in a better manner than the posture of he affair promise ; and have hem twice , to find in what key he story would best go , and best suit he master 's humour , -- he exchange a single look of kindness with he , and set off thus . the story of the of and . there be a certain king of .. he - as the corporal be enter the confines of , my uncle oblige he to hal for a single moment ; he have set out bare - head , have , since he pull would off he -cap in the latter end of the last chapter , leave it lie beside he on the ground . -- the eye of goodness espieth all thing -- so that before the corporal have well get through the first five word of he story , have my uncle twice touch would he Montero - cap with the end of he cane , interrogatively -- as much as to say , why do not you put it on , ? Tre take it up with the most respectful slowness , and cast a glance of humiliation as he do it , upon the embroidery of the fore - part , which be dismally tarnish would and fray would moreover in some of the principal leave and boldest part of the pattern , he lay would it down again between he two foot , in order to moralize upon the subject . t--'Tis every word of it but too true , cry my uncle , that thou be about to observe -- ' nothing in this world , , be make to last for ever . ' -- but when token , dear , of thy love and remembrance wear out , say , what shall we say ? there be no occasion , , quoth my uncle , to say any thing else ; and be a man to puzzle he brain till 's day , I believe , , it would be impossible . the corporal , perceive my uncle be in the right , and that it would be in vain for the wit of man to think of extract a purer moral from he cap , without further attempt it , he put it on ; and pass he hand across he forehead to rub out a pensive wrinkle , which the text and the doctrine between they have engender ' , he return ' , with the same look and tone of voice , to he story of the king of and he seven castle . the story of the of and , . there be a certain king
king of , but in whose reign , except he own , I be not able to inform you honour -- I do not desire it of thee , , by any means , cry my uncle . -- it be a little before the time , a ' please you honour , when giant be begin to leave off breed :-- but in what year of we that be -- I would not give a halfpenny to know , say my uncle . -- only , an' please you honour , it make a story look the better in the face -- --'Tis thy own , , so ornament it after thy own fashion ; and take any date , continue my uncle , look pleasantly upon he -- take any date in the whole world thout chusest , and put it to -- thou be heartily welcome -- the corporal bow ; for of every century , and of every year of that century , from the first creation of the world down to 's flood ; and from 's flood to the birth of ; through all the pilgrimage of the patriarch , to the departure of the out of -- and throughout all the Dynasty , Olympiads , Urbeconditas , and other memorable epocha of the different nation of the world , down to the coming of , and from thence to the very moment in which the corporal be tell he story -- have my uncle subject this vast empire of time and all its abyss at he foot ; but as Modesty scarce touch with a finger what offer she with both hand open -- the corporal contente himself with the very worst year of the whole bunch ; which , to prevent you honour of the majority and minority from tear the very flesh off you bone in contestation , ' whether that year be not always the last cast - year of the last cast - almanack ' -- I tell you plainly it be ; but from a different reason than you wot of -- -- it be the year next he -- which be the year of we seventeen hundred and twelve , when the of be play the in -- the corporal take it , and set out with it afresh on he expedition to . the story of the of and , . in the year of we one thousand seven hundred and twelve , there be , a ' please you honour -- -- to tell thee truly , , quoth my uncle , any other date would have pleas I much better , not only on account of the sad stain upon we history that year , in march off we troops , and refuse to cover the siege of , though be carry on the work with such incredible vigour -- but likewise on the score , , of thy own story ; because if there be -- and which , from what thou hast dropt , I partly suspect to be the fact -- if there be giant in it -- there be but one , a ' please you honour -- --'Tis as bad as twenty , reply my uncle -- thou should 'st have carry he back some seven or eight hundred year out of harm 's way , both of critic and other people : and therefore I would advise thee , if ever thou tellest it again -- -- if I live , an' please you honour , but once to get through it , I will never tell it again , quoth Trim , either to man , woman , or child -- Poo -- poo ! say my uncle -- but with accent of such sweet encouragement do he utter it , that the corporal go on with he story with more alacrity than ever . the story of the of and , . there be , an' please you honour , say the corporal , raise he voice and rub the palm of he two hand cheerily together as he begin , a certain king of -- -- leave out the date entirely , , quoth my uncle , lean forward , and lay he hand gently upon the corporal 's shoulder to temper the interruption -- leave it out entirely , ; a story pass very well without these nicety , unless one be pretty sure of th'ey -- sure of th'ey ! say the corporal , shak he head -- right ; answer my uncle , it be not easy , , for one , breed up as thou and I have be to arm , who seldom look further forward than to the end of he musket , or backwards beyond he knapsack , to know much about this matter -- bless you honour ! say the corporal , win by the manner of my uncle 's reasoning , as much as by the reasoning itself , he have something else to do ; if not on action , or a march , or upon duty in he garrison -- he have he firelock , an' please you honour , to furbish -- he accoutrement to take care of -- he regimental to mmend -- himself to shave and keep clean , so as to appear always like what he be upon the parade ; what business , add the corporal triumphantly , have a soldier , an' please you honour , to know any thing at all of geography ? -- thou would 'st have say chronology , , say my uncle ; for as for geography , ' tis of absolute use to he ; he must be acquaint intimately with every country and its boundary where he profession carry he ; he should know every town and city , and village and hamlet , with the canal , the roads , and
and hollow way which lead up to they ; there be not a river or a rivulet he pass , , but he should be able at first sight to tell thee what be its name -- in what mountain it take its rise -- what be its course -- how far it be navigable -- where fordable -- where not ; he should know the fertility of every valley , as well as the hind who plough it ; and be able to describe , or , if it be require , to give thee a exact map of all the plain and defile , the fort , the acclivity , the wood and morass , thro ' and by which he army be to march ; he should know they produce , they plant , they mineral , they water , they animal , they season , they climates , they heats and cold , they inhabitant , they custom , they language , they policy , and even they religion . be it else to be conceive , corporal , continue my uncle , rise up in he sentry - box , as he begin to warm in this part of he discourse -- how Marlborough could have march he army from the bank of the to ; from to --( here the corporal could sit no longer ) from , , to ; from to ; from to ; from to ; from to ; from to ; from to ; from to , where he break in upon the enemy 's work ; force he passage over the Danube ; cross would the -- push ' on he troops into the heart of the empire , march at the head of they through , , and , to the plain of and ?-- great as he be , corporal , he could not have advance a step , or make one single day 's march without the aids of .-- as for , I own , , continue my uncle , sit down again coolly in he sentry - box , that of all other , it seem a science which the soldier might best spare , be it not for the light which that science must one day give he , in determine the invention of powder ; the furious execution of which , renverse every thing like thunder before it , have become a new aera to we of military improvement , change so totally the nature of attack and defences both by sea and land , and awaken so much art and skill in do it , that the world can not be too exact in ascertain the precise time of its discovery , or too inquisitive in know what great man be the discoverer , and what occasion give birth to it . I be far from controverting , continue my uncle , what historian agree in , that in the year of we 1380 , under the reign of , son of Charles the fourth -- a certain priest , whose name be Schwartz , shew would the use of powder to the , in they wars against the Genoese ; but ' ttis certain he be not the first ; because if we be to believe , the bishop of -- how come priest and bishop , an' please you honour , to trouble they head so much about gun - powder ? know , say my uncle -- he providence bring good out of every thing -- and he avers , in he chronicle of , who reduce , that in the year 1343 , which be full thirty - seven year before that time , the secret of powder be well know , and employ with success , both by and , not only in they sea-combat , at that period , but in many of they most memorable siege in and -- and all the world know , that have write expressly about it , and have generously give the world a receipt to make it by , above a hundred and fifty year before even be bear -- and that the chinese , add my uncle , embarrass we , and all account of it , still more , by boast of the invention some hundred of year even before he -- they be a pack of liar , I believe , cry Trim -- -- they be somehow or other deceive , say my uncle , in this matter , as be plain to I from the present miserable state of military architecture amongst they ; which consist of nothing more than a fosse with a brick wall without flank -- and for what they give we as a bastion at each angle of it , ' tis so barbarously construct , that it look for all the world -- like one of my seven castle , an' please you honour , quoth . my uncle , tho ' in the utmost distress for a comparison , most courteously refuse 's offer -- till tell he , he have half a dozen more in , which he know not how to get off he hand -- my uncle be so touch ' with the pleasantry of heart of the corporal -- that he discontinue he dissertation upon gun - powder -- and beg the corporal forthwith to go on with he story of the of and he seven castle . the story of the of and , . this unfortunate of , say Trim ,-- be he unfortunate , then ? cry my uncle , for he have be so wrapt up in he dissertation upon gun - powder , and other military affair , that tho ' he have desire the corporal to go on , yet the many interruption he have give , dwelt not so strong upon he fancy as to account
account for the epithet -- be he unfortunate , then , ? say my uncle , pathetically -- the corporal , wish first the word and all its synonima at the devil , forthwith begin to run back in he mind , the principal event in the of 's story ; from every one of which , it appear that he be the most fortunate man that ever exist in the world -- it put the corporal to a stand : for not care to retract he epithet -- and less to explain it -- and least of all , to twist he tale ( like man of lore ) to serve a system -- he look up in my uncle 's face for assistance -- but see it be the very thing my uncle sit in expectation of himself -- after a hum and a haw , he go on -- the of , an' please you honour , reply the corporal , be unfortunate , as thus -- that take great pleasure and delight in navigation and all sort of sea affair -- and there happen throughout the whole kingdom of , to be no sea - port town whatever -- how the duce should there -- ? cry my uncle ; for be totally inland , it could have happen ' no otherwise -- it might , say , if it have pleas -- my uncle never speak of the being and natural attribute of , but with diffidence and hesitation -- -- I believe not , reply my uncle , after some pause -- for be inland , as I say , and have and to the east ; and to the north ; to the west ; and to the south ; could not have be propell ' to the sea without cease to be -- nor could the sea , on the other hand , have come up to , without overflow a great part of , and destroy million of unfortunate inhabitant who could make no defence against it -- ! cry -- which would bespeak , add my uncle , mildly , such a want of compassion in he who be the father of it -- that , I think , -- the thing could have happen ' no way . the corporal make the bow of unfeign would conviction ; and go on . now the of with he queen and courtier happen one fine summer 's evening to walk out -- aye ! there the word happen be right , , cry my uncle ; for the of and he queen might have walk ' out or let it alone :--'tbe a matter of contingency , which might happen , or not , just as chance order it . be of a opinion , a ' please you honour , quoth , that every thing be predestin for we in this world ; insomuch , that he would often say to he soldier , that ' every ball have its billet . ' he be a great man , say my uncle -- and I believe , continue , to this day , that the shot which disable I at the battle of , be point at my knee for no other purpose , but to take I out of he service , and place I in you honour 's , where I should be take so much better care of in my old age -- it shall never , , be construe otherwise , say my uncle . the heart , both of the master and the man , be alike subject to sudden over-flowing ;-- a short silence ensue . besides , say the corporal , resume the discourse -- but in a gayer accent -- if it have not be for that single shot , I have never , 'an please you honour , be in love -- so , thou wast once in love , ! say my uncle , smile -- ! reply the corporal -- over head and ear ! an' please you honour . Prithee when ? where ?-- and how come it to pass ?-- I never hear one word of it before ; quoth my uncle :-- I dare say , answer , that every drummer and serjeant 's son in the regiment knew of it -- it be high time I should -- say my uncle . you honour remember with concern , say the corporal , the total rout and confusion of we camp and army at the affair of ; every one be leave to shift for himself ; and if it have not be for the regiment of , , and , which cover the retreat over the , the king himself could scarce have gain it -- he be press ' hard , as you honour know , on every side of he -- Gallant mortal ! cry my uncle , catch up with enthusiasm -- this moment , now that all be lost , I see he gallop across I , corporal , to the left , to bring up the remains of the english horse along with he to support the right , and tear the laurel from 's brows , if yet ' ttis possible -- I see he with the knot of he scarfe just shoot off , infus fresh spirits into poor 's regiment -- ride along the line -- then wheel about , and charge at the head of it -- brave , brave , by heaven ! cry my uncle -- he deserve a crown -- as richly , as a thief a halter ; shoute . my uncle know the corporal 's loyalty ;--otherwise the comparison be not at all to he mind -- it do not altogether strike the corporal 's fancy when he have make it -- but it could not be recall have -- so he
he have nothing to do , but proceed . as the number of wounded be prodigious , and no one have time to think of any thing but he own safety -- though , say my uncle , bring off the foot with great prudence -- but I be leave upon the field , say the corporal . thou wast so ; poor fellow ! reply my uncle -- so that it be noon the next day , continue the corporal , before I be exchange , and put into a cart with thirteen or fourteen more , in order to be convey' to we hospital . there be no part of the body , an' please you honour , where a wound occasion more intolerable anguish than upon the knee -- except the groin ; say my uncle . a ' please you honour , reply the corporal , the knee , in my opinion , must certainly be the most acute , there be so many tendon and what - d 'ye - call - 'ems all about it . it be for that reason , quoth my uncle , that the groin be infinitely more sensible -- there be not only as many tendon and what - d 'ye - call - 'ems ( for I know they name as little as thou dost ) -- about it -- but moreover ...-- , who have be all the time in she arbour -- instantly stopp would she breath -- unpinn would she mob at the ching , and stand upon one leg -- the dispute be maintain with amicable and equal force betwixt my uncle and for some time ; till Trim at length recollect that he have often cry at he master 's suffering , but never she a tear at he own -- be for give up the point , which my uncle would not allow --'Tis a proof of nothing , , say he , but the generosity of thy temper -- so that whether the pain of a wound in the groin ( caeteris paribus ) be greater than the pain of a wound in the knee -- or whether the pain of a wound in the knee be not greater than the pain of a wound in the groin -- be point which to this day remain unsettled . . the anguish of my knee , continue the corporal , be excessive in itself ; and the uneasiness of the cart , with the roughness of the roads , which be terribly cut up -- make bad still worse -- every step be death to I : so that with the loss of blood , and the want of care - take of I , and a fever I feel come on beside -- ( poor soul ! say my uncle ) -- all together , a ' please you honour , be more than I could sustain . I be tell my suffering to a young woman at a peasant 's house , where we cart , which be the last of the line , have halt ; they have help ' I in , and the young woman have take a cordial out of she pocket and dropp ' it upon some sugar , and see it have cheer would I , she have give it I a second and a third time -- so I be tell she , a ' please you honour , the anguish I be in , and be say it be so intolerable to I , that I have much rather lie down upon the bed , turn my face towards one which be in the corner of the room -- and die , than go on -- when , upon she attempting to lead I to it , I faint away in she arm . she be a good soul ! as you honour , say the corporal , wip he eye , will hear . I think love have be a joyous thing , quoth my uncle . ' Tis the most serious thing , a ' please you honour ( sometimes ) , that be in the world . by the persuasion of the young woman , continue the corporal , the cart with the wounded man set off without I : she have assure they I should expire immediately if I be put into the cart . so when I come to myself -- I find myself in a still quiet cottage , with no one but the young woman , and the peasant and he wife . I be laid across the bed in the corner of the room , with my wounded leg upon a chair , and the young woman beside I , hold the corner of she handkerchief dipp would in vinegar to my nose with one hand , and rub my temple with the other . I take she at first for the daughter of the peasant ( for it be no inn ) -- so have offer ' she a little purse with eighteen florin , which my poor brother ( here Trim wip would he eye ) have send I as a token , by a recruit , just before he set out for -- -- I never tell you honour that piteous story yet -- here wip he eye a third time . the young woman call have the old man and he wife into the room , to show they the money , in order to gain I credit for a bed and what little necessary I should want , till I should be in a condition to be get to the hospital -- come then ! say she , tie up the little purse -- I will be you banker -- but as that office alone will not keep I employ ' , I will be you nurse too . I
I think by she manner of speak this , as well as by she dress , which I then begin to consider more attentively -- that the young woman could not be the daughter of the peasant . she be in black down to she toe , with she hair conceal would under a cambric border , laid close to she forehead : she be one of those kind of nun , a ' please you honour , of which , you honour know , there be a good many in Flanders , which they let go loose -- by thy description , , say my uncle , I dare say she be a young , of which there be none to be find any where but in the spanish -- except at -- they differ from nun in this , that they can quit they cloister if they choose to marry ; they visit and take care of the sick by profession -- I have rather , for my own part , they do it out of good - nature . -- she often tell I , quoth , she do it for the love of -- I do not like it .-- I believe , , we be both wrong , say my uncle -- we will ask about it to - night at my brother 's -- so put I in mind ; add my uncle . the young , continue the corporal , have scarce give herself time to tell I ' she would be my nurse , ' when she hastily turn about to begin the office of one , and prepare something for I -- and in a short time -- though I think it a long one -- she come back with flannel , & c . & c. and have foment my knee soundly for a couple of hour , & c. and make I a thin bason of gruel for my supper -- she wish would I rest , and promise to be with I early in the morning .-- she wish would I , a ' please you honour , what be not to be have . my fever run very high that night -- she figure make sad disturbance within I -- I be every moment cut the world in two -- to give she half of it -- and every moment be I cry , that I have nothing but a knapsack and eighteen florin to share with she -- the whole night long be the fair , like a angel , close by my bed - side , hold back my curtain and offer I cordial -- and I be only awaken from my dream by she come there at the hour promise , and give they in reality . in truth , she be scarce ever from I ; and so accustom be I to receive life from she hand , that my heart sicken , and I lose colour when she leave the room : and yet , continue the corporal ( make one of the strangest reflection upon it in the world ) -- --' it be not love ' -- for during the three week she be almost constantly with I , foment my knee with she hand , night and day -- I can honestly say , an' please you honour -- that . . .once . that be very odd , , quoth my uncle . I think so too --said . it never do , say the corporal . . -- but ' ti no marvel , continue the corporal -- see my uncle Toby muse upon it -- for , an' please you honour , be exactly like war , in this ; that a soldier , though he have escape three week complete o' night ,-- may nevertheless be shoot through he heart on morning -- it happen so here , a ' please you honour , with this difference only -- that it be on in the afternoon , when I fall in love all at once with a sisserara -- it burst upon I , a ' please you honour , like a bomb -- scarce give I time to say , ' God bless I . ' I think , , say my uncle , a man never fall in love so very suddenly . yes , an' please you honour , if he be in the way of it -- reply . I prithee , quoth my uncle , inform I how this matter happen . -- with all pleasure , say the corporal , make a bow . . I have escape , continue the corporal , all that time from fall in love , and have go on to the end of the chapter , have it not be predestin otherwise -- there be no resisting we fate . it be on a , in the afternoon , as I tell you honour . the old man and he wife have walk out -- every thing be still and hush as midnight about the house -- there be not so much as a duck or a duckling about the yard -- -- when the fair come in to see I . my wound be then in a fair way of do well -- the inflammation have be go off for some time , but it be succeed with a itch both above and below my knee , so insufferable , that I have not shut my eye the whole night for it . let I see it , say she , knee down upon the ground parallel to my knee , and lay she hand upon the part below it -- it only want rub a little , say the ; so cover it with the bed - clothes , she begin with the fore - finger of she right hand to rub
rub under my knee , guide she fore - finger backward and forward by the edge of the flannel which keep on the dressing . in five or six minute I feel slightly the end of she second finger -- and presently it be laid flat with the other , and she continue rub in that way round and round for a good while ; it then come into my head , that I should fall in love -- I blush ' when I see how white a hand she have -- I shall never , an' please you honour , behold another hand so white whilst I live -- -- not in that place , say my uncle -- though it be the most serious despair in nature to the corporal -- he could not forbear smile . the young , continue the corporal , perceive it be of great service to I -- from rubbing for some time , with two finger -- proceed to rub at length , with three -- till by little and little she bring down the fourth , and then rubb would with she whole hand : I will never say another word , an' please you honour , upon hand again -- but it be softer than sattin -- -- , , commend it as much as thou will , say my uncle ; I shall hear thy story with the more delight -- the corporal thank would he master most unfeignedly ; but have nothing to say upon the 's hand but the same over again -- he proceed to the effect of it . the fair , say the corporal , continue rub with she whole hand under my knee -- till I fear would she zeal would weary she -- 'I would do a thousand time more , ' say she , ' for the love of -- in say which , she pass ' she hand across the flannel , to the part above my knee , which I have equally complain would of , and rubb would it also . I perceiv' , then , I be begin to be in love -- as she continue rub-rub-rubb -- I feel it spread from under she hand , a ' please you honour , to every part of my frame -- the more she rubb ' , and the longer stroke she take -- the more the fire kindle in my vein -- till at length , by two or three stroke longer than the rest -- my passion rise to the highest pitch -- I seiz would she hand -- -- and then thou clap 'st it to thy lip , , say my uncle -- and madest a speech . whether the corporal 's amour terminate precisely in the way my uncle describe it , be not material ; it be enough that it contain in it the essence of all the love romance which ever have be write since the beginning of the world . . as soon as the corporal have finish the story of he amour -- or rather my uncle for he -- . silently sally forth from she arbour , replace the pin in she mob , pass would the wicker gate , and advance slowly towards my uncle 's sentry - box : the disposition which Tre have make in my uncle 's mind , be too favourable a crisis to be let slipp' -- -- the attack be determin ' upon : it be facilitate still more by my uncle 's have order the corporal to wheel off the pioneer 's shovel , the spade , the pick - axe , the picquet , and other military store which lay scatter have upon the ground where stood -- the corporal have march ' -- the field be clear . now , consider , sir , what nonsense it be , either in fighting , or write , or any thing else ( whether in rhyme to it , or not ) which a man have occasion to do -- to act by plan : for if ever plan , independent of all circumstance , deserve register in letter of gold ( I mean in the archive of ) - - it be certainly the plan of 's attack of my uncle in he sentry - box , by plan -- now the plan hang up in it at this juncture , be the plan of -- and the tale of a tale of relaxation , it oppose every impression she could make : and beside , could she have go upon it -- the manoeuvre of finger and hand in the attack of the sentry - box , be so outdone by that of the fair 's , in 's story -- that just then , that particular attack , however successful before -- become the most heartless attack that could be make -- o ! let woman alone for this . have scarce open would the wicker - gate , when she genius sport with the change of circumstance . -- she form a new attack in a moment . . -- I be half distract , , say , hold up she cambrick handkerchief to she left eye , as she approach would the door of my uncle 's sentry - box -- a mote -- or sand -- or something -- I know not what , have get into this eye of mine -- do look into it -- it be not in the white -- in say which , edge herself close in beside my uncle , and squeeze herself down upon the corner of he bench , she give he a opportunity of do it without rise up -- do look into it -- say she . Honest soul ! thou didst look into it with as much innocency of heart , as ever child
child look would into a raree - shew - box ; and ' twere as much a sin to have hurt thee . -- if a man will be pee of he own accord into thing of that nature -- I have nothing to say to it -- my uncle never do : and I will answer for he , that he would have sit quietly upon a sofa from to ( which , you know , take in both the hot and cold month ) , with a eye as fine as the 's ( tam inevitabili fascino instructa , tam exacte oculus intuen attraxit , ut sus in illam quis incidisset , fieri non posset , quin caperetur .-- I know not who . ) besides he , without be able to tell , whether it be a black or blue one . the difficulty be to get my uncle , to look at one at all . ' Tis surmount . and I see he yonder with he pipe pendulous in he hand , and the ash fal out of it -- look -- and look -- then rubb he eye -- and look again , with twice the good - nature that ever look would for a spot in the sun . -- in vain ! for by all the power which animate the organ -- 's left eye shine this moment as lucid as she right -- there be neither mote , or sand , or dust , or chaff , or speck , or particle of opake matter float in it -- there be nothing , my dear paternal uncle ! but one lambent delicious fire , furtively shoot out from every part of it , in all direction , into thine -- -- if thou lookest , uncle , in search of this mote one moment longer , -- thou be undone . . a eye be for all the world exactly like a cannon , in this respect ; that it be not so much the eye or the cannon , in themselves , as it be the carriage of the eye -- and the carriage of the cannon , by which both the one and the other be enable to do so much execution . I do not think the comparison a bad one : however , as ' tis make and place at the head of the chapter , as much for use as ornament , all I desire in return , be , that whenever I speak of 's eye ( except once in the next period ) , that you keep it in you fancy . I protest , , say my uncle , I can see nothing whatever in you eye . it be not in the white ; say : my uncle look ' with might and main into the pupil -- now of all the eye which ever be create -- from you own , madam , up to those of herself , which certainly be as venereal a pair of eye as ever stand in a head -- there never be a eye of they all , so fit to rob my uncle of he repose , as the very eye , at which he be look -- it be not , Madam a rolling eye -- a romping or a wanton one -- nor be it a eye sparkling -- petulant or imperious -- of high claim and terrifying exaction , which would have curdle at once that milk of human nature , of which my uncle be make up -- but 'tbe a eye full of gentle salutation -- and soft response -- speak -- not like the trumpet stop of some ill - make organ , in which many a eye I talk to , hold coarse converse -- but whisper soft - - like the last low accent of a expire saint --' how can you live comfortless , , and alone , without a bosom to lean you head on -- or trust you car to ? ' it be a eye -- but I shall be in love with it myself , if I say another word about it . -- it do my uncle 's business . . there be nothing shew the character of my father and my uncle , in a more entertaining light , than they different manner of deportment , under the same accident -- for I call not love a misfortune , from a persuasion , that a man 's heart be ever the better for it -- Great ! what must my uncle 's have be , when ' tbe all benignity without it . my father , as appear from many of he papers , be very subject to this passion , before he marry -- but from a little subacid kind of drollish impatience in he nature , whenever it befell he , he would never submit to it like a christian ; but would pish , and huff , and bounce , and kick , and play the , and write the bitterest Philippick against the eye that ever man write -- there be one in verse upon somebody be eye or other , that for two or three night together , have put he by he rest ; which in he first transport of resentment against it , he begin thus : ' a 's tis -- and mischief such doth work as never yet do , , or . ' ( this will be print with my father 's life of , & c. & c . ) in short , during the whole paroxism , my father be all abuse and foul language , approach rather towards malediction -- only he do not do it with as much method as -- he be too impetuous ; nor with 's policy -- for tho ' my father
father , with the most intolerant spirit , would curse both this and that , and every thing under heaven , which be either aide or abett to he love -- yet never conclude he chapter of curse upon it , without curse himself in at the bargain , as one of the most egregious fools and cox-comb , he would say , that ever be let loose in the world . my uncle , on the contrary , take it like a lamb -- sit still and let the poison work in he vein without resistance -- in the sharpest exacerbation of he wound ( like that on he groin ) he never dropt one fretful or discontent word -- he blame neither heaven nor earth -- or think or speak a injuriious thing of any body , or any part of it ; he sit solitary and pensive with he pipe -- look at he lame leg -- then whiff out a sentimental heigh ho ! which mix with the smoke , incommod no one mortal . he take it like a lamb -- I say . in truth he have mistake it at first ; for have take a ride with my father , that very morning , to save if possible a beautiful wood , which the dean and chapter be hew down to give to the poor ( must mean the poor in spirit ; inasmuch as they divide the money amongst themselves . ) ; which say wood be in full view of my uncle 's house , and of singular service to he in he description of the battle of -- by trot on too hastily to save it -- upon a uneasy saddle -- worse horse , &c . & c . . . it have so happen , that the serious part of the blood have get betwixt the two skin , in the nethermost part of my uncle -- the first shootings of which ( as my uncle have no experience of love ) he have take for a part of the passion -- till the blister break in the one case -- and the other remain -- my uncle be presently convinced , that he wound be not a skin - deep wound -- but that it have go to he heart . . the world be ashamed of be virtuous --my uncle know little of the world ; and therefore when he feel he be in love with widow , he have no conception that the thing be any more to be make a mystery of , than if have give he a cut with a gap would knife across he finger : have it be otherwise -- yet as he ever look would upon as a humble friend ; and see fresh reason every day of he life , to treat he as such -- it would have make no variation in the manner in which he inform he of the affair . 'I be in love , corporal ! ' quoth my uncle . . in love !--say the corporal -- you honou be very well the day before yesterday , when I be tell you honour of the story of the of -- ! say my uncle . . . muse a long time . . . what become of that story , ? -- we lose it , a ' please you honour , somehow betwixt we -- but you honour be as free from love then , as I be --'tbe just whilst thou go 'st off with the wheel - barrow -- with , quoth my uncle -- she have leave a ball here -- add my uncle -- point to he breast -- -- she can no more , an' please you honour , stand a siege , than she can fly - - cry the corporal -- -- but as we be neighbour , , -- the best way I think be to let she know it civilly first -- quoth my uncle . now if I might presume , say the corporal , to differ from you honour -- -- why else do i talk to , ? say my uncle , mildly -- -- then I would begin , an' please you honour , with make a good thundering attack upon she , in return -- and tell she civilly afterwards -- for if she know any thing of you honour 's be in love , before hand -- l ..d help she !-- she know no more at present of it , , say my uncle -- than the child unborn -- precious soul !-- have tell it , with all its circumstance , to twenty - four hour before ; and be at that very moment sit in council with she , touch some slight misgiving with regard to the issue of the affair , which the , who never lie dead in a ditch , have put into she head -- before he would allow half time , to get quietly through she . I be terribly afraid , say widow Wadman , in case I should marry he , -- that the poor captain will not enjoy he health , with the monstrous wound upon he groin -- it may not , madam , be so very large , reply , as you think -- and I believe , besides , add she -- that ' tis dry up -- -- I could like to know -- merely for he sake , say -- -- we will know and long and the broad of it , in ten day -- answer , for whilst the captain be pay he address to you -- I be confident will be for make love to I -- and I will let he as much as he will -- add -- to get it all out of he --
-- the measure be take at once -- and my uncle and the corporal go on with theirs . now , quoth the corporal , set he leave hand a - kimbo , and give such a flourish with he right , as just promise success -- and no more -- if you honou will give I leave to lay down the plan of this attack -- -- thou will please I by it , , say my uncle , exceedingly -- and as I foresee thou must act in it as my aid de camp , here be a crown , corporal , to begin with , to steep thy commission . then , an' please you honour , say the corporal ( make a bow first for he commission ) -- we will begin with get you honour 's laced clothes out of the great campaign - trunk , to be well air' , and have the blue and gold take up at the sleeve -- and I will put you white ramallie-wig fresh into pipe -- and send for a taylor , to have you honour 's thin scarlet breech yotu nhave -- -- I have better take the red plush one , quoth my uncle -- they will be too clumsy -- say the corporal . . -- thou will get a brush and a little chalk to my sword --'Twill be only in you honour 's way , reply . . -- but you honour 's two razor shall be new set -- and I will get my cap furbish would up , and put on poor lieutenant 's regimental coat , which you honou give I to wear for he sake -- and as soon as you honour be clean shaved -- and have get you clean shirt on , with you blue and gold , or you fine scarlet -- sometimes one and sometimes t'other -- and every thing be ready for the attack -- we will march up boldly , as if ' twas to the face of a bastion ; and whilst you honou engage in the parlour , to the right -- I will attack in the kitchen , to the left ; and have seiz have the pass , I will answer for it , say the corporal , snapp he finger over he head -- that the day be we own . I wish I may but manage it right ; say my uncle -- but I declare , corporal , I have rather march up to the very edge of a trench -- -- a woman be quite a different thing -- say the corporal . -- I suppose so , quoth my uncle . . if any thing in this world , which my father say , could have provoke my uncle , during the time he be in love , it be the perverse use my father be always make of a expression of the hermit ; who , in speaking of he abstinence , he watchings , flagellation , and other instrumental part of he religion --would say -- tho ' with more facetiousness than become a hermit --' that they be the means he use , to make he ass ( mean he body ) leave off kicking . ' it please my father well ; it be not only a laconick way of expressing -- but of libelling , at the same time , the desire and appetite of the lower part of we ; so that for many year of my father 's life , ' tbe he constant mode of expression -- he never use the word passion once -- but ass always instead of they -- so that he might be say truly , to have be upon the bone , or the back of he own ass , or else of some other man 's , during all that time . I must here observe to you the difference betwixt my father 's ass and my hobby - horse -- in order to keep character as separate as may be , in we fancie as we go along . for my hobby - horse , if you recollect a little , be no way a vicious beast ; he have scarce one hair or lineament of the ass about he -- 'Tis the sporting little filly - folly which carry you out for the present hour -- a maggot , a butterfly , a picture , a fiddlestick -- a uncle 's siege -- or a any thing , which a man make a shift to get a - stride on , to canter it away from the car and solicitude of life --'Tis as useful a beast as be in the whole creation -- nor do I really see how the world could do without it -- -- but for my father 's ass -- oh ! mount he -- mount he -- mount he --( that be three time , be it not ?) --mount he not :--'ti a beast concupiscent -- and foul befal the man , who do not hinder he from kicking . . well ! dear brother , say my father , upon he first see he after he fall in love -- and how go it with you Asse ? now my uncle Toby think more of the part where he have have the blister , than of 's metaphor -- and we preconception have ( you know ) as great a power over the sound of word as the shape of thing , he have imagined , that my father , who be not very ceremonious in he choice of word , have enquire after the part by its proper name : so notwithstand my mother , doctor , and , be sit in the parlour , he think it rather civil to conform to the term my father have make
make use of than not . when a man be hemm have in by two indecorum , and must commit one of th'ey -- I always observe -- let he chuse which he will , the world will blame he -- so I should not be astonished if it blame my uncle . my a ..e , quoth my uncle , be much better -- brother -- my father have form great expectation from he Asse in this onset ; and would have bring he on again ; but doctor Slop set up a intemperate laugh -- and my mother cry out ... bless we !-- it drive my father 's Asse off the field -- and the laugh then become general -- there be no bring he back to the charge , for some time -- and so the discourse go on without he . every body , say my mother , say you be in love , brother , -- and we hope it be true . I be as much in love , sister , I believe , reply my uncle , as any man usually be -- ! say my father -- and when do you know it ? quoth my mother -- -- when the blister break ; reply my uncle . my uncle 's reply put my father into good temper -- so he charg would of ' foot . . as the ancients agree , brother , say my father , that there be two different and distinct kind of love , accord to the different part which be affect by it -- the or -- I think when a man be in love , it behove he a little to consider which of the two he be fall into . what signify it , brother , reply my uncle , which of the two it be , provide it will but make a man marry , and love he wife , and get a few child ? -- a few child ! cry my father , rise out of he chair , and look full in my mother 's face , as he force he way betwixt she 's and doctor Slop's - - a few child ! cry my father , repeat my uncle 's word as he walk ' to and fro -- -- not , my dear brother , cry my father , recovere himself all at once , and come close up to the back of my uncle 's chair -- not that I should be sorry hadst thout a score -- on the contrary , I should rejoice -- and be as kind , , to every one of they as a father -- my uncle steal he hand unperceive behind he chair , to give my father 's a squeeze -- -- Nay , moreover , continue he , keep hold of my uncle 's hand -- so much dost thout possess , my dear , of the milk of human nature , and so little of its asperity t--'tis piteous the world be not people by creature which resemble thee ; and be I a Asiatic monarch , add my father , hea himself with he new project -- I would oblige thee , provide it would not impair thy strength -- or dry up thy radical moisture too fast -- or weaken thy memory or fancy , brother , which these gymnic inordinately take be apt to do -- else , dear , I would procure thee the most beautiful woman in my empire , and I would oblige thee , nolens , volens , to beget for I one subject every month -- as my father pronounce the last word of the sentence -- my mother take a pinch of snuff . now I would not , quoth my uncle , get a child , nolens , volens , that be , whether I would or no , to please the greatest prince upon earth -- -- and 'twould be cruel in I , brother , to compel thee ; say my father - - but ' ti a case put to show thee , that it be not thy begett a child -- in case thou should 'st be able -- but the system of love and marriage thou goest upon , which I would set thee right in -- there be at least , say , a great deal of reason and plain sense in 's opinion of love ; and ' tis amongst the ill - spend hour of my life , which I have to answer for , that I have read so many flourish poet and rhetorician in my time , from whom I never could extract so much - - I wish , , say my father , you have read ; for there you would have learn that there be two love -- I know there be two religion , reply , amongst the ancient -- one -- for the vulgar , and another for the learned ; -- but I think one love might have serve both of they very well -- I could not ; reply my father -- and for the same reason : for of these love , accord to 's comment upon , the one be rational -- -- the other be natural -- the first ancient -- without mother -- where have nothing to do : the second , begotten of and -- -- pray , brother , quoth my uncle , what have a man who believe in to do with this ? my father could not stop to answer , for fear of break the thread of he discourse -- this latter , continue he , partake wholly of the nature of . the first , which be the golden chain let down from heaven , excite to love heroic , which comprehend in it , and excite to
to the desire of philosophy and truth -- the second , excites to desire , simply -- -- I think the procreation of child as beneficial to the world , say , as the find out the longitude -- -- to be sure , say my mother , love keep peace in the world -- -- in the house -- my dear , I own -- -- it replenish the earth ; say my mother -- but it keep heaven empty -- my dear ; reply my father . t--'Tis Virginity , cry , triumphantly , which fill paradise . well push would nin ! quoth my father . . my father have such a skirmishing , cut kind of a slashing way with he in he disputation , thrust and rip , and give every one a stroke to remember he by in he turn -- that if there be twenty people in company -- in less than half a hour he be sure to have every one of 'em against he . what do not a little contribute to leave he thus without a ally , be , that if there be any one post more untenable than the rest , he would be sure to throw himself into it ; and to do he justice , when he be once there , he would defend it so gallantly , that ' twould have be a concern , either to a brave man or a good - nature one , to have see he drive out . , for this reason , though he would often attack he -- yet could never bear to do it with all he force . 's , in the close of the last chapter , have get he for once on the right side of the rampart ; and he be begin to blow up all the convent in about 's ear , when corporal come into the parlour to inform my uncle , that he thin scarlet breech , in which the attack be to be make upon , would not do ; for that the taylor , in rip they up , in order to turn they , have find they have be turn would before -- then turn they again , brother , say my father , rapidly , for there will be many a turning of th'ey yet before all be do in the affair -- they be as rotten as dirt , say the corporal -- then by all means , say my father , bespeak a new pair , brother -- for though I know , continue my father , turn himself to the company , that widow have be deeply in love with my brother for many year , and have use every art and circumvention of woman to outwit he into the same passion , yet now that she have catch he -- she fever will be pass have its height -- -- she have gain she point . in this case , continue my father , which , I be persuade , never think of -- , you see , be not so much a sentiment as a situation , into which a man enter , as my brother would do , into a corps -- no matter whether he love the service or no -- be once in it -- he act as if he do ; and take every step to show himself a man of prowesse . the hypothesis , like the rest of my father 's , be plausible enough , and my uncle have but a single word to object to it -- in which stand ready to second he -- but my father have not draw he conclusion -- for this reason , continue my father ( state the case over again ) -- notwithstand all the world know , that affect my brother -- and my brother contrariwise affect , and no obstacle in nature to forbid the music strike up this very night , yet will I answer for it , that this self - same tune will not be play ' this twelvemonth . we have take we measure badly , quoth my uncle , look up interrogatively in 's face . I would lay my Montero-cap , say Trim -- now 's - cap , as I once tell you , be he constant wager ; and have furbish ' it up that very night , in order to go upon the attack -- it make the odds look more considerable -- I would lay , an' please you honour , my -cap to a shilling -- be it proper , continue ( make a bow ) , to offer a wager before you honour -- -- there be nothing improper in it , say my father --'ti a mode of expression ; for in say thou would 'st lay thy Montero - cap to a shilling -- all thou meanest be this -- that thou believest -- -- now , what do 'st thou believe ? that widow , an' please you worship , can not hold it out ten day -- and whence , cry Slop , jeeringly , hast thou all this knowledge of woman , friend ? by fall in love with a popish clergy - woman ; say . ' Tbe a , say my uncle . be too much in wrath to listen to the distinction ; and my father take that very crisis to fall in helter - skelter upon the whole order of and , a set of silly , fusty , baggage -- could not stand it -- and my uncle Toby have some measure to take about he breech -- and about he fourth general division -- in order for they several attack next day -- the company break up : and my father be leave alone , and have half a hour upon
upon he hand betwixt that and bed - time ; he call for pen , ink , and paper , and write my uncle Toby the follow letter of instruction : my dear brother , what I be go to say to thee be upon the nature of woman , and of love - make to they ; and perhaps it be as well for thee -- tho ' not so well for I -- that thout hast occasion for a letter of instruction upon that head , and that I be able to write it to thee . have it be the good pleasure of he who dispose of we lots -- and thout no sufferer by the knowledge , I have be well contend that thou should 'st have dipp have the pen this moment into the ink , instead of myself ; but that not be the case -- . Shandy be now close beside I , prepare for bed -- I have throw together without order , and just as they have come into my mind , such hint and document as I deem may be of use to thee ; intend , in this , to give thee a token of my love ; not doubt , my dear , of the manner in which it will be accept . in the first place , with regard to all which concern religion in the affair -- though I perceive from a glow in my cheek , that I blush as I begin to speak to thee upon the subject , as well know , notwithstand thy unaffected secrecy , how few of its office thout neglectest -- yet I would remind thee of one ( during the continuance of thy courtship ) in a particular manner , which I would not have omit ; and that be , never to go forth upon the enterprize , whether it be in the morning or the afternoon , without first recommend thyself to the protection of , that he may defend thee from the evil one . shave the whole top of thy cry clean once at least every four or five day , but oftner if convenient ; lest in take off thy wig before she , thro ' absence of mind , she should be able to discover how much have be cut away by -- how much by . --' Twere better to keep idea of baldness out of she fancy . always carry it in thy mind , and act upon it as a sure maxim , -- ' that woman be timid :' and ' ti well they be -- else there would be no deal with they . let not thy breech be too tight , or hang too loose about thy thigh , like the trunk - hose of we ancestor . -- a just medium prevent all conclusion . whatever thou hast to say , be it more or less , forget not to utter it in a low soft tone of voice . Silence , and whatever approach it , weave dream of midnight secrecy into the brain : for this cause , if thou canst help it , never throw down the tong and poker . avoid all kind of pleasantry and facetiousness in thy discourse with she , and do whatever lie in thy power at the same time , to keep she from all book and writing which tend theretoo : there be some devotional tract , which if thou canst entice she to read over -- it will be well : but suffer she not to look into , or , or -- -- they be all book which excite laughter ; and thou knowest , dear , that there be no passion so serious as lust . stick a pin in the bosom of thy shirt , before thou enterest she parlour . and if thou be permit to sit upon the same sopha with she , and she give thee occasion to lay thy hand upon hers -- beware of take it -- thou canst not lay thy hand on hers , but she will feel the temper of thine . leave that and as many other thing as thou canst , quite undetermined ; by so do , thou will have she curiosity on thy side ; and if she be not conquer by that , and thy Asse continue still kick , which there be great reason to suppose -- thou must begin , with first lose a few ounce of blood below the ear , accord to the practice of the ancient , who cure the most intemperate fit of the appetite by that mean . , after this , be for have the part anoint with the syrup of hellebore , use proper evacuation and purge -- and I believe rightly . but thou must eat little or no goat 's flesh , nor red deer -- nor even foal 's flesh by any means ; and carefully aabstain -- that be , as much as thou canst , from peacock , crane , coot , didapper , and water - hen -- as for thy drink -- I need not tell thee , it must be the infusion of and the herb Hanea , of which relate such effect -- but if thy stomach pall with it --discontinue it from time to time , take cucumber , melon , purslane , water - lilly , woodbine , and lettice , in the stead of they . there be nothing further for thee , which occur to I at present -- -- unless the breaking out of a fresh war -- So wish every thing , dear , for best , I rest thy affectionate brother , . . whilst my father be write he letter of instruction , my uncle and the corporal be busy in prepare every
every thing for the attack . as the turning of the thin scarlet breech be laid aside ( at least for the present ) , there be nothing which should put it off beyond the next morning ; so accordingly it be haresolve ' upon , for eleven o'clock . come , my dear , say my father to my mother --'twill be but like a brother and sister , if you and I take a walk down to my brother 's -- to countenance he in this attack of he . my uncle and the corporal have be accour both some time , when my father and mother enter ' , and the clock strike eleven , be that moment in motion to sally forth -- but the account of this be worth more than to be wove into the fag end of the eighth ( Allud to the first edition . ) volume of such a work as this .-- my father have no time but to put the letter of instruction into my uncle 's coat - pocket -- and join with my mother in wish he attack prosperous . I could like , say my mother , to look through the key - hole out of curiosity -- call it by it be right name , my dear , quoth my father -- and look through the key - hole as long as you will . . I call all the power of time and chance , which severally check we in we career in this world , to bear I witness , that I could never yet get fairly to my uncle 's amour , till this very moment , that my mother 's curiosity , as she state the affair , -- or a different impulse in she , as my father would have it -- wish she to take a peep at they through the key - hole . ' call it , my dear , by it be right name , quoth my father , and look through the key - hole as long as you will . ' nothing but the fermentation of that little subacid humour , which I have often speak of , in my father 's habit , could have vent such a insinuation -- he be however frank and generous in he nature , and at all time open to conviction ; so that he have scarce get to the last word of this ungracious retort , when he conscience smote he . my mother be then conjugally swing with she left arm twist under he right , in such wise , that the inside of she hand rest upon the back of he -- she raise she finger , and let they fall -- it could scarce be call have a tap ; or if it be a tap --'twould have puzzl a casuist to say , whether ' tbe a tap of remonstrance , or a tap of confession : my father , who be all sensibility from head to foot , class ' it right -- redouble she blow -- he turn would he face suddenly the other way , and my mother suppose he body be about to turn with it in order to move homeward , by a cross movement of she right leg , keep she leave as its centre , bring herself so far in front , that as he turn he head , he meet she eye -- again ! he see a thousand reason to wipe out the reproach , and as many to reproach himself - - a thing , blue , chill , pellucid chrystal with all its humours so at rest , the least mote or speck of desire might have be see , at the bottom of it , have it exist -- it do not -- and how I happen to be so lewd myself , particularly a little before the vernal and autumnal equinox -- heaven above know -- my mother -- madam -- be so at no time , either by nature , by institution , or example . a temperate current of blood run orderly through she vein in all month of the year , and in all critical moment both of the day and night alike ; nor do she superinduce the least heat into she humours from the manual effervescency of devotional tract , which have little or no meaning in they , nature be oft -times obliged to find one -- and as for my father 's example ! ' tbe so far from be either aide or abett thereuntoo , that ' tbe the whole business of he life , to keep all fancie of that kind out of she head -- have do she part , to have spare he this trouble ; and what be not a little inconsistent , my father know it -- and here be I sit , this 12th day of 1766 , in a purple jerkin and yellow pair of slipper , without either wig or cap on , a most tragicomical completion of he prediction , ' that I should neither think , nor act like any other man 's child , upon that very account . ' the mistake in my father , be in attack my mother 's motive , instead of the act itself ; for certainly key - hole be make for other purpose ; and consider the act , as a act which interfere with a true proposition , and deny a key - hole to be what it be -- it become a violation of nature ; and be so far , you see , criminal . it be for this reason , an' please you Reverence , that key - hole be the occasion of more sin and wickedness , than all other holes in this world put together . -- which
which lead I to my uncle 's amour . . though the corporal have be as good as he word in put my uncle 's great ramallie -wig into pipe , yet the time be too short to produce any great effect from it : it have alain many year squeeze up in the corner of he old campaign trunk ; and as bad form be not so easy to be get the better of , and the use of candle - end not so well understood , it be not so pliable a business as one would have wish . the corporal with cheary eye and both arm extend , have fall back perpendicular from it a score time , to inspire it , if possible , with a better air -- have Spleen give a look at it , ' twould have cost she ladyship a smile -- it curl would every where but where the corporal would have it ; and where a buckle or two , in he opinion , would have do it honou , he could as soon have raise the dead . such it be -- or rather such would it have seem ' upon any other brow ; but the sweet look of goodness which sit upon my uncle 's , assimilate every thing around it so sovereignly to itself , and have moreover write with so fair a hand in every line of he countenance , that even he tarnish would gold - lace hat and huge cockade of flimsy taffeta become he ; and though not worth a button in themselves , yet the moment my uncle put they on , they become serious object , and altogether seem ' to have be pick up by the hand of to set he off to advantage . nothing in this world could have co-operat more powerfully towards this , than my uncle 's blue and gold -- have not quantity in some measure be necessary to : in a period of fifteen or sixteen year since they have be make , by a total inactivity in my uncle 's life , for he seldom go further than the bowling - green -- he blue and gold have become so miserably too straight for he , that it be with the utmost difficulty the corporal be able to get he into they ; the take they up at the sleeve , be of no advantage .-- they be lace however down the back , and at the seam of the side , & c. in the mode of 's reign ; and to shorten all description , they shine so bright against the sun that morne , and have so metallick and doughty a air with they , that have my uncle think of attacking in armour , nothing could have so well impos upon he imagination . as for the thin scarlet breech , they have be unripp have by the taylor between the leg , and leave at six and seven -- -- yes , Madam , -- but let we govern we fancie . it be enough they be hold impracticable the night before , and as there be no alternative in my uncle 's wardrobe , he sally forth in the red plush . the corporal have array would himself in poor 's regimental coat ; and with he hair tuck would up under he Montero-cap , which he have furbish ' up for the occasion , march would three pace distant from he master : a whiff of military pride have puff would out he shirt at the wrist ; and upon that in a black leather thong clipp would into a tassel beyond the knot , hng the corporal 's stick -- my uncle carry he cane like a pike . -- it look well at least ; quoth my father to himself . . my uncle turn would he head more than once behind he , to see how he be support by the corporal ; and the corporal as oft as he do it , give a slight flourish with he stick -- but not vapouringly ; and with the sweetest accent of most respectful encouragement , bid he honour 's never fear . ' now my uncle do fear ; and grievously too ; he know not ( as my father have reproach have he ) so much as the right end of a from the wrong , and therefore be never altogether at he ease near any one of they -- unless in sorrow or distress ; then infinite be he pity ; nor would the most courteous knight of romance have go further , at least upon one leg , to have wip away a tear from a woman 's eye ; and yet except once that he be beguil into it by , he have never look stedfastly into one ; and would often tell my father in the simplicity of he heart , that it be almost ( if not about ) as bad as take bawdy .-- -- and suppose it be ? my father would say . . she cannot , quoth my uncle , halt , when they have march would up to within twenty pace of 's door -- she cannot , corporal , take it amiss .-- -- she will take it , a ' please you honour , say the corporal , just as the 's widow at take it of my brother .-- -- and how be that ? quoth my uncle , face quite about to the corporal . you honour , reply the corporal , knows of 's misfortune ; but this affair have nothing to do with they any further than this , that if have not marry the widow -- or have it pleas after they marriage , that they have but put pork into they sausage , the
the honest soul have never be take out of he warm bed , and dragg ' to the inquisition --'Tis a curse place -- add the corporal , shak he head , -- when once a poor creature be in , he be in , a ' please you honour , for ever . ' tTis very true ; say my uncle , look gravely at 's house , as he speak . nothing , continue the corporal , can be so sad as confinement for life -- or so sweet , an' please you honour , as liberty . nothing , -- say my uncle , musing -- whilst a man be free , -- cry the corporal , give a flourish with he stick thus -- ( squiggly line diagonally across the page ) a thousand of my father 's most subtle syllogism could not have say more for celibacy . my uncle look have earnestly towards he cottage and he bowling - green . the corporal have unwarily conjure up the Spirit of calculation with he wand ; and he have nothing to do , but to conjure he down again with he story , and in this form of , most un-ecclesiastically do the corporal do it . . as 's place , an' please you honour , be easy -- and the weather warm -- it put he upon think seriously of settle himself in the world ; and as it fall out about that time , that a who keep a sausage shop in the same street , have the ill luck to die of a strangury , and leave he widow in possession of a rouse trade -- think ( as every body in be do the best he could devise for himself ) there could be no harm in offer she he service to carry it on : so without any introduction to the widow , except that of buy a pound of sausage at she shop -- set out -- count the matter thus within himself , as he walk would along ; that let the worst come of it that could , he should at least get a pound of sausage for they worth -- but , if thing go well , he should be set up ; inasmuch as he should get not only a pound of sausage -- but a wife and -- a sausage shop , an' please you honour , into the bargain . every servant in the family , from high to low , wish would success ; and I can fancy , a ' please you honour , I see he this moment with he white dimity waist - coat and breech , and hat a little o' one side , pass jollily along the street , swing he stick , with a smile and a chearful word for every body he meet :-- but alas ! ! thou smilest no more , cry the corporal , look on one side of he upon the ground , as if he apostrophise he in he dungeon . poor fellow ! say my uncle , feelingly . he be a honest , light - hear lad , a ' please you honour , as ever blood warm' -- -- then he resemble thee , , say my uncle , rapidly . the corporal blush would down to he finger end -- a tear of sentimental bashfulness -- another of gratitude to my uncle -- and a tear of sorrow for he brother 's misfortune , start into he eye , and run sweetly down he cheek together ; my uncle 's kindle as one lamp do at another ; and take hold of the breast of 's coat ( which have be that of 's ) as if to ease he lame leg , but in reality to gratify a finer feeling -- he stand silent for a minute and a half ; at the end of which he take he hand away , and the corporal make a bow , go on with he story of he brother and the 's widow . . when , an' please you honour , get to the shop , there be nobody in it , but a poor negro girl , with a bunch of white feather slightly tie to the end of a long cane , flapping away fly -- not kill they t.--'Tis a pretty picture ! say my uncle -- she have suffer persecution , , and have lear nt mercy -- -- she be good , an' please you honour , from nature , as well as from hardship ; and there be circumstance in the story of that poor friendless slut , that would melt a heart of stone , say ; and some dismal winter 's evening , when you honour be in the humour , they shall be tell you with the rest of 's story , for it make a part of it -- then do not forget , , say my uncle . a negro have a soul ? a ' please you honour , say the corporal ( doubtingly ) . I be not much verse , corporal , quoth my uncle , in thing of that kind ; but I suppose , would not leave he without one , any more than thee or I -- -- it would be put one sadly over the head of another , quoth the corporal . it would so ; say my uncle . why then , a ' please you honour , be a black wench to be use worse than a white one ? I can give no reason , say my uncle -- -- only , cry the corporal , shak he head , because she have no one to stand up for she -- --'Tis that very thing , Trim , quoth my uncle , -- which
which recommend she to protection -- and she breth with she ; ' ti the fortune of war which have put the whip into we hand now -- where it may be hereafter , heaven know !-- but be it where it will , the brave , ! will not use it unkindly . -- , say the corporal . amen , respond my uncle , lay he hand upon he heart . the corporal return to he story , and go on -- but with a embarrassment in do it , which here and there a reader in this world will not be able to comprehend ; for by the many sudden transition all along , from one kind and cordial passion to another , in get thus far on he way , he have lose the sportable key of he voice , which give sense and spirit to he tale : he attempt twice to resume it , but could not please himself ; so give a stout hem ! to rally back the retreating spirit , and aid nature at the same time with he left arm a kimbo on one side , and with he right a little extended , support she on the other -- the corporal get as near the note as he could ; and in that attitude , continue he story . . as , an' please you honour , have no business at that time with the Moorish girl , he pass on into the room beyond , to talk to the 's widow about love -- and this pound of sausage ; and being , as I have tell you honour , a open cheary - hear lad , with he character write in he look and carriage , he take a chair , and without much apology , but with great civility at the same time , place it close to she at the table , and sit down . there be nothing so awkward , as court a woman , a ' please you honour , whilst she be make sausage -- so begin a discourse upon they ; first , gravely ,-- 'as how they be make -- with what meat , herb , and spice . '-- then a little gayly , -- as , ' with what skin -- and if they never burst -- whether the largest be not the best ?'-- and so on -- take care only as he go along , to season what he have to say upon sausage , rather under than over ; -- that he might have room to act in -- it be owe to the neglect of that very precaution , say my uncle , lay he hand upon 's shoulder , that lose the battle of Wynendale : he press too speedily into the wood ; which if he have not do , have not fall into we hand , nor and , which both follow she example ; it be so late in the year , continue my uncle , and so terrible a season come on , that if thing have not fall out as they do , we troops must have perish ' in the open field .-- -- why , therefore , may not battle , an' please you honour , as well as marriage , be make in heaven ?--my uncle muse -- inclin he to say one thing , and he high idea of military skill tempt he to say another ; so not be able to frame a reply exactly to he mind --my uncle say nothing at all ; and the corporal finish he story . as perceive , an' please you honour , that he gain ground , and that all he have say upon the subject of sausage be kindly take , he go on to help she a little in make they .-- first , by take hold of the ring of the sausage whilst she strok the force meat down with she hand -- then by cut the string into proper length , and hold they in he hand , whilst she take they out one by one -- then , by put they across she mouth , that she might take they out as she want they -- and so on from little to more , till at last he adventur to tie the sausage himself , whilst she hold the snout .-- -- now a widow , an' please you honour , always chuse a second husband as unlike the first as she can : so the affair be more than half settle in she mind before mention it . she make a fei not however of defend herself , by snatch up a sausage :-- instantly laid hold of another -- but see 's have more gristle in it -- she sign the capitulation -- and seal it ; and there be a end of the matter . . all womankind , continue , ( comment upon he story ) from the highest to the lowest , an' please you honour , love joke ; the difficulty be to know how they chuse to have they cut ; and there be no know that , but by try , as we do with we artillery in the field , by raise or let down they breech , till we hit the mark .-- -- I like the comparison , say my uncle , better than the thing itself -- -- because you honour , quoth the corporal , love glory , more than pleasure . I hope , , answer my uncle , I love mankind more than either ; and as the knowledge of arm tend so apparently to the good and quiet of the world -- and particularly that branch of it which we have practise together in we bowling - green , have no object but to
to shorten the stride of Ambition , and intrench the life and fortune of the few , from the plundering of the many -- whenever that drum beat in we ear , I trust , corporal , we shall neither of we want so much humanity and fellow - feeling , as to face about and march . in pronounce this , my uncle face about , and march would firmly as at the head of he company -- and the faithful corporal , shouldere he stick , and strike he hand upon he coat - skirt as he take he first step -- march would close behind he down the avenue . -- now what can they two noddle be about ? cry my father to my mother -- by all that be strange , they be besiege in form , and be march round she house to mark out the line of circumvallation . I dare say , quoth my mother -- but stop , dear Sir -- for what my mother da to say upon the occasion -- and what my father do say upon it -- with she reply and he rejoinder , shall be read , peruse , paraphrase , comment , and descant upon -- or to say it all in a word , shall be thumb would over by posterity in a chapter apart -- I say , by posterity -- and care not , if I repeat the word again -- for what have this book do more than the of , or the of a , that it may not swim down the gutter of along with they ? I will not argue the matter : time waste too fast : every letter I trace tell I with what rapidity life follow my pen : the day and hour of it , more precious , my dear ! than the ruby about thy neck , be fly over we head like light clouds of a windy day , never to return more -- every thing presse on -- whilst thou be twist that lock , -- see ! it grow grey ; and every time I kiss thy hand to bid adieu , and every absence which follow it , be prelude to that eternal separation which we be shortly to make .-- -- have mercy upon we both ! . now , for what the world think of that ejaculation -- I would not give a groat . . my mother have go with she left arm twist in my father 's right , till they have get to the fatal angle of the old garden wall , where be overthrow by on the coach - horse : as this be directly opposite to the front of 's house , when my father come to it , he give a look across ; and see my uncle and the corporal within ten pace of the door , he turn would about --' let we just stop a moment , quoth my father , and see with what ceremony my brother and he man Tre make they first entry -- it will not detain we , add my father , a single minute :' -- no matter , if it be ten minute , quoth my mother . -- it will not detain we half one ; say my father . the corporal be just then set in with the story of he brother and the 's widow : the story go on -- and on -- it have episodes in it -- it come back , and go on -- and on again ; there be no end of it -- the reader find it very long -- --g .. help my father ! he pish have fifty time at every new attitude , and give the corporal 's stick , with all its flourishing and dangling , to as many devils as choose to accept of they . when issue of event like these my father be wait for , be hang in the scale of fate , the mind have the advantage of change the principle of expectation three time , without which it would not have power to see it out . Curiosity governd the first moment ; and the second moment be all oeconomy to justify the expence of the first -- and for the third , fourth , fifth , and sixth moment , and so on to the day of judgment t--'tis a point of . I need not be tell , that the ethic writer have assign this all to patience ; but that Virtue , methink , have extent of dominion sufficient of she own , and enough to do in it , without invade the few dismantled castle which have leave he upon the earth . my father stand it out as well as he could with these three auxiliary to the end of 's story ; and from thence to the end of my uncle 's panegyrick upon arm , in the chapter follow it ; when see , that instead of march up to 's door , they both face about and march ' down the avenue diametrically opposite to he expectation -- he break out at once with that little subacid soreness of humour , which , in certain situation , distinguished he character from that of all other man . . --' now what can they two noddle be about ? ' cry my father . . .&c . . .. I dare say , say my mother , they be make fortification -- -- not on 's premise ! cry my father , step back -- I suppose not : quoth my mother . I wish , say my father , raise he voice , the whole science of fortification at the devil , with all its trumpery of sap , mine , blind , gabion ,
, fausse - bray and cuvett -- -- they be foolish thing -- say my mother . now she have a way , which , by the bye , I would this moment give away my purple jerkin , and my yellow slipper into the bargain , if some of you reverence would imitate -- and that be , never to refuse she assent and consent to any proposition my father laid before she , merely because she do not understand it , or have no idea of the principal word or term of art , upon which the tenet or proposition roll . she contente herself with do all that she godfather and godmother promise for she -- but no more ; and so would go on use a hard word twenty year together -- and reply to it too , if it be a verb , in all its mood and tense , without give herself any trouble to enquire about it . this be a eternal source of misery to my father , and break the neck , at the first set out , of more good dialogue between they , than could have do the most petulant contradiction -- the few which survive be the better for the cuvett -- --' they be foolish thing ;' say my mother . -- particularly the cuvett ; reply my father . ' tTis enough -- he taste the sweet of triumph -- and go on . -- not that they be , properly speak , 's premise , say my father , partly correcte himself -- because she be but tenant for life -- -- that make a great difference -- say my mother -- -- in a fool 's head , reply my father -- unless she should happen to have a child -- say my mother -- -- but she must persuade my brother first to get she one -- to be sure , , quoth my mother . -- though if it come to persuasion -- say my father -- have mercy upon they . amen : say my mother , piano . amen : cry my father , fortissime . amen : say my mother again -- but with such a sigh cadence of personal pity at the end of it , as discomfit every fibre about my father -- he instantly take out he almanack ; but before he could untie it , 's congregation come out of church , become a full answer to one half of he business with it -- and my mother tell he it be a sacrament day -- leave he as little in doubt , as to the other part -- he put he almanack into he pocket . the first of the think of way and mean , could not have return home with a more embarrassed look . . upon look back from the end of the last chapter , and survey the texture of what have be write , it be necessary , that upon this page and the three follow , a good quantity of heterogeneous matter be insert to keep up that just balance betwixt wisdom and folly , without which a book would not hold together a single year : nor be it a poor creeping digression ( which but for the name of , a man might continue as well go on in the king 's highway ) which will do the business -- no ; if it be to be a digression , it must be a good frisky one , and upon a frisky subject too , where neither the horse or he rider be to be catch , but by rebound . the only difficulty , be raise power suitable to the nature of the service : Fancy be capricious -- must not be search for -- and Pleasantry ( good - natured slut as she be ) will not come in at a call , be a empire to be laid at she foot . -- the best way for a man , be to say he prayer -- only if it put he in mind of he infirmity and defect as well ghostly as bodily -- for that purpose , he will find himself rather worse after he have say they than before -- for other purpose , better . for my own part , there be not a way either moral or mechanical under heaven that I could think of , which I have not take with myself in this case : sometimes by address myself directly to the soul herself , and argue the point over and over again with she upon the extent of she own faculty -- -- I never could make they a inch the wider -- then by change my system , and try what could be make of it upon the body , by temperance , soberness , and chastity : these be good , quoth I , in themselves -- they be good , absolutely ; -- they be good , relatively ; -- they be good for health -- they be good for happiness in this world -- they be good for happiness in the next -- in short , they be good for every thing but the thing want ; and there they be good for nothing , but to leave the soul just as heaven make it : as for the theological virtue of faith and hope , they give it courage ; but then that snivell virtue of ( as my father would always call it ) take it quite away again , so you be exactly where you start . now in all common and ordinary case , there be nothing which I have find to answer so well as this -- -- certainly , if there be any dependence upon logic , and that I be not blind by self - love
love , there must be something of true genius about I , merely upon this symptom of it , that I do not know what envy be : for never do I hit upon any invention or device which tendeth to the furtherance of good writing , but I instantly make it public ; willing that all mankind should write as well as myself . -- which they certainly will , when they think as little . . now in ordinary case , that be , when I be only stupid , and the thought rise heavily and pass gummous through my pen -- or that I be get , I know not how , into a cold unmetaphorical vein of infamous writing , and can not take a plumb - liave out of it for my soul ; so must be obliged to go on writing like a commentator to the end of the chapter , unless something be do -- -- I never stand conferr with pen and ink one moment ; for if a pinch of snuff , or a stride or two across the room will not do the business for I -- I take a razor at once ; and have try the edge of it upon the palm of my hand , without further ceremony , except that of first lather my beard , I shave it off ; take care only if I do leave a hair , that it be not a grey one : this do , I change my shirt -- put on a better coat -- send for my last wig -- put my topaz ring upon my finger ; and in a word , dress myself from one end to the other of I , after my best fashion . now the devil in hell must be in it , if this do not do : for consider , , as every man chuse to be present at the shaving of he own beard ( though there be no rule without a exception ) , and unavoidably sit over - against himself the whole time it be do , in case he have a hand in it -- the situation , like all other , have notion of she own to put into the brain .-- -- I maintain it , the conceit of a rough - bearded man , be seven year more terse and juvenile for one single operation ; and if they do not run a risk of be quite shave away , might be carry up by continual shaving , to the highest pitch of sublimity -- how Homer could write with so long a beard , I do not know -- and as it make against my hypothesis , I as little care -- but let we return to the toilet . make this entirely a affair of the body ( ) as he call it -- but he be deceive : the soul and body be joint-sharer in every thing they get : a man can not dress , but he idea get cloth would at the same time ; and if he dress like a gentleman , every one of they stand present to he imagination , genteelize along with he -- so that he have nothing to do , but take he pen , and write like himself . for this cause , when you honour and reverence would know whether I writ clean and fit to be read , you will be able to judge full as well by look into my Laundress 's bill , as my book : there be one single month in which I can make it appear , that I dirtie one and thirty shirt with clean writing ; and after all , be more abus ' , curse , criticis' , and confound , and have more mystic head shaken at I , for what I have write in that one month , than in all the other month of that year put together . -- but they honour and reverence have not see my bill . . as I never have any intention of begin the Digression , I be make all this preparation for , till I come to the 74th chapter -- I have this chapter to put to whatever use I think proper -- I have twenty this moment ready for it -- I could write my chapter of - hole in it -- or my chapter of , which should follow they -- or my chapter of , in case they reverence have do with they -- they might lead I into mischief : the safest way be to follow the track of the learn , and raise objection against what I have be write , tho ' I declare before - hand , I know no more than my heel how to answer they . and first , it may be say , there be a pelting kind of thersitical satire , as black as the very ink ' tis write with -- ( and by the bye , whoever say so , be indebt to the muster - master general of the Grecian army , for suffer the name of so ugly and foul - mouth ' a man as Thersites to continue upon he roll -- for it have furnish ' he with a epithet ) -- in these productions he will urge , all the personal washing and scrubbing upon earth do a sinking genius no sort of good -- but just the contrary , inasmuch as the dirtier the fellow be , the better generally he succeed in it . to this , I have no other answer -- at least ready -- but that the Archbishop of write he nasty romance of the , as all the world know , in a purple coat , waistcoat , and purple pair of breech ;
; and that the penance set he of write a commentary upon the book of the Revelation , as severe as it be look would upon by one part of the world , be far from be thdeey ' so , by the other , upon the single account of that investment . another objection , to all this remedy , be its want of universality ; forasmuch as the shaving part of it , upon which so much stress be laid , by a unalterable law of nature exclude one half of the species entirely from its use : all I can say be , that female writer , whether of , or of , must e'en go without it -- as for the spanish lady -- I be in no sort of distress -- . the seventy - fourth chapter be come at last ; and bring nothing with it but a sad signature of ' how we pleasur slip from under we in this world ! ' for in talking of my digression -- I declare before heaven I have make it ! what a strange creature be mortal man ! say she . ' tTis very true , say I -- but ' twere better to get all these thing out of we head , and return to my uncle . . when my uncle and the corporal have march down to the bottom of the avenue , they recollect they business lay the other way ; so they face about and march up straight to 's door . I warrant you honour ; say the corporal , touch he Montero - cap with he hand , as he pass he in order to give a knock at the door -- my uncle , contrary to he invariable way of treat he faithful servant , say nothing good or bad : the truth be , he have not altogether marshal would he idea ; he wish would for another conference , and as the corporal be mount up the three step before the door -- he hey would twice -- a portion of my uncle 's most modest spirit fle , at each expulsion , towards the corporal ; he stand with the rapper of the door suspend for a full minute in he hand , he scarce know why . stand perdue withing , with she finger and she thumb upon the latch , benumb would with expectation ; and , with a eye ready to be deflower again , sit breathless behind the window - curtain of she bed - chamber , watch they approach . Trim ! say my uncle -- but as he articulate the word , the minute expire , and let fall the rapper . my uncle perceive that all hope of a conference be knock have on the head by it -- whistle . . as 's finger and thumb be upon the latch , the corporal do not knock as often as perchance you honour 's taylor -- I might have take my example something nearer home ; for I owe mine , some five and twenty pound at least , and wonder at the man 's patience -- -- but this be nothing at all to the world : only ' tis a curse thing to be in debt ; and there seem to be a fatality in the exchequer of some poor prince , particularly those of we house , which no Economy can bind down in iron : for my own part , I be persuade there be not any one prince , prelate , pope , or potentate , great or small upon earth , more desirous in he heart of keep straight with the world than I be -- or who take more likely means for it . I never give above half a guinea -- or walk with boot - - or cheapen tooth - pick -- or lay out a shilling upon a band - box the year round ; and for the six month I be in the country , I be upon so small a scale , that with all the good temper in the world , I outdue , a bar length -- for I keep neither man or boy , or horse , or cow , or dog , or cat , or any thing that can eat or drink , except a thin poor piece of a ( to keep my fire in ) , and who have generally as bad a appetite as myself -- but if you think this make a philosopher of I -- I would not , my good people ! give a rush for you judgment . true philosophy -- but there be no treat the subject whilst my uncle be whistl . -- let we go into the house . . ( blank page ) . ( blank page ) . --( two blank paragraph ) -- -- you shall see the very place , Madam ; say my uncle . blush have -- look ' towards the door -- turn would pale -- blush would slightly again -- recover would she natural colour -- blush have worse than ever ; which , for the sake of the unlearned reader , I translate thus -- ' ! I can not look at it -- ' what would the world say if I look would at it ? 'I should drop down , if I look would at it -- 'I wish I could look at it -- ' there can be no sin in look at it . -- 'I will look at it . ' whilst all this be run through 's imagination , my uncle have risen from the sopha , and get to the other side of the parlour door , to give Trim a order about it in the passage -- . . .-- I believe it
it be in the garret , say my uncle -- I see it there , a ' please you honour , this morning , answer -- then prithee , step directly for it , , say my uncle , and bring it into the parlour . the corporal do not approve of the order , but most cheerfully obey they . the first be not a act of he will -- the second be ; so he put on he Montero-cap , and go as fast as he lame knee would let he . my uncle return into the parlour , and sit himself down again upon the sopha . -- you shall lay you finger upon the place -- say my uncle .-- I will not touch it , however , quoth to herself . this require a second translation :-- it shew what little knowledge be get by mere word -- we must go up to the first spring . now in order to clear up the mist which hang upon these three page , I must endeaavor to be as clear as possible myself . rub you hand thrice across you forehead -- blow you nos -- cleanse you emunctory -- sneeze , my good people !-- bless you -- now give I all the help you can . . as there be fifty different end ( count all end in -- as well civil as religious ) for which a woman take a husband , the first set about and carefully weigh , then separate and distinguish in she mind , which of all that number of end be hers ; then by discourse , enquiry , argumentation , and inference , she investigate and find out whether she have get hold of the right one -- and if she have -- then , by pull it gently this way and that way , she further form a judgment , whether it will not break in the drawing . the imagery under which impress this upon the reader 's fancy , in the beginning of he third Decad , be so ludicrous , that the honour I bear the sex , will not suffer I to quote it -- otherwise it be not destitute of humwe . ' she first , saith , stop the asse , and hold he halter in she left hand ( lest he should get away ) she thrust she right hand into the very bottom of he pannier to search for it -- for what ?-- you will not know the sooner , quoth , for interrupt I -- 'I have nothing , good , but empty bottle ; ' say the asse . 'I be load with trip ;' say the second . -- and thou be little better , quoth she to the third ; for nothing be there in thy pannier but trunk - hose and pantofle -- and so to the fourth and fifth , go on one by one through the whole string , till come to the asse which carry it , she turn the pannier upside down , look at it -- consider it -- sample it -- measure it -- stretch it -- wet it -- dry it -- then take she tooth both to the warp and weft of it . -- of what ? for the love of ! I be determine , answer , that all the power upon earth shall never wr that secret from my breast . . we live in a world beset on all side with mystery and riddle -- and so ' ti no matter -- else it seem strange , that , who make every thing so well to answer its destination , and seldom or never errs , unless for pastime , in give such form and aptitude to whatever pass through she hand , that whether she design for the plough , the caravan , the cart -- or whatever other creature she model , be it but a asse 's foal , you be sure to have the thing you want ; and yet at the same time should so eternally bungle it as she do , in make so simple a thing as a married man . whether it be in the choice of the clay -- or that it be frequently spoiled in the baking ; by a excess of which a husband may turn out too crusty ( you know ) on one hand -- or not enough so , through defect of heat , on the other -- or whether this great Artificer be not so attentive to the little Platonic exigence of that part of the species , for whose use she be fabricat this -- or that she Ladyship sometimes scarce know what sort of a husband will do -- I know not : we will discourse about it after supper . it be enough , that neither the observation itself , or the reasoning upon it , be at all to the purpose -- but rather against it ; since with regard to my uncle 's fitness for the marriage state , nothing be ever better : she have form he of the best and kindliest clay -- have temper would it with she own milk , and breathe into it the sweetest spirit -- she have make he all gentle , generous , and humane -- she have fill he heart with trust and confidence , and dispose every passage which lead to it , for the communication of the tenderest office -- she have moreover consider the other cause for which matrimony be ordained -- and accordingly . . .. the donation be not defeat by my uncle 's wound . now this last article be somewhat apocryphal ; and the , who be the great disturber of we fait in this world , have raise scruple in 's brain about it
it ; and like a true devil as he be , have do he own work at the same time , by turn my uncle 's into nothing but empty bottle , trip , trunk - hose , and pantofle . . have pawn have all the little stock of honou a poor chamber-maid be worth in the world , that she would get to the bottom of the affair in ten day ; and it be build upon one of the most concessible postulata in nature : namely , that whilst my uncle be make love to she mistress , the corporal could find nothing better to do , than make love to she --' and I will let he as much as he will , say , to get it out of he . ' friendship have two garment ; a outer and a under one . be serve she mistress 's interests in the one -- and do the thing which most please herself in the other : so have as many stake depend upon my uncle 's wound , as the himself -- . have but one -- and as it possibly might be she last ( without discourage , or discredite she talents ) be determined to play she card herself . she want not encouragement : a child might have look ' into he hand -- there be such a plainness and simplicity in he play out what trump he have -- with such a unmistrusting ignorance of the ten - ace -- and so naked and defenceless do he sit upon the same sopha with widow , that a generous heart would have weep to have win the game of he . let we drop the metaphor . . -- and the story too -- if you please : for though I have all along be hasten towards this part of it , with so much earnest desire , as well know it to be the choicest morsel of what I have to offer to the world , yet now that I be get to it , any one be welcome to take my pen , and go on with the story for I that will -- I see the difficulty of the description I be go to give -- and feel my want of power . it be one comfort at least to I , that I lose some fourscore ounce of blood this week in a most uncritical fever which attack I at the beginning of this chapter ; so that I have still some hope remain , it may be more in the serious or globular part of the blood , than in the subtile aura of the brain -- be it which it will -- a Invocation can do no hurt -- and I leave the affair entirely to the invoke , to inspire or to inject I accord as he see good . the Invocation . Gentle Spirit of sweetest humour , who erst do sit upon the easy pen of my beloved Cervante ; Thou who glidedst daily through he lattice , and turn 'st the twilight of he prison into noon -day brightness by thy presence -- tinge 'st he little urn of water with heaven - send nectar , and all the time he write of and he master , didst cast thy mystic mantle of 'er he wither would stump ( he lose he hand at the battle of . ) , and wide extend it to all the evils of he life -- -- turn in hither , I beseech thee !-- behold these breech !-- they be all I have in world -- that piteous rent be give they at Lyons -- my shirts ! see what a deadly schism have happen would amongst 'em -- for the laps be in , and the rest of 'em here -- I never have but six , and a cunning gypsey of a laundress at cut I off the fore - lap of five -- to do she justice , she do it with some consideration -- for I be return out of . and yet , notwithstand all this , and a pistol tinder - box which be moreover filch would from I at , and twice that I pay have five Pauls for two hard egg , once at , and a second time at -- I do not think a journey through and , provide a man keep he temper all the way , so bad a thing as some people would make you believe : there must be up and downs , or how the duce should we get into vallie where nature spread so many table of entertainment t.--'Tis nonsense to imagine they will lend you they voiture to be shaken to piece for nothing ; and unless you pay twelve sous for greas you wheel , how should the poor peasant get butter to he bread ?-- we really expect too much -- and for the livre or two above par for you supper and bed -- at the most they be but one shilling and ninepence halfpenny -- who would embroil they philosophy for it ? for heaven 's and for you own sake , pay it -- pay it with both hand open , rather than leave disappointment sit droop upon the eye of you fair hostess and she Damsel in the gate - way , at you departure -- and beside , my dear Sir , you get a sisterly kiss of each of th'ey worth a pound - - at least I do -- -- for my uncle 's amour run all the way in my head , they have the same effect upon I as if they have be my own -- I be in the most perfect state of bounty and good - will ; and feel the kindliest harmony vibrat within I
I , with every oscillation of the chaise alike ; so that whether the roads be rough or smooth , it make no difference ; every thing I see or have to do with , touch would upon some secret spring either of sentiment or rapture . -- they be the sweetest note I ever hear ; and I instantly let down the fore - glass to hear they more distinctly ; say the postillion , observe I be listen -- , continue he ( lean he body on one side to let I see she , for he be in a line betwixt we ) , be sit upon a bank play she vesper upon she pipe , with she little goat beside she . the young fellow utter have this with a accent and a look so perfectly in tune to a feeling heart , that I instantly make a vow , I would give he a four - and - twenty sous piece , when I get to -- -- and who be poor ? say I . the love and piety of all the village around we ; say the postillion -- it be but three year ago , that the sun do not shine upon so fair , so quick - witted and amiable a maid ; and better fate do deserve , than to have she forbid , by the intrigue of the curate of the parish who publish they -- he be go on , when , who have make a short pause , put the pipe to she mouth , and begin the air again -- they be the same note ; -- yet be ten time sweeter : it be the evening service to the , say the young man -- but who have teach she to play it -- or how she come by she pipe , no one know ; we think that heaven have assist she in both ; for ever since she have be unsettled in she mind , it seem she only consolation -- she have never once have the pipe out of she hand , but play that service upon it almost night and day . the postillion deliver this with so much discretion and natural eloquence , that I could not help decypher something in he face above he condition , and should have sift out he history , have not poor take such full possession of I . we have get up by this time almost to the bank where be sit : she be in a thin white jacket , with she hair , all but two tress , draw up into a silk - net , with a few olive leave twist a little fantastically on one side -- she be beautiful ; and if ever I feel the full force of a honest heart - ache , it be the moment I see she -- -- help she ! poor damsel ! above a hundred mass , say the postillion , have be say in the several parish church and convent around , for she , -- but without effect ; we have still hope , as she be sensible for short interval , that the Virgin at last will restore she to herself ; but she parent , who know she best , be hopeless upon that score , and think she sense be lose for ever . as the postillion speak this , make a cadence so melancholy , so tender and querulous , that I spring out of the chaise to help she , and find myself sit betwixt she and she goat before I relapse from my enthusiasm . look have wistfully for some time at I , and then at she goat -- and then at I -- and then at she goat again , and so on , alternately -- -- well , , say I softly -- what resemblance do you find ? I do entreat the candid reader to believe I , that it be from the humblest conviction of what a man be , -- that I ask the question ; and that I would not have let fall a unseasonable pleasantry in the venerable presence of , to be entitle to all the wit that ever Rabelais scatter ' -- and yet I own my heart smote I , and that I so smart at the very idea of it , that I swore I would set up for , and utter grave sentence the rest of my day -- and never -- never attempt again to commit mirth with man , woman , or child , the longest day I have to live . as for write nonsense to they -- I believe there be a reserve -- but that I leave to the world . , !--adieu , poor hapless damsel !-- some time , but not now , I may hear thy sorrow from thy own lip -- but I be deceive ; for that moment she take she pipe and tell I such a tale of woe with it , that I rise up , and with broken and irregular step walk would softly to my chaise . -- what a excellent inn at ! . when we have get to the end of this chapter ( but not before ) we must all turn back to the two blank chapter , on the account of which my honou have alain bleed this half hour -- I stop it , by pull off one of my yellow slipper and throw it with all my violence to the opposite side of my room , with a declaration at the heel of it -- -- that whatever resemblance it may bear to half the chapter which be write in the world , or for atch I know may be now write in it -- that it be as casual
casual as the foam of he horse ; beside , I look upon a chapter which have only nothing in it , with respect ; and consider what worse thing there be in the world -- that it be no way a proper subject for satire -- -- why then be it leave so ? and here without stay for my reply , shall I be call as many blockhead , numscul , doddypole , dunderhead , ninny - hammer , goosecap , jolthead , nincompoops , and sh.. t - a - bed -- and other unsavoury appellation , as ever the cake - baker of Lerne cast in the tooth of 's shepherd -- and I will let they do it , as say , as much as they please ; for how be it possible they should foresee the necessity I be under of writing the 84th chapter of my book , before the 77th , &c ? -- so I do not take it amiss -- all I wish be , that it may be a lesson to the world , 'to let people tell they story they own way . ' the Seventy - seventh chapter . as open the door before the corporal have well give the rap , the interval betwixt that and my uncle 's introduction into the parlour , be so short , that have but just time to get from behind the curtain -- lay a upon the table , and advance a step or two towards the door to receive he . my uncle salute , after the manner in which woman be salute by man in the year of we one thousand seven hundred and thirteen -- then face about , he march would up abreast with she to the sopha , and in three plain word -- though not before he be sit down -- nor after he be sit down -- but as he be sit down , tell she , ' he be in love ' -- so that my uncle strain himself more in the declaration than he need . naturally look down , upon a slit she have be darn up in she apron , in expectation every moment , that my uncle would go on ; but have no talents for amplification , and moreover of all other be a subject of which he be the least a master -- when he have tell once that he love she , he let it alone , and leave the matter to work after its own way . my father be always in rapture with this system of my uncle 's , as he falsely call it , and would often say , that could he brother to he processe have add but a pipe of tobacco -- he have wherewithal to have find he way , if there be faith in a spanish proverb , towards the heart of half the woman upon the globe . my uncle never understand what my father mean ; nor will I presume to extract more from it , than a condemnation of a error which the bulk of the world lie under -- but the french , every one of 'em to a man , who believe in it , almost as much as the , ' that talk of love , be make it . ' -- I would have soon set about make a black - pudd by the same receipt . let we go on : sit in expectation my uncle would do so , to almost the first pulsation of that minute , wherein silence on one side or the other , generally become indecent : so edge herself a little more towards he , and raise up she eye , sub blush , as she do it -- she take up the gauntlet -- or the discourse ( if you like it better ) and commune with my uncle , thus : the car and disquietude of the marriage state , quoth , be very great . I suppose so -- say my uncle : and therefore when a person , continue , be so much at he ease as you be -- so happy , , in yourself , you friend and you amusement -- I wonder , what reason can incline you to the state -- -- they be write , quoth my uncle , in the - . thus far my uncle go on warily , and keep within he depth , leave to sail upon the gulph as she please . -- as for child -- say -- though a principal end perhaps of the institution , and the natural wish , I suppose , of every parent -- yet do not we all find , they be certain sorrow , and very uncertain comforts ? and what be there , dear sir , to pay one for the heart -ach -- what compensation for the many tender and disquiet apprehension of a suffering and defenceless mother who bring they into life ? I declare , say my uncle , smit with pity , I know of none ; unless it be the pleasure which it have pleas -- a fiddlestick ! quoth she . 4.to - . now there be such a infinitude of note , tune , cant , chant , air , look , and accent with which the word fiddlestick may be pronounce in all such cause as this , every one of th'ey impress a sense and mean as different from the other , as dirt from cleanliness -- that Casuist ( for it be a affair of conscience on that score ) reckon up no less than fourteen thousand in which you may do either right or wrong . hit upon the fiddlestick , which summon up all my uncle 's modest blood into he cheek -- so feel within himself that
that he have somehow or other get beyond he depth , he stopt short ; and without enter further either into the pain or pleasur of matrimony , he lay he hand upon he heart , and make a offer to take they as they be , and share they along with she . when my uncle have say this , he do not care to say it again ; so caste he eye upon the which have laid upon the table , he take it up ; and popping , dear soul ! upon a passage in it , of all other the most interesting to he -- which be the siege of -- he set himself to read it over -- leave he proposal of marriage , as he have do he declaration of love , to work with she after its own way . now it wrotch neither as a astringent or a loosener ; nor like opium , or bark , or mercury , or buckthorn , or any one drug which nature have bestow upon the world -- in short , it work would not at all in she ; and the cause of that be , that there be something work there before -- that I be ! I have anticipate what it be a dozen time ; but there be fire still in the subject -- allon . . it be natural for a perfect stranger who be go from to , to enquire before he set out , how many mile to ; which be about the half way -- nor do any body wonder , if he go on and ask about the corporation , & c . . .. it be just as natural for , whose first husband be all he time afflict with a , to wish to know how far from the hip to the groin ; and how far she be likely to suffer more or less in she feeling , in the one case than in the other . she have accordingly read 's anatomy from one end to the other . she have pee into upon the brain , and borrowed ( this must be a mistake in ; for write upon the pancreatick juice , and the part of generation . ) upon the bone and muscle ; but could make nothing of it . she have reason would likewise from she own power -- laid down theorem -- drawn consequence , and come to no conclusion . to clear up all , she have twice ask , ' if poor be ever likely to recover off he wound -- ? ' -- he be recover , would say -- what ! quite ? quite : madam -- but what do you mean by a recovery ? would say . be the worst man alive at definition ; and so could get no knowledge : in short , there be no way to extract it , but from my uncle himself . there be a accent of humanity in a enquiry of this kind which lull to rest -- and I be half persuade the serpent get pretty near it , in he discourse with ; for the propensity in the sex to be deceive could not be so great , that she should have boldness to hold chat with the devil , without it -- but there be a accent of humanity -- how shall I describe it ?--' ti a accent which cover the part with a garment , and give the enquirer a right to be as particular with it , as you body - surgeon . ' -- be it without remission ?-- ' -- be it more tolerable in bed ? ' -- could he lie on both side alike with it ? ' -- be he able to mound a horse ? ' -- be motion bad for it ? ' et caetera , be so tenderly speak to , and so direct towards my uncle 's heart , that every item of they sink ten time deeper into it than the evils themselves -- but when go round about by to get at my uncle 's groin ; and engage he to attack the point of the advanced counterscarp , and pele mele with the Dutch to take the counterguard of sword in hand -- and then with tender note play upon he ear , lead he all bleed by the hand out of the trench , wip she eye , as he be carry to he tent -- ! ! Sea!- - all be lift up -- the spring of nature rise above they level -- a angel of mercy sit besides he on the sopha -- he heart glow would with fire -- and have he be worth a thousand , he have lose every heart of they to . -- and whereabouts , dear sir , quoth , a little categorically , do you receive this sad blow ?-- in ask this question , give a slight glance towards the waistband of my uncle 's red plush breech , expect naturally , as the shortest reply to it , that my uncle would lay he fore - finger upon the place -- it fall out otherwise -- for my uncle Toby have get he wound before the gate of , in one of the traverse of the trench opposite to the salient angle of the demibastion of ; he could at any time stick a pin upon the identical spot of ground where he be stand when the stone strike he : this strike instantly upon my uncle 's sensorium -- and with it , strike he large map of the town and citadel of and its environ , which he have purchase and paste down upon a board , by the corporal 's aid , during he long illness -- it have lain
lain with other military lumber in the garret ever since , and accordingly the corporal be detach to the garret to fetch it . my uncle measure off thirty toise , with 's scissar , from the return angle before the gate of ; and with such a virgin modesty lay she finger upon the place , that the goddess of , if then in be -- if not , ' tbe she shade -- shook she head , and with a finger waver across she eye -- forbid she to explain the mistake . ! -- for nothing can make this chapter go off with spirit but a apostrophe to thee -- but my heart tell I , that in such a crisis a apostrophe be but a insult in disguise , and ere I would offer one to a woman in distress -- let the chapter go to the devil ; provide any damn have crintic in keeping will be but at the trouble to take it with he . . my uncle 's be carry down into the kitchen . . -- and here be the -- and this be the ; say the corporal , point with he right hand extend a little towards the map , and he leave upon 's shoulder -- but not the shoulder next he -- and this , say he , be the town of -- and this the citadel -- and there lay the french -- and here lay he honour and myself -- and in this curse trench , , quoth the corporal , take she by the hand , do he receive the wound which crush would he so miserably here .-- in pronouncing which , he slightly press would the back of she hand towards the part he feel for -- and let it fall . we think , , it have be more in the middle , -- say -- that would have undone we for ever -- say the corporal . -- and leave my poor mistress undone too , say . the corporal make no reply to the repartee , but by give a kiss . come --come --said Bridget -- hold the palm of she left hand parallel to the plane of the horizon , and slide the finger of the other over it , in a way which could not have be do , have there be the least wart or protruberance --'Tis every syllable of it false , cry the corporal , before she have half finish the sentence -- -- I know it to be fact , say , from credible witness . -- upon my honour , say the corporal , lay he hand upon he heart , and blushing , as he speak , with honest resentment --'ti a story , , as false as hell -- not , say , interrupt he , that either I or my mistress care a halfpenny about it , whether ' tis so or no --only that when one be marry , one would chuse to have such a thing by one at least -- it be somewhat unfortunate for , that she have begin the attack with she manual exercise ; for the corporal instantly . . .. . it be like the momentary contest in the moist eye - lid of a morning , ' whether should laugh or cry . ' she snatch would up a rolling -pin --'tbe ten to one , she have laugh ' -- she lay it down -- she cry ; and have one single tear of th'ey but taste of bitterness , full sorrowful would the corporal 's heart have be that he have use the argument ; but the corporal understood the sex , a quart major to a terce at least , better than my uncle , and accordingly he assail after this manner . I know , . , say the corporal , give she a most respectful kiss , that thou be good and modest by nature , and art withal so generous a girl in thyself , that , if I know thee rightly , thou would 'st not wound a insect , much less the honour of so gallant and worthy a soul as my master , wast thou sure to be make a countess of -- but thou hast be set on , and delude , dear Bridget , as be often a woman 's case , 'too please other more than themselves -- ' 's eye pour down at the sensation the corporal excited . -- tell I -- tell I , then , my dear Bridget , continue the corporal , take hold of she hand , which hang down dead by she side , -- and give a second kiss -- whose suspicion have misled thee ? Bridget sobb have a sob or two -- then open would she eyes -- the corporal wiped 'em with the bottom of she apron -- she then open would she heart and tell he all . . my uncle and the corporal have go on separately with they operation the greatest part of the campaign , and as effectually cut off from all communication of what either the one or the other have be do , as if they have be separate from each other by the or the . my uncle , on he side , have present himself every afternoon in he red and silver , and blue and gold alternately , and sustain a infinity of attack in they , without know they to be attack -- and so have nothing to communicate -- the corporal , on he side , in take , by it have gain have considerable advantage -- and consequently have much to communicate -- but what be the advantage -- as well as what be the manner by which he have seiz have they , require so
so nice a historian , that the corporal durst not venture upon it ; and as sensible as he be of glory , would rather have be contente to have go bareheaded and without laurel for ever , than torture he master 's modesty for a single moment -- -- best of honest and gallant servants ! -- but I have apostrophiz ' thee , ! once before -- and could I apotheosize thee also ( that be to say ) with good company -- I would do it without ceremony in the very next page . . now my uncle have one evening laid down he pipe upon the table , and be count over to himself upon he finger end ( begin at he thumb ) all 's perfection one by one ; and happen two or three time together , either by omitt some , or count other twice over , to puzzle himself sadly before he could get beyond he middle finger -- , ! say he , take up he pipe again , -- bring I a pen and ink : Tre bring paper also . take a full sheet -- ! say my uncle , make a sign with he pipe at the same time to take a chair and sit down close by he at the table . the corporal obey -- place the paper directly before he -- take a pen , and dipp ' it in the ink . -- she have a thousand virtue , ! say my uncle -- be I to set they down , a ' please you honour ? quoth the corporal . -- but they must be take in they rank , reply my uncle ; for of they all , , that which win I most , and which be a security for all the rest , be the compassionate turn and singular humanity of she character -- I protest , add my uncle , look up , as he protest it , towards the top of the ceiling -- that be I she brother , , a thousand fold , she could not make more constant or more tender enquiry after my suffering -- though now no more . the corporal make no reply to my uncle 's protestation , but by a short cough -- he dipp would the pen a second time into the inkhorn ; and my uncle , point with the end of he pipe as close to the top of the sheet at the left hand corner of it , as he could get it -- the corporal write down the word humanity . . . thus . , corporal , say my uncle , as soon as Tre have do it -- how often do enquire after the wound on the cap of thy knee , which thou receive 'st at the battle of ? she never , an' please you honour , enquire after it at all . that , corporal , say my uncle , with all the triumph the goodness of he nature would permit -- that shew the difference in the character of the mistress and maid -- have the fortune of war allot the same mischance to I , would have enquire into every circumstance relate to it a hundred time -- she would have enquire , an' please you honour , ten time as often about you honour 's groin -- the pain , , be equally excruciat , -- and have as much to do with the one as the other -- -- bless you honour ! cry the corporal -- what have a woman 's compassion to do with a wound upon the cap of a man 's knee ? have you honou be be shoot into ten thousand splinter at the affair of , would have trouble she head as little about it as ; because , add the corporal , lower he voice , and speak very distinctly , as he assign he reason -- ' the knee be such a distance from the main body -- whereas the groin , you honour know , be upon the very curtain of the place . ' my uncle give a long whistle -- but in a note which could scarce be hear across the table . the corporal have advance too far to retire -- in three word he tell the rest -- my uncle lay down he pipe as gently upon the fender , as if it have be spun from the unravelling of a spider 's web -- -- let we go to my brother 's , say he . . there will be just time , whilst my uncle and be walk to my father 's , to inform you that have , some moons before this , make a confident of my mother ; and that . , who have the burden of she own , as well as she mistress 's secret to carry , have get happily deliver of both to behind the garden - wall . as for my mother , she see nothing at all in it , to make the least bustle about -- but be sufficient by herself for all the end and purpose you could possibly have , in export a family secret ; for she instantly impart it by sign to -- and by token to the cook as she be bast a loin of mutton ; the cook sell it with some kitchen - fat to the postillion for a groat , who trike would it with the dairy maid for something of about the same value -- and though whisper would in the hay - loft , fame catch the note with she brazen trumpet , and sound they upon the house - top -- in a word , not a old woman in the village or five mile round , who do not understand
understand the difficulty of my uncle 's siege , and what be the secret article which have delay the surrender .-- my father , whose way be to force every event in nature into a hypothesis , by which mean never man crucify truth at the rate he do -- have but just hear of the report as my uncle Toby set out ; and catche fire suddenly at the trespass do he brother by it , be demonstrate to , notwithstand my mother be sit by -- not only , ' that the be in woman , and that the whole of the affair be lust ;' but that every evil and disorder in the world , of what kind or nature soever , from the first fall of , down to my uncle 's ( inclusive ) , be owe one way or other to the same unruly appetite . be just bring my father 's hypothesis to some temper , when my uncle Toby enter the room with mark of infinite benevolence and forgiveness in he look , my father 's eloquence re-kindle against the passion -- and as he be not very nice in the choice of he word when he be wroth -- as soon as my uncle be seat by the fire , and have fill he pipe , my father break out in this manner . . -- that provision should be make for continue the race of so great , so exalt and godlike a being as man -- I be far from denying -- but philosophy speak freely of every thing ; and therefore I still think and do maintain it to be a pity , that it should be do by means of a passion which bend down the faculty , and turn all the wisdom , contemplation , and operation of the soul backward -- a passion , my dear , continue my father , address himself to my mother , which couple and equals wise man with fool , and make we come out of we cavern and hiding - place more like satyr and four -footed beasts than man . I know it will be say , continue my father ( avail himself of the ) , that in itself , and simply take -- like hunger , or thirst , or sleep t--'tis a affair neither good or bad -- or shameful or otherwise .-- why then do the delicacy of Diogenes and Plato so recalcitrate against it ? and wherefore , when we go about to make and plant a man , do we put out the candle ? and for what reason be it , that all the part thereof -- the congredient -- the preparations -- the instrument , and whatever serve thereto , be so held as to be convey to a cleanly mind by no language , translation , or periphrasis whatever ? -- the act of kill and destroy a man , continue my father , raise he voice -- and turn to my uncle -- you see , be glorious -- and the weapon by which we do it be honourable -- we march with they upon we shoulders -- we strut with they by we side -- we gild they -- we carve they -- we in - lay they -- we enrich they -- , if it be but a scoundrel cannon , we cast a ornament upon the breach of it .-- -- my uncle lay down he pipe to intercede for a better epithet -- and be rise up to batter the whole hypothesis to piece -- -- when break into the middle of the room with a complaint , which cry out for a immediate hearing . the case be this : my father , whether by ancient custom of the manor , or as impropriator of the great tythes , be oblige to keep a bull for the service of the Parish , and have lead he cow upon a pop - visit to he one day or other the preceding summer -- I say , one day or other -- because as chance would have it , it be the day on which he be marry to my father 's house - maid -- so one be a reckoning to the other . therefore when 's wife be bring to be -- thank -- -- now , say Obadiah , I shall have a calf : so go daily to visit he cow . she will calve on -- on -- on at the farthest -- the cow do not calve -- no -- she will not calve till next week -- the cow put it off terribly -- till at the end of the sixth week 's suspicion ( like a good man 's ) fall upon the bull . now the parish be very large , my father 's , to speak the truth of he , be no way equal to the department ; he have , however , get himself , somehow or other , thrust into employment -- and as he go through the business with a grave face , my father have a high opinion of he . -- most of the townsman , an' please you worship , quoth , believe that ' tis all the 's fault -- -- but may not a cow be barren ? reply my father , turn to . it never happen : say , but the man 's wife may have come before she time naturally enough -- have the child hair upon he head ?--ad -- -- it be as hairy as I be ; say .-- have not be shave for three week -- . . .u . . .u . . . cry my father ; begin the sentence with a exclamatory whistle -- and so , brother , this poor bull of mine , who
