a and they order , say I , this matter better in . - you have be in ? say my gentleman , turn quick upon I , with the most civil triumph in the world . - ! quoth I , debat the matter with myself , that one and twenty mile sail , for ' tis absolutely no further from to , should give a man these rights : - I will look into they : so , give up the argument , - I go straight to my lodging , put up half a dozen shirt and a black pair of silk breech , - " the coat I have on , " say I , look at the sleeve , " will do ; " - take a place in the stage ; and the packet sail at nine the next morning , - by three I have get sat down to my dinner upon a fricaseed chicken , so incontestably in , that have I die that night of a indigestion , the whole world could not have suspend the effect of the droit d'aubaine ; - my shirts , and black pair of silk breech , - portmanteau and all , must have go to the of ; - even the little picture which I have so long worn , and so often have tell thee , , I would carry with I into my grave , would have be tear from my neck ! - Ungenerous ! to seize upon the wreck of a unwary passenger , whom you subject have beckon to they coast ! - by heaven ! , it be not well do ; and much do it grieve I , ' ti the monarch of a people so civilized and courteous , and so renowne for sentiment and fine feeling , that I have to reason with ! - but I have scarce set a foot in you dominion . - . when I have fished my dinner , and drank the of 's health , to satisfy my mind that I bear he no spleen , but , on the contrary , high honour for the humanity of he temper , - I rise up a inch taller for the accommodation . - no - say I - the Bourbon be by no means a cruel race : they may be misl , like other people ; but there be a mildness in they blood . as I acknowledge this , I feel a suffusion of a finer kind upon my cheek - more warm and friendly to man , than what ( at least of two livre a bottle , which be such as I have be drink ) could have produce . - ! say I , kick my portmanteau aside , what be there in this world 's goods which should sharpen we spirits , and make so many kind - hear breth of we fall out so cruelly as we do by the way ? when man be at peace with man , how much lighter than a feather be the heaviest of metals in he hand ! he pull out he purse , and hold it airily and uncompressed , look round he , as if he seek for a object to share it with . - in do this , I feel every vessel in my frame dilate , - the arteries beat all cheerily together , and every power which sustain life , perform it with so little friction , that ' twould have confound the most physical précieuse in ; with all she materialism , she could scarce have call I a machine . - I be confident , say I to myself , I should have overset she creed . the accession of that idea carry nature , at that time , as high as she could go ; - I be at peace with the world before , and this finish have the treaty with myself . - - now , be I of , cry I - what a moment for a orphan to have begg would he father 's portmanteau of I ! the Monk . Calais . I have scarce utter the word , when a poor monk of the order of come into the room to beg something for a he convent . no man care to have he virtue the sport of contingency - or one man may be generous , as another be puissant ; - s non quoad hanc - or be it as it may , - for there be no regular reason upon the ebb and flow of we humours ; they may depend upon the same cause , for atch I know , which influence the tide themselves : ' twould oft be no discredit to we , to suppose it be so : I be sure at least for myself , that in many a case I should be more highly satisfied , to have it say by the world , " I have have a affair with the moon , in which there be neither sin nor shame , " than have it pass altogether as my own act and deed , wherein there be so much of both . - but , be this as it , - the moment I cast my eye upon he , I be predetermine not to give he a single sous ; and , accordingly , I put my purse into my pocket - button it - set myself a little more upon my centre , and advanc up gravely to he ; there be something , I fear , forbid in my look : I have he figure this moment before my eye , and think there be that in it which deserv better . the monk , as I judge by the break in he tonsure , a
a few scattered white hair upon he temple , be all that remain of it , might be about seventy ; - but from he eye , and that sort of fire which be in they , which seem more temper would by courtesy than year , could be no more than sixty : - might lie between - he be certainly sixty - five ; and the general air of he countenance , notwithstand something thseey ' to have be plan - wrinkle in it before they time , agree to the account . it be one of those head which have often painted , - mild , pale - penetrating , free from all commonplace idea of fat content ignorance look downwards upon the earth ; - it look would forward ; but look ' as if it look would at something beyond this world . - how one of he order come by it , heaven above , who let it fall upon a monk 's shoulders best know : but it would have suit a , and have I meet it upon the plain of , I have reverence it . the rest of he outline may be give in a few stroke ; one might put it into the hand of any one to design , for ' twa neither elegant nor otherwise , but as character and expression make it so : it be a thing , spare form , something above the common size , if it lose not the distinction by a bend forward in the figure , - but it be the attitude of ; and , as it now stand present to my imagination , it gain more than it lose by it . when he have enter the room three pace , he stand still ; and lay he left hand upon he breast ( a slender white staff with which he journey would be in he right ) - when I have get close up to he , he introduce himself with the little story of the wants of he convent , and the poverty of he order ; - and do it with so simple a grace , - and such a air of deprecation be there in the whole cast of he look and figure , - I be bewitch have not to have be strike with it . - a better reason be , I have predetermine not to give he a single sous . the Monk . Calais . - ' Tis very true , say I , reply to a cast upward with he eye , with which he have conclude he address ; - ' tis very true , - and heaven be they resource who have no other but the charity of the world , the stock of which , I fear , be no way sufficient for the many great claim which be hourly make upon it . as I pronounce the word great claim , he give a slight glance with he eye downward upon the sleeve of he tunic : - I feel the full force of the appeal - I acknowledge it , say I : - a coarse habit , and that but once in three year with meagre diet , - be no great matter ; and the true point of pity be , as they can be earn have in the world with so little industry , that you order should wish to procure they by pressing upon a fund which be the property of the lame , the blind , the aged and the infirm ; - the captive who lie down counting over and over again the day of he affliction , languish also for he share of it ; and have you be of the order of mercy , instead of the order of , poor as I be , continue I , point at my portmanteau , full cheerfully should it have be open ' to you , for the ransom of the unfortunate . - the monk make I a bow . - but of all other , resume I , the unfortunate of we own country , surely , have the first rights ; and I have leave thousand in distress upon we own shore . - the monk give a cordial wave with he head , - as much as to say , no doubt there be misery enough in every corner of the world , as well as within we convent - but we distinguish , say I , lay my hand upon the sleeve of he tunic , in return for he appeal - we distinguish , my good father ! betwixt those who wish only to eat the bread of they own labour - and those who eat the bread of other people 's , and have no other plan in life , but to get through it in sloth and ignorance , for the love of . the poor make no reply : a hectic of a moment pass would across he cheek , but could not tarry - seem to have do with she resentment in he ; - he show none : - but let he staff fall within he arm , he press both he hand with resignation upon he breast , and retire . the Monk . Calais . my heart smote I the moment he shut the door - ! say I , with a air of carelessness , three several time - but it would not do : every ungracious syllable I have utter would crowd back into my imagination : I reflect , I have no right over the poor , but to deny he ; and that the punishment of that be enough to the disappointed , without the addition of unkind language . - I consider would he gray hair - he courteous figure seem
seem have to re-enter and gently ask I what injury he have do I ? - and why I could use he thus ? - I would have give twenty livre for a advocate . - I have behave very ill , say I within myself ; but I have only just set out upon my travels ; and shall learn better manners as I get along . the DESOBLIGEANT . Calais . when a man be discontent with himself , it have one advantage however , that it put he into a excellent frame of mind for make a bargain . now there be no travelling through and without a chaise , - and nature generally prompt we to the thing we be fittest for , I walk would out into the coach - yard to buy or hire something of that kind to my purpose : a old désobligeant in the furthest corner of the court , hit my fancy at first sight , so I instantly get into it , and find it in tolerable harmony with my feeling , I order the waiter to call , the master of the hotel : - but be go to vesper , and not care to face the , whom I see on the opposite side of the court , in conference with a lady just arrive at the inn , - I draw the taffeta curtain betwixt we , and be determined to write my journey , I take out my pen and ink and write the preface to it in the désobligeant . Preface . in the DESOBLIGEANT . it must have be observe by many a peripatetic philosopher , that nature have set up by she own unquestionable authority certain boundary and fence to circumscribe the discontent of man ; she have effect she purpose in the quietest and easiest manner by lay he under almost insuperable obligation to work out he ease , and to sustain he suffering at home . it be there only that she have provide he with the most suitable object to partake of he happiness , and bear a part of that bure which in all country and age have ever be too heavy for one pair of shoulders . ' tTis true , we be endue with a imperfect power of spread we happiness sometimes beyond she limit , but ' tis so order , that , from the want of language , connection , and dependency , and from the difference in education , custom , and habit , we lie under so many impediment in communicate we sensation out of we own sphere , as often amount to a total impossibility . it will always follow from hence , that the balance of sentimental commerce be always against the expatriate adventurer : he must buy what he have little occasion for , at they own price ; - he conversation will seldom be take in exchange for theirs without a large discount , - and this , by the by , eternally drive he into the hand of more equitable broker , for such conversation as he can find , it require no great spirit of divination to guess at he party - this bring I to my point ; and naturally lead I ( if the see-saw of this désobligeant will but let I get on ) into the efficient as well as final cause of travel - you idle people that leave they native country , and go abroad for some reason or reason which may be derive from one of these general cause :- Infirmity of body , Imbecility of mind , or inevitable necessity . the first two include all those who travel by land or by water , labour with pride , curiosity , vanity , or spleen , subdivide and combine ad infinitum . the third class include the whole army of peregrine martyr ; more especially those traveller who set out upon they travels with the benefit of the clergy , either as delinquent travel under the direction of governors recommend by the magistrate ; - or young gentleman transport by the cruelty of parent and guardian , and travel under the direction of governors recommend by , , and . there be a fourth class , but they number be so small that they would not deserve a distinction , be it not necessary in a work of this nature to observe the greatest precision and nicety , to avoid a confusion of character . and these man I speak of , be such as cross the seas and sojourn in a land of strangers , with a view of save money for various reason and upon various pretence : but as they might also save themselves and other a great deal of unnecessary trouble by save they money at home , - and as they reason for travelling be the least complex of any other species of emigrant , I shall distinguish these gentleman by the name of simple traveller . thus the whole circle of traveller may be reduce to the follow head :- idle travellers , inquisitive travellers , lying travellers , , travellers , Splenetic travellers . then follow : the traveller of , the and , the and , the simple Traveller , and last of all ( if you please ) the , ( mean thereby myself ) who have travell ' , and of which I be now sit down to give a account , - as much out of necessity , and the besoin de Voyager , as any one in the class . I be well aware , at the same time , as both my travels and observation will be altogether of a different cast from any of my forerunner , that I might have insist upon a whole nitch entirely to myself ; - but I should break in
in upon the confines of the , in wishing to draw attention towards I , till I have some better grounds for it than the mere Novelty of my vehicle . it be sufficient for my reader , if he have be a traveller himself , that with study and reflection hereupon he may be able to determine he own place and rank in the catalogue ; - it will be one step towards know himself ; as it be great odd but he retain some tincture and resemblance , of what he imbibe or carry out , to the present hour . the man who first transplant the grape of to the cape of ( observe he be a Dutchman ) never dreamt of drinke the same wine at the cape , that the same grape produce upon the french mountain , - he be too phlegmatic for that - but undoubtedly he expect to drink some sort of vinous liquor ; but whether good or bad , or indifferent , - he know enough of this world to know , that it do not depend upon he choice , but that what be generally call choice , be to decide he success : however , he hope for the best ; and in these hope , by a intemperate confidence in the fortitude of he head , and the depth of he discretion , might possibly oversee both in he new vineyard ; and by discover he nakedness , become a laugh stock to he people . even so it fare with the poor Traveller , sail and post through the politer kingdom of the globe , in pursuit of knowledge and improvement . and improvements be to be get by sailing and post for that purpose ; but whether useful knowledge and real improvement be all a lottery ; - and even where the adventurer be successful , the acquired stock must be use with caution and sobriety , to turn to any profit : - but , as the chance run prodigiously the other way , both as to the acquisition and application , I be of opinion , that a man would act as wisely , if he could prevail upon himself to live contente without foreign knowledge or foreign improvement , especially if he live in a country that have no absolute want of either ; - and indeed , much grief of heart have it oft and many a time cost I , when I have observe how many a foul step the have measure to see sight and look into discoveries ; all which , as say to , they might have see dry - shod at home . it be a age so full of light , that there be scarce a country or corner in whose beam be not cross and interchange with other . - in most of its branch , and in most affair , be like music in a italian street , whereor those may partake who pay nothing . - but there be no nation under heaven - and be my record ( before whose tribunal I must one day come and give a account of this work ) - that I do not speak it vauntingly , - but there be no nation under heaven abound with more variety of learning , - where the sciences may be more fitly woo ' , or more surely win , than here , - where art be encourage , and will so soon rise high , - where nature ( take she altogether ) have so little to answer for , - and , to close all , where there be more wit and variety of character to feed the mind with : - where then , my dear countryman , be you go ? - we be only look at this chaise , say they . - you most obedient servant , say I , skip out of it , and pull off my hat . - we be wonder , say one of they , who , I find be a inquisitive Traveller , - what could occasion its motion . - ' Tbe the agitation , say I , coolly , of write a preface . - I never hear , say the other , who be a simple Traveller , of a preface write in a désobligeant . - it would have be better , say I , in a vis -a -vis . - as a do not travel to see , I retire to my room . Calais . I perceive that something darken would the passage more than myself , as I stepp would along it to my room ; it be effectually Mon . , the master of the hôtel , who have just return from vesper , and with he hat under he arm , be most complaisantly follow I , to put I in mind of my want . I have write myself pretty well out of conceit with the désobligeant , and . speak of it , with a shrug , as if it would no way suit I , it immediately strike my fancy that it belong ' to some innocent Traveller , who , on he return home , have leave it to Mons . 's honour to make the most of . four month have elapse since it have finish its career of in the corner of Mons . 's coach - yard ; and have sally out from thence but a vampt - up business at the first , though it have be twice take to piece on , it have not profit much by its adventur , - but by none so little as the standing so many month unpitied in the corner of Mons . 's coach - yard . much indeed be not to be say for it , -
- but something might ; - and when a few word will rescue misery out of she distress , I hate the man who can be a churl of they . - now be I the master of this hôtel , say I , lay the point of my fore - finger on Mons . 's breast , I would inevitably make a point of get rid of this unfortunate désobligeant ; - it stand swing reproach at you every time you pass by it . ! say . , - I have no interest - except the interest , say I , which man of a certain turn of mind take , . , in they own sensation , - I be persuade , to a man who feel for other as well as for himself , every rainy night , disguise it as you will , must cast a damp upon you spirit : - you suffer , . , as much as the machine - I have always observ , when there be as much sour as sweet in a compliment , that a be eternally at a loss within himself , whether to take it , or let it alone : a never be : . make I a bow . C'est bien vrai , say he . - but in this case I should only exchange one disquietude for another , and with loss : figure to yourself , my dear Sir , that in give you a chaise which would fall to piece before you have get half - way to , - figure to yourself how much I should suffer , in give a ill impression of myself to a man of honour , and lie at the mercy , as I must do , d'un homme d'esprit . the dose be make up exactly after my own prescription ; so I could not help taste it , - and , return Mons . Dessein he bow , without more casuistry we walk would together towards he Remise , to take a view of he magazine of chaise . in the street . Calais . it must need be a hostile kind of a world , when the buyer ( if it be but of a sorry post-chaise ) can not go forth with the seller thereor into the street to terminate the difference betwixt they , but he instantly fall into the same frame of mind , and view he conventionist with the same sort of eye , as if he be go along with he to - park corner to fight a duel . for my own part , be but a poor swordsman , and no way a match for , I feel the rotation of all the movement within I , to which the situation be incident ; - I look at through and through - eye he as he walk would along in profile , - then , en face ; - think like a , - then a , - dislike he wig , - curse he by my gods , - wish he at the devil . - - and be all this to be lighte up in the heart for a beggarly account of three or four louis d'or , which be the most I can be overreach in ? - base passion ! say I , turn myself about , as a man naturally do upon a sudden reverse of sentiment , - base , ungentle passion ! thy hand be against every man , and every man 's hand against thee . - forbid ! say she , raise she hand up to she forehead , for I have turn full in front upon the lady whom I have see in conference with the monk : - she have follow we unperceived . - heaven forbid , indeed ! say I , offer she my own ; - she have a black pair of silk glove , open only at the thumb and two fore -finger , so accept it without reserve , - and I lead she up to the door of the Remise . have diable the key above fifty time before he have find out he have come with a wrong one in he hand : we be as impatient as himself to have it open ; and so attentive to the obstacle that I continue hold she hand almost without know it : so that leave we together with she hand in mine , and with we face turn towards the door of the Remise , and say he would be back in five minute . now a colloquy of five minute , in such a situation , be worth one of as many ag , with you face turn towards the street : in the latter case , ' tis draw from the object and occurrence without ; - when you eye be fix upon a dead blank , - you draw purely from yourselves . a silence of a single moment upon Mons . 's leave we , have be fatal to the situation - she have infallibly turn about ; - so I begin the conversation instantly . - - but what be the temptation ( as I write not to apologize for the weakness of my heart in this tour , - but to give a account of they ) - shall be describe with the same simplicity with which I feel they . the Remise door . Calais . when I tell the reader that I do not care to get out of the désobligeant , because I see the monk in close conference with a lady just arrive at the inn - I tell he the truth , - but I do not tell he the whole truth ; for I be as full as much restrain by the appearance and figure of the
the lady he be talk to . suspicion cross my brain and say , he be tell she what have pass : something jar upon it within I , - I wish he at he convent . when the heart fly out before the understanding , it save the judgment a world of pain . - I be certain she be of a better order of being ; - however , I think no more of she , but go on and write my preface . the impression return upon my encounter with she in the street ; a guard frankness with which she give I she hand , show , I think , she good education and she good sense ; and as I lead she on , I feel a pleasurable ductility about she , which spread a calmness over all my spirit - - ! how a man might lead such a creature as this round the world with he ! - I have not yet see she face - ' tbe not material : for the drawing be instantly set about , and long before we have get to the door of the Remise , have finish the whole head , and pleas herself as much with its fit she goddess , as if she have div into the for it ; - but thou be a seduce , and a seduce slut ; and albeit thou cheatest we seven time a day with thy picture and image , yet with so many charms dost thou do it , and thou deckest out thy picture in the shape of so many angels of light , ' ti a shame to break with thee . when we have get to the door of the Remise , she withdraw she hand from across she forehead , and let I see the original : - it be a face of about six - and - twenty , - of a clear transparent brown , simply set off without rouge or powder ; - it be not critically handsome , but there be that in it , which , in the frame of mind I be in , attach I much more to it , - it be interes : I fancie it wear the character of a widow would look , and in that state of its declension , which have pass the two first paroxysm of sorrow , and be quietly begin to reconcile itself to its loss ; - but a thousand other distress might have trace the same line ; I wish have to know what they have be - and be ready to inquire , ( have the same bon ton of conversation permit , as in the day of ) - " what ailelh thee ? and why be thou disquiet ? and why be thy understanding troublead ? " - in a word , I feel benevolence for she ; and haresolve ' some way or other to throw in my mite of courtesy , - if not of service . such be my temptation ; - and in this disposition to give way to they , be I leave alone with the lady with she hand in mine , and with we face both turn closer to the door of the Remise than what be absolutely necessary . the Remise door . Calais . this certainly , fair lady , say I , raise she hand up little lightly as I begin , must be one of 's whimsical doings ; to take two utter stranger by they hand , - of different sex , and perhaps from different corner of the globe , and in one moment place they together in such a cordial situation as herself could scarce have achieve for they , have she project it for a month . - and you reflection upon it show how much , Monsieur , she have embarrasse you by the adventure - when the situation be what we would wish , nothing be so ill - timed as to hint at the circumstance which make it so : you thank , continue she - you have reason - the heart know it , and be satisfied ; and who but a english philosopher would have send notice of it to the brain to reverse the judgment ? in say this , she disengage she hand with a look which I think a sufficient commentary upon the text . it be a miserable picture which I be go to give of the weakness of my heart , by own , that it suffer a pain , which worthier occasion could not have inflict . - I be mortify with the loss of she hand , and the manner in which i have lose it carry neither oil nor wine to the wound : I never feel the pain of a sheepish inferiority so miserably in my life . the triumph of a true feminine heart be short upon these discomfiture . in a very few seconds she lay she hand upon the cuff of my coat , in order to finish she reply ; so , some way or other , know how , I regain my situation . - she have nothing to add . I forthwill begin to model a different conversation for the lady , think from the spirit as well as moral of this , that I have be mistaken in she character ; but upon turn she face towards I , the spirit which have animate the reply be fle , - the muscle relaxed , and I beheld the same unprotected look of distress which first win I to she interest : - melancholy ! to see such sprightliness the prey of sorrow , - I pitie she from my soul ; and though it may seem ridiculous enough to a torpid heart , - I could
could have take she into my arm , and cherish she , though it be in the open street , without brush . the pulsation of the artery along my finger press across hers , tell she what be pass within I : she look down - a silence of some moment follow . I fear in this interval , I must have make some slight effort towards a closer compression of she hand , from a subtle sensation I feel in the palm of my own , - not as if she be go to withdraw hers - but as if she think about it ; - and I have infallibly lose it a second time , have not instinct more than reason direct I to the last resource in these dangers , - to hold it loosely , and in a manner as if I be every moment go to release it , of myself ; so she let it continue , till return with the key ; and in the mean time I set myself to consider how I should undue the ill impressions which the poor monk 's story , in case he have tell it she , must have plan in she breast against I . the . Calais . the good old monk be within six pace of we , as the idea of he cross my mind ; and be advanc towards we a little out of the line , as if uncertain whether he should break in upon we or no . - he stopp would , however , as soon as he come up to we , with a world of frankness : and have a horn snuff box in he hand , he present it open to I . - you shall taste mine - say I , pull out my box ( which be a small tortoise one ) and put it into he hand . - ' Tis most excellent , say the monk . then do I the favour , I reply , to accept of the box and all , and when you take a pinch out of it , sometimes recollect it be the peace offer of a man who once use you unkindly , but not from he heart . the poor monk blush would as red as scarlet . ! say he , press he hand together - you never use I unkindly . - I should think , say the lady , he be not likely . I blush would in my turn ; but from what movement , I leave to the few who feel , to analyze . - excuse I , Madame , reply I , - I treat he most unkindly ; and from no provocation . - ' Tis impossible , say the lady . - my ! cry the monk , with a warmth of asseveration which seem would not to belong to he - the fault be in I , and in the indiscretion of my zeal . - the lady oppose it , and I join with she in maintain it be impossible , that a spirit so regulate as he , could give offence to any . I know not that contention could be render so sweet and pleasurable a thing to the nerve as I then feel it . - we remain silent , without any sensation of that foolish pain which take place , when , in such a circle , you look for ten minute in one another 's face without say a word . whilst this last , the monk rub he horn box upon the sleeve of he tunic ; and as soon as it have acquire a little air of brightness by the friction - he make I a low bow , and say , ' tbe too late to say whether it be the weakness or goodness of we tempers which have involve we in this contest - but be it as it would , - he begg would we might exchange box . - in say this , he present he to I with one hand , as he take mine from I in the other , and have kiss it , - with a stream of good nature in he eye , he put it into he bosom , - and take he leave . I guard this box , as I would the instrumental part of my religion , to help my mind on to something better : in truth , I seldom go abroad without it ; and oft and many a time have I call up by it the courteous spirit of its owner to regulate my own , in the justling of the world : they have find full employment for he , as I lear not from he story , till about the forty - fifth year of he age , when upon some military service ill requit , and meet at the same time with a disappointment in the tenderest of passion , he abandon the sword and the sex together , and take sanctuary not so much in he convent as in himself . I feel a damp upon my spirit , as I be go to add , that in my last return through , upon enquiring after , I hear he have be dead near three month , and be bury , not in he convent , but , accord to he desire , in a little cemetery belong to it , about two leagu off : I have a strong desire to see where they have lay he , - when , upon pull out he little horn box , as I sit by he grave , and pluck up a nettle or two at the head of it , which have no business to grow there , they all struck together so forcibly upon
upon my affections , that I burst into a flood of tear : - but I be as weak as a woman ; and I beg the world not to smile , but to pity I . the Remise door . Calais . I have never quit the lady 's hand all this time , and have hold it so long , that it would have be indecent to have let it go , without first press it to my lip : the blood and spirit , which have suffer a revulsion from she , crowd back to she as I do it . now the two traveller , who have speak to I in the coach - yard , happene at that crisis to be pass by , and observe we communication , naturally take it into they head that we must be man and wife at least ; so , stop as soon as they come up to the door of the Remise , the one of they who be the inquisitive Traveller , ask would we , if we set out for the next morning ? - I could only answer for myself , I say ; and the lady add , she be for Amiens . - we dine there yesterday , say the simple Traveller . - you go directly through the town , add the other , in you road to . I be go to return a thousand thanks for the intelligence , that be in the road to , but , upon pull out my poor monk 's little horn box to take a pinch of snuff , I make they a quiet bow , and wish they a good passage to . - they leave we alone . - - now where would be the harm , say I to myself , if I be to beg of this distressed lady to accept of half of my chaise ? - and what mighty mischief could ensue ? every dirty passion , and bad propensity in my nature take the alarm , as I state the proposition . - it will oblige you to have a third horse , say , which will put twenty livre out of you pocket ; - you know not what she be , say ; - or what scrape the affair may draw you into , whisper would Cowardice . - Depend upon it , ! say , 'twill be say you go off with a mistress , and come by assignation to for that purpose ; - - you can never after , cry aloud , show you face in the world ; - or rise , quoth Meanness , in the church ; - or be any thing in it , say , but a lousy prebendary . but ' ti a civil thing , say I ; - and as I generally act from the first impulse , and therefore seldom listen to these cabal , which serve no purpose , that I know of , but to encompass the heart with adamant - I turn instantly about to the lady . - - but she have glide off unperceived , as the cause be plead , and have make ten or a dozen pace down the street , by the time I have make the determination ; so I set off after she with a long stride , to make she the proposal , with the best address I be master of : but observe she walk ' with she cheek half rest upon the palm of she hand , - with the slow short - yomeasu would step of thoughtfulness , - and with she eye , as she go step by step , fix upon the ground , it strike I she be try the same cause herself . - help she ! say I , she have some mother - in - law , or tartufish aunt , or nonsensical old woman , to consult upon the occasion , as well as myself : so not care to interrupt the process , and deem it more gallant to take she at discretion than by surprise , I face about and take a short turn or two before the door of the Remise , whilst she walk would muse on one side . in the street . Calais . have , on the first sight of the lady , settle the affair in my fancy " that she be of the better order of being ; " - and then lay it down as a second axiom , as indisputable as the first , that she be a widow , and wear a character of distress , - I go no further ; I get ground enough for the situation which please I ; - and have she remain close beside my elbow till midnight , I should have hold true to my system , and consider she only under that general idea . she have scarce get twenty pace distant from I , ere something within I call out for a more particular enquiry ; - it bring on the idea of a further separation : - I might possibly never see she more : - the heart be for save what it can ; and I want the trace through which my wish might find they way to she , in case I should never rejoin she myself ; in a word , I wish to know she name , - she family 's - she condition ; and as I know the place to which she be go , I want to know from whence she come : but there be no come at all this intelligence ; a hundred little delicacy stood in the way . I form ' a score different plan . - there be no such thing as a man 's ask she directly
directly ; - the thing be impossible . a little french débonnaire captain , who come dancing down the street , show I it be the easiest thing in the world : for , poppe in betwixt we , just as the lady be return back to the door of the Remise , he introduce himself to my acquaintance , and before he have well get announced , begg would I would do he the honour to present he to the lady . - I have not be present myself ; - so turn about to she , he do it just as well , by ask she if she have come from ? no : she be go that route , she say . - Vous and ' ? te pas ? - she be not , she reply . - then must have come through Flanders . - Apparemment vous ?te ? say the french captain . - the lady answer , she be . - ? add he . - she say , she be not of . - ? - nor ? - nor ? - nor ? - she answer , she be of Brussels . he have have the honour , he say , to be at the bombardment of it last war ; - that it be finely situate , pour cela , - and full of noblesse when the Imperialist be drive out by the french ( the lady make a slight courtesy ) - so give she a account of the affair , and of the share he have have in it , - he begg would the honour to know she name , - so make he bow . - a son ? - say he , look back when he have make two step , - and , without stay for a answer - dance down the street . have I serve seven year apprenticeship to good breeding , I could not have do as much . the Remise . Calais . as the little french captain leave we , . come up with the key of the Remise in he hand , and forthwith let we into he magazine of chaise . the first object which catch my eye , as Mons . Dessein open would the door of the Remise , be another old tatter would désobligean ; and notwithstand it be the exact picture of that which have hit my fancy so much in the coach - yard but a hour before , - the very sight of it stirr would up a disagreeable sensation within I now ; and I think ' tbe a churlish beast into whose heart the idea could first enter , to construct such a machine ; nor have I much more charity for the man who could think of use it . I observ the lady be as little take with it as myself : so Mons . lead we on to a couple of chaise which stand abreast , tell we , as he recommend they , that they have be purchase by my and to go the grand tour , but have go no further than , so be in all respects as good as new . - they be too good ; - so I pass would on to a third , which stand behind , and forthwith begin to chaffer for the price . - but ot will scarce hold two , say I , open the door and get in . - have the goodness , , say . , offer he arm , to step in . - the lady hesitat half a second , and step in ; and the waiter that moment beckon to speak to . , he shut the door of the chaise upon we , and leave we . the Remise . Calais . C'est bien comique , ' ttis very droll , say the lady , smile , from the reflection that this be the second time we a have be leave together by a parcel of nonsensical contingency , - c'est bien comique , say she . - - there want nothing , say I , to make it so but the comic use which the gallantry of a would put it to , - to make love the first moment , and a offer of he person the second . ' tTis they fort , reply the lady . it be suppose so at least ; - and how it have come to pass , continue I , I know not ; but they have certainly get the credit of understanding more of love , and make it better than any other nation upon earth ; but , for my own part , I think they arrant bungler , and in truth the worst set of marksman that ever try 's patience . - to think of make love by sentiment ! I should have soon think of make a genteel suit of clothes out of remnant : - and to do it - pop - at first sight , by declaration - be submit the offer , and themselves with it , to be sift with all they pour and contre , by a unheated mind . the lady attend as if she expect I should go on . consider then , , continue I , lay my hand upon hers :- that grave people hate love for the name 's sake ; - that selfish people hate it for they own ; - Hypocrites for heaven 's ; - and that all of we , both old and young , be ten time worse frightened than hurt by the very report , - what a want of knowledge in this branch of commence a man betray , whoever let the word come out of he lip , till a hour or two , at least
least , after the time that he silence upon it become tormenting . a course of small , quiet attention , not so point as to alarm , - nor so vague as to be misunderstood - with now and then a look of kindness , and little or nothing say upon it , - leave nature for you mistress , and she fashion it to she mind . - then I solemnly declare , say the lady , blush , you have be make love to I all this while . the Remise . Calais . come back to let we out of the chaise , and acquaint the lady , the count -, she brother , be just arrive at the hotel . though I have infinite good will for the lady , I can not say that I rejoice in my heart at the event - and could not help tell she so ; - for it be fatal to a proposal , , say I , that I be go to make to you - - you need not tell I what the proposal be , say she , lay she hand upon both mine , as she interrupt I . - a man my good Sir , have seldom a offer of kindness to make to a woman , but she have a presentiment of it some moment before . - nature arm she with it , say I , for immediate preservation . - but I think , say she , look in my face , I have no evil to apprehend , - and , to deal frankly with you , have determined to accept it . - if I have - ( she stop a moment ) - I believe you good will would have draw a story from I , which would have make pity the only dangerous thing in the journey . in say this , she suffer I to kiss she hand twice , and with a look of sensibility mix with concern , she get out of the chaise , - and bid adieu. in the street . Calais . I never finish a twelve guinea bargain so expeditiously in my life : my time seem heavy , upon the loss of the lady , and know every moment of it would be as two , till I put myself into motion , - I order post horse directly , and walk towards the hotel . ! say I , hear the town clock strike four , and recollect that I have be little more than a single hour in , - - what a large volume of adventure may be grasp within this little span of life by he who interest he heart in every thing , and who , have eye to see what time and chance be perpetually hold out to he as he journeyeth on he way , miss nothing he can fairly lay he hand on ! - if this will not turn out something , - another will ; - no matter , - ' ttis a assay upon human nature - I get my labour for my pain , - ' tis enough ; - the pleasure of the experiment have keep my sense and the best part of my blood awake , and lay the gross to sleep . I pity the man who can travel from to , and cry , ' Tis all barren ; - and so it be : and so be all the world to he who will not cultivate the fruit it offer . I declare , say I , clapp my hand cheerily together , that be I in a desert , I would find out wherewith in it to call forth my affections : - if I could not do better , I would fasten they upon some sweet myrtle , or seek some melancholy cypress to connect myself to ; - I would court they shade , and greet they kindly for they protection . - I would cut my name upon they , and swear they be the loveliest tree throughout the desert : if they leave wither ' , I would teach myself to mourn ; and , when they rejoice , I would rejoice along with they . the learn Smelfungus travel from to , - from to , - and so on ; - but he set out with the spleen and jaundice , and every object he pass would by be discoloure or distort . - he write a account of they , but ' tbe nothing but the account of he miserable feeling . I meet in the grand portico of the : - he be just come out of it . - ' Tis nothing but a huge cockpit , say he : - I wish you have say nothing worse of the of , reply I ; - for in passing through , I have hear he have fall foul upon the goddess , and use she worse than a common strumpet , without the least provocation in nature . I popp would upon again at , in he return home ; and a sad tale of sorrowful adventure have he to tell , " wherein he speak of move accident by flood and field , and of the cannibal that each other eat : the : " - he have be flay alive , and bedevil ' , and use worse than , at every stage he have come at . - - I will tell it , cry , to the world . you have better tell it , say I , to you physician . , with a immense fortune , make the whole tour ; go on from to , - from to , - from to , - to , to , without one generous connection or pleasurable anecdote
anecdote to tell of ; but he have travell would straight on , look neither to he right hand nor he leave , lest love or Pity should seduce he out of he road . peace be to they ! if it be to be find ; but heave itself , be it possible to get there with such temper , would want object to give it ; every gentle spirit would come fly upon the wing of love to hail they arrival . - nothing would the soul of and hear of , but fresh anthem of joy , fresh rapture of love , and fresh congratulation of they common felicity . - I heartily pity they ; they have bring up no faculty for this work ; and , be the happiest mansion in heaven to be allot to and , they would be so far from be happy , that the soul of and would do penance there to all eternity ! Montreuil . I have once lose my portmanteau from behind my chaise , and twice get out in the rain , and one of the time up to the knee in dirt , to help the postilion to tie it on , without be able to find out what be want . - be it till I get to , upon the landlord 's ask I if I want not a servant , that it occur to I , that that be the very thing . a servant ! that I do most sadly , quoth I . - because , , say the landlord , there be a clever young fellow , who would be very proud of the honour to serve a . - but why a english one , more than any other ? - they be so generous , say the landlord . - I will be shoot if this be not a livre out of my pocket , quoth I to myself , this very night . - but they have wherewithal to be so , , add he . - set down one livre more for that , quoth I . - it be but last night , say the landlord , qu'un milord Anglois présentoit un écu ? la fille de chambre . - pis pour , say I . now , be the landlord 's daughter , and the landlord suppose I be young in , take the liberty to inform I , I should not have say tant pis - but , tant mieux . Tant mieux , toujour , , say he , when there be any thing to be get - tant pis , when there be nothing . it come to the same thing , say I . Pardonnez -moi , say the landlord . I can not take a fitter opportunity to observe , once for all , that tant pis and tant mieux , be two of the great hinge in french conversation , a stranger would do well to set himself right in the use of they , before he get to . a prompt french marquis at we ambassador 's table demand of -, if he be h - the poet ? no , say -, mildly . - Tant pis , reply the marquis . it be h - the historian , say another , - Tant mieux , say the marquis . and -, who be a man of a excellent heart , return would thanks for both . when the landlord have set I right in this matter , he call in , which be the name of the young man he have spoke of , - say only first , that as for he talents he would presume to say nothing , - yoMonsieu be the best judge what would suit he ; but for the fidelity of he would stand responsible in all he be worth . the landlord deliver ' this in a manner which instantly set my mind to the business I be upon ; - and , who stand wait without , in that breathless expectation which every son of nature of we have feel in we turn , come in . Montreuil . I be apt to be take with all kind of people at first sight ; but never more so than when a poor devil come to offer he service to so poor a devil as myself ; and as I know this weakness , I always suffer my judgment to draw back something on that very account , - and this more or less , accord to the mood I be in , and the case ; - and I may add , the gender too , of the person I be to govern . when enter the room , after every discount I could make for my soul , the genuine look and air of the fellow determine the matter at once in he favour ; so I hire he first , - and then begin to enquire what he could do : but I shall find out he talents , quoth I , as I want they , - beside , a can do every thing . now poor could do nothing in the world but beat a drum , and play a march or two upon the fife . I be determined to make he talents do ; and can not say my weakness be ever so insult by my wisdom as in the attempt . have set out early in life , as gallantly as most do , with serve for a few year ; at the end of which , have satisfy the sentiment , and find , moreover , that the honour of beat a drum be likely to be its own reward , as it open would no further track of glory to he , - he retire ? se terre
terre , and live comme il plaisoit ? ; - that be to say , upon nothing . - and so , quoth wisdom , you have hire a drummer to attend you in this tour of yours through and ! - ! say I , and do not one half of we gentry go with a humdrum compagnon do voyage the same round , and have the piper and the devil and all to pay besides ? when man can extricate himself with a équivoque in such a unequal match , - he be not ill off . - but you can do something else , ? say I . - o qu'oui ! he could make spatterdash , and play a little upon the fiddle . - ! say . - why , I play a bass myself , say I ; - we shall do very well . you can shave , and dress a wig a little , ? - he have all the disposition in the world . - it be enough for heaven ! say I , interrupt he , - and ought to be enough for I . - so , supper come in , and have a frisky English spaniel on one side of my chair , and a french valet , with as much hilarity in he countenance as ever paint in one , on the other , - I be satisfied to my heart 's content with my empire ; and if monarch know what they would be at , they might be as satisfied as I be . Montreuil . as go the whole tour of and with I , and will be often upon the stage , I must interest the reader a little further in he behalf , by say , that I have never less reason to repent of the impulse which generally do determine I , than in regard to this fellow ; - he be a faithful , affectionate , simple soul as ever trudge after the heel of a philosopher ; and , notwithstand he talents of drum beating and spatterdash - make , which , though very good in themselves , happen to be of no great service to I , yet be I hourly recompense by the festivity of he temper ; - it supply all defect : - I have a constant resource in he look in all difficulty and distress of my own - I be go to have add of he too ; but be out of the reach of every thing ; for , whether ' twa hunger or thirst , or cold or nakedness , or watchings , or whatever stripe of ill luck meet with in we journeying , there be no index in he physiognomy to point they out by , - he be eternally the same ; so that if I be a piece of a philosopher , which now and then put it into my head I be , - it always mortify the pride of the conceit , by reflec how much I owe to the complexional philosophy of this poor fellow , for sham I into one of a better kind . with all this , have a small cast of the coxcomb , - but he seem at first sight to be more a coxcomb of nature than of art ; and , before I have be three day in with he , - he seem to be no coxcomb at all . Montreuil . the next morning , enter upon he employment , I deliver to he the key of my portmanteau , with a inventory of my half a dozen shirt and silk pair of breech , and bid he fasten all upon the chaise , - get the horse put to , - and desire the landlord to come in with he bill . C's est un garcon de bonne fortune , say the landlord , point through the window to half a dozen wench who have get round about , and be most kindly take they leave of he , as the postilion be lead out the horse . kiss all they hand round and round again , and thrice he wip he eye , and thrice he promise he would bring they all pardon from . - the young fellow , say the landlord , be belove by all the town , and there be scarce a corner in where the want of he will not be feel : he have but one misfortune in the world , continue he , " he be always in love . " - I be heartily glad of it , say I , - 'twill save I the trouble every night of put my breech under my head . in say this , I be make not so much 's eloge as my own , have be in love with one princess or another almost all my life , and I hope I shall go on so till I die , be firmly persuade , that if ever I do a mean action , it must be in some interval betwixt one passion and another : whilst this interregnum last , I always perceive my heart lock up , - I can scarce find in it to give a sixpence ; and therefore I always get out of it as fast as I can - and the moment I be rekindle , I be all generosity and good - will again ; and would do anything in the world , either for or with any one , if they will but satisfy I there be no sin in it . - but in say this , - sure I be command the passion , - not myself . a FRAGMENT . - the town of , notwithstand live there , try all the power of irony and laughter
laughter to reclaim it , be the vilest and most profligate town in all Thrace . what for poisons , conspiracies , and assassinations , - libel , pasquinade , and tumult , there be no go there by day - ' twas worse by night . now , when thing be at the worst , it come to pass that the of be represent at , the whole orchestra be delighted with it : but of all the passage which delighte they , nothing operate more upon they imagination than the tender strokes of nature which the poet have wrotch up in that pathetic speech of , of , prince of god and man ! &c . every man almost speak pure iambic the next day , and talk of nothing but he pathetic address , - " o ! prince of gods and man ! " - in every street of , in every house , " of ! Cupid ! " - in every mouth , like the natural note of some sweet melody which drop from it , whether it will or no , - nothing but " ! Cupid ! prince of gods and man ! " - the fire catch - and the whole city , like the heart of one man , open ' itself to . no pharmacopolist could sell one grain of hellebore , - not a single armourer have a heart to forge one instrument of death ; - and meet together , and kiss would each other in the street ; the golden age return , and hang over the town of - every Abderite take he eaten pipe , and every Abderitish woman leave she purple web , and chastely sit she down and listen to the song . ' Twas only in the power , say the Fragment , of the whose empire extendeth from heaven to , and even to the depth of the sea , to have do this . Montreuil . when all be ready , and every article be dispute and pay for in the inn , unless you be a little sour ' by the adventure , there be always a matter to compound at the door , before you can get into you chaise ; and that be with the son and daughter of poverty , who surround you . let no man say , " let they go to the devil ! " - ' ti a cruel journey to send a few miserable , and they have have suffering enow without it : I always think it better to take a few sous out in my hand ; and I would counsel every gentle traveller to do so likewise : he need not be so exact in set down he motives for give they ; - they will be register elsewhere . for my own part , there be no man give so little as I do ; for few , that I know , have so little to give ; but as this be the first public act of my charity in , I take the more notice of it . a well - a - way ! say I , - I have but eight sous in the world , show they in my hand , and there be eight poor man and eight poor woman for th'ey . a poor tatter would soul , without a shirt on , instantly withdraw he claim , by retire two step out of the circle , and make a disqualify bow on he part . have the whole parterre cry out , place aux dame , with one voice , it would not have convey the sentiment of a deference for the sex with half the effect . just heaven ! for what wise reason hast thou order it , that beggary and urbanity , which be at such variance in other country , should find a way to be at unity in this ? - I insist upon present he with a single sous , merely for he politesse . a poor little dwarfish brisk fellow , who stand over against I in the circle , put something first under he arm , which have once be a hat , take he snuff - box out of he pocket , and generously offer have a pinch on both side of he : it be a gift of consequence , and modestly decline . - the poor little fellow press it upon they with a nod of welcomeness . - Prenez en - prenez , say he , look another way ; so they each take a pinch . - Pity thy box should ever want one ! say I to myself ; so I put a couple of sous into it - take a small pinch out of he box , to enhance they value , as I do it . he feel the weight of the second obligation more than of the first , - ' tbe do he a honour , - the other be only do he a charity ; - and he make I a bow down to the ground for it . - Here ! say I to a old soldier with one hand , who have be campaigne and wear out to death in the service - here be a couple of sous for thee . - Vive le ! say the old soldier . I have then but three sous left : so I give one , simply , pour l'amour , which be the footing on which it be begg ' . - the poor woman have a dislocated hip ; so it could not be well upon any other motive . cher et tr? s-charitable Monsieur . - there be no opposing this , say I . - the very sound be worth the money ; - so I give
give my last sous for it . but in the eagerness of giving , I have overlook a pauvre honteux , who have have no one to ask a sous for he , and who , I believe , would have perish , ere he could have ask have one for himself : he stand by the chaise a little without the circle , and wip a tear from a face which I think have see better day . - ! say I - and I have not one single sous leave to give he . - but you have a thousand ! cry all the power of nature , stirr within I ; - so I give he - no matter what - I be asham to say how much now , - and be asham to think how little , then : so , if the reader can form any conjecture of my disposition , as these two fix point be give he , he may judge within a livre or two what be the precise sum . I could afford nothing for the rest , but vous bénisse ! - le bon vous bénisse encore , say the old soldier , the dwarf , &c . the pauvre honteux could say nothing ; - he pull would out a little handkerchief , and wip he face as he turn away - and I think he thank I more than they all . the Bidet . have settle all these little matter , I get into my post -chaise with more ease than ever I get into a post -chaise in my life ; and have get one large jack - boot on the far side of a little bidet , and another on this ( for I count nothing of he leg ) - he canter would away before I as happy and as perpendicular as a prince . - but what be happiness ! what be grandeur in this pain scene of life ! a dead ass , before we have get a , put a sudden stop to 's career ; - he bidet would not pass by it , - a contention arise betwixt they , and the poor fellow be kick ' out of he jack - boot the very first kick . bear he fall like a french , say neither more nor less upon it , than ! so presently get up , and come to the charge again astride he bidet , beat he up to it as he would have beat he drum . the bidet flew from one side of the road to the other , then back again , - then this way , then that way , and in short , every way but by the dead ass : - insist upon the thing - and the bidet throw he . what be the matter , , say I , with this bidet of thine ? , say he , c'est un cheval le plus opiniâtre do monde . - , if he be a conceited beast , he must go he own way , reply I . so get off he , and give he a good sound lash , the bidet take I at my word , and away he scamper back to . - ! say . it be not mal -?-propo to take notice here , that though avail himself but of two different term of exclamation in this encounter , - namely , ! and ! that there be , nevertheless , three in the french language : like the positive , comparative , and superlative , one or the other of which serve for every unexpected throw of the dice in life . ! which be the first , and positive degree , be generally use upon ordinary emotion of the mind , where small thing only fall out contrary to you expectation ; such as - the throwing once doublet - 's be kick ' off he horse , and so forth . - Cuckoldom , for the same reason , be always - ! but , in case where the cast have something provoke in it , as in that of the bidet 's run away after , and leave aground in jack - boot , - ' ti the second degree . ' Tis then ! and for the third - - but here my heart be wrung with pity and fellow feel , when I reflect what misery must have be they lot , and how bitterly so refin a people must have smarted , to have force they upon the use of it . - grant I , of ye power which touch the tongue with eloquence in distress ! - what ever be my cast , grant I but decent word to exclaim in , and I will give my nature way . - but as these be not to be have in , I resolve to take every evil just as it befell I , without any exclamation at all . , who have make no such covenant with himself , follow the bidet with he eye till it be get out of sight , - and then , you may imagine , if you please , with what word he close the whole affair . as there be no hunting down a frightened horse in jack - boot , there remain no alternative but take either behind the chaise , or into it . - I prefer the latter , and in half a hour we get to the post -house at . Nampont . the dead ass . - and this , say he , put the remains of a crust into he wallet - and this should have be thy portion , say he , hadst thou be alive to have share it with I . - I think , by
by the accent , it have be a apostrophe to he child ; but ' twas to he ass , and to the very ass we have see dead in the road , which have occasion 's misadventure . the man seem to lament it much ; and it instantly bring into my mind 's lamentation for he ; but he do it with more true touch of nature . the mourner be sit upon a stone bench at the door , with the ass 's pannel and its bridle on one side , which he take up from time to time , - then lay they down , - look ' at they , and shake he head . he then take he crust of bread out of he wallet again , as if to eat it ; hold it some time in he hand , - then lay it upon the bit of he ass 's bridle , - look wistfully at the little arrangement he have make - and then give a sigh . the simplicity of he grief draw number about he , and amongst the rest , whilst the horse be get ready ; as I continue sit in the post-chaise , I could see and hear over they head . - he say he have come last from , where he have be from the furthest border of ; and have get so far on he return home , when he ass di . every one seem desirous to know what business could have take so old and poor a man so far a journey from he own home . it have pleased heaven , he say , to bless he with three son , the finest lad in ; but have in one week lose two of the eldest of they by the small - pox , and the youngest fall ill of the same distemper , he be afraid of be bereft of they all ; and make a vow , if heaven would not take he from he also , he would go in gratitude to in . when the mourner get thus far on he story , he stopp have to pay she tribute , - and weep bitterly . he say , heaven have accept the condition ; and that he have set out from he cottage with this poor creature , who have be a patient partner of he journey ; - that it have eat the same bread with he all the way , and be unto he as a friend . every body who stand about , hear the poor fellow with concern . - offer he money . - the mourner say he do not want it ; - it be not the value of the ass - but the loss of he . - the ass , he say , he be assure , love he ; - and upon this tell they a long story of a mischance upon they passage over the Pyrenean mountain , which have separate they from each other three day ; during which time the ass have seek he as much as he have seek the ass , and that they have scarce either eat or drank till they meet . thou hast one comfort , friend , say I , at least , in the loss of thy poor beast ; I be sure thou hast be a merciful master to he . - ! say the mourner , I think so when he be alive ; - but now that he be dead , I think otherwise . - I fear the weight of myself and my affliction together have be too much for he , - they have shorten the poor creature 's day , and I fear I have they to answer for . - shame on the world ! say I to myself . - do we but love each other as this poor soul love he ass - 'twould be something . - . the Postilion . the concern which the poor fellow 's story throw I into require some attention ; the postilion pay not the least to it , but set off upon the pavé in a full gallop . the thirstiest soul in the most sandy desert of could not have wish more for a cup of cold water , than mine do for grave and quiet movement ; and I should have have a high opinion of the postilion have he but steal off with I in something like a pensive pace . - on the contrary , as the mourner finish he lamentation , the fellow give a unfeeling lash to each of he beasts , and set off clattering like a thousand devils . I call to he as loud as I could , for heaven 's sake to go slower : - and the louder I call , the more unmercifully he gallop . - the deuce take he and he gallop too - say I , - he will go on tear my nerve to piece till he have work I into a foolish passion , and then he will go slow that I may enjoy the sweet of it . the postilion manage the point to a miracle : by the time he have get to the foot of a steep hill , about half a from , - he have put I out of temper with he , - and then with myself , for be so . my case then require a different treatment ; and a good rattling gallop would have be of real service to I . - - then , prithee , get on - get on , my good lad , say I . the postilion point to the hill . - I then try to return back to the story of the poor German and he ass
ass - but I have break the clue , - and could no more get into it again , than the postilion could into a trot . - the deuce go , say I , with it all ! here be I sit as candidly dispose to make the best of the worst , as ever wight be , and all run counter . there be one sweet lenitive at least for evils , which hold out to we : so I take it kindly at she hand , and fall asleep ; and the first word which rouse I be . - I ! say I , rub my eye , - this be the very town where my poor lady be to come . Amiens . the word be scarce out of my mouth when the - post-chaise , with he sister in it , drive hastily by : she have just time to make I a bow of recognition , - and of that particular kind of it , which tell I she have not yet do with I . she be as good as she look ; for , before I have quite finish my supper , she brother 's servant come into the room with a billet , in which she say she have take the liberty to charge I with a letter , which I be to present myself to - the first morning I have nothing to do at . there be only add , she be sorry , but from what penchant she have not consider , that she have be prevent tell I she story , - that she still owed it to I ; and if my route should ever lay through , and I have not by then forget the name of -, - that - would be glad to discharge she obligation . then I will meet thee , say I , fair spirit ! at ; - ' tis only return from through to , by the route of Flanders , home ; - 'twill scarce be ten post out of my way ; but , be it ten thousand ! with what a moral delight will it cry my journey , in sharing in the sickening incidents of a tale of misery tell to I by such a sufferer ? to see she weep ! and , though I can not dry up the fountain of she tear , what a exquisite sensation be there still leave , in wip they away from off the cheek of the first and fairest of woman , as I be sit with my handkerchief in my hand in silence the whole night beside she ? there be nothing wrong in the sentiment ; and yet I instantly reproach my heart with it in the bitterest and most reprobate of expression . it have ever , as I tell the reader , be one of the singular blessing of my life , to be almost every hour of it miserably in love with some one ; and my last flame happen to be blow out by a whiff of jealousy on the sudden turn of a corner , I have light it up afresh at the pure taper of but about three month before , - swear , as I do it , that it should last I through the whole journey . - why should I dissemble the matter ? I have swear to she eternal fidelity ; - she have a right to my whole heart : - to divide my affections be to lessen they ; - to expose they be to risk they : where there be risk there may be lose : - and what will thou have , , to answer to a heart so full of trust and confidence - so good , so gentle , and unreproaching ! - I will not go to , reply I , interrupt myself . - but my imagination go on , - I recal she look at that crisis of we separation , when neither of we have power to say adieu ! I look would at the picture she have tie in a black riband about my neck , - and blush ' as I look would at it . - I would have give the world to have kiss ' it , - but be asham . - and shall this tender flower , say I , press it between my hand , - shall it be smite to its very root , - and smite , ! by thee , who hast promise to shelter it in thy breast ? Eternal fountain of Happiness ! say I , knee down upon the ground , - be thout my witness - and every pure spirit which taste it , be my witness also , that I would not travel to , unless go along with I , do the road lead I towards heaven ! in transport of this kind , the heart , in spite of the understanding , will always say too much . the letter . Amiens . Fortune have not smile upon ; for he have be unsuccessful in he feat of chivalry , - and not one thing have offer to signalise he zeal for my service from the time that he have enter into it , which be almost four - and - twenty hour . the poor soul burn would with impatience ; and the - servant come with the letter , be the first practicable occasion which offer ' , have laid hold of it ; and , in order to do honou to he master , have take he into a back parlour in the auberge , and treat he with a cup or two of the best wine in ; and the - servant , in return , and not to be behindhand in
in politeness with , have take he back with he to the count 's hotel . 's prevenancy ( for there be a passport in he very look ) soon set every servant in the kitchen at ease with he ; and as a , whatever be he talents , have no sort of prudery in show they , , in less than five minute , have pull out he fife , and lead off the dance himself with the first note , set the fille de chambre , the maître d'hôtel , the cook , the scullion , and all the house - hold , dog and cat , besides a old monkey , a dancing : I suppose there never be a merrier kitchen since the flood . -, in pass from she brother 's apartment to she own , hearing so much jollity below stair , ring up she fille de chambre to ask about it ; and , hear it be the english gentleman 's servant , who have set the whole house merry with he pipe , she order he up . as the poor fellow could not present himself empty , he have load himself in go up stair with a thousand compliment to -, on the part of he master , - add a long apocrypha of inquirie after - health , - tell she , that he master be au désespoire for she re-establishment from the fatigue of she journey , - and , to close all , that yoMonsieu have receive the letter which have do he the honour - and he have do I the honour , say -, interrupt , to send a billet in return . - have say this with such a tone of reliance upon the fact , that have not power to disappoint she expectation ; - he tremble for my honour , - and possibly might not altogether be unconcerned for he own , as a man capable of be attach to a master who could be want en égard vis ? vis d'une femme ! so that when - ask if he have bring a letter , - of qu'oui , say : so lay down he hat upon the ground , and take hold of the flap of he right side pocket with he left hand , he begin to search for the letter with he right ; - then contrariwise . - Diable ! then seek every pocket - pocket by pocket , round , not forget he fob : - ! - then empty they upon the floor , - pull out a dirty cravat , - a handkerchief , - a comb , - a whip lash , - a nightcap , - then give a peep into he hat , - Quelle étourderie ! he have leave the letter upon the table in the auberge ; - he would run for it , and be back with it in three minute . I have just finish my supper when come in to give I a account of he adventure : he tell the whole story simply as it be : and only add that if yoMonsieu have forgot ( par hazard ) to answer 's letter , the arrangement give he a opportunity to recover the faux pa ; - and if not , that thing be only as they be . now I be not altogether sure of my étiquette , whether I ought to have wrote or no ; - but if I have , - a devil himself could not have be angry : ' twa but the officious zeal of a well meaning creature for my honour ; and , however he might have mistake the road , - or embarrass I in so do , - he heart be in no fault , - I be under no necessity to write ; - and , what weigh more than all , - he do not look as if he have do amiss . - ' all very well , , say I . - ' Twas sufficient . fly out of the room like lightning , and return with pen , ink , and paper , in he hand ; and , come up to the table , laid they close before I , with such a delight in he countenance , that I could not help take up the pen . I begin and begin again ; and , though I have nothing to say , and that nothing might have be express in half a dozen line , I make half a dozen different beginning , and could no way please myself . in short , I be in no mood to write . stepp would out and bring a little water in a glass to dilute my ink , - then fetch have sand and seal - wax . - it be all one ; I write , and blot , and tore off , and burnt , and write again . - diable l'emporte ! say I , half to myself , - I can not write this self - same letter , throw the pen down despairingly as I say it . as soon as I have cast down my pen , advanc with the most respectful carriage up to the table , and make a thousand apology for the liberty he be go to take , tell I he have a letter in he pocket write by a drummer in he regiment to a corporal 's wife , which he durst say would suit the occasion . I have a mind to let the poor fellow have he humour . - then prithee , say I , let I see it . instantly pull out a little dirty pocket book cramm have full of small letter and billet - doux in a sad condition , and lay it
it upon the table , and then unty the string which hold they all together , run they over , one by one , till he come to the letter in question , - ! say he , clapp he hand : so , unfold it first , he lay it open before I , and retire three step from the table whilst I read it . the letter . , Je suis pénétré de la douleur la plus vive , et réduit en m ?me temp au désespoir par ce retour imprév? do qui rmend notre entrev? e de ce soir la chose do monde la plus impossible . tMais vive la joie ! et toute la mienne sera de penser ? vous . L'amour n'est rien san sentiment . et le sentiment est encore moin sand amour . on dit qu 'on ne doin tjamais se désesperér . on dit aussi que Monsieur le Caporal monte la garde Mercredi : alors ce cera mon tour . ? son tour . En attendant - Vive l'amour ! et vive la bagatelle ! Je suis , , tous les sentimen les plus respectueux et les plus tendre , tout ? vous , . it be but change the into the count , - and say nothing about mount guard on , - and the letter be neither right nor wrong : - so , to gratify the poor fellow , who stand trembling for my honour , he own , and the honour of he letter , - I take the cream gently off it , and whipp it up in my own way , I seal would it up and send he with it to - ; - and the next morning we pursue we journey to . Paris . when a man can contest the point by dint of equipage , and carry all on floundering before he with half a dozen of lacky and a couple of cook - ' tis very well in such a place as , - he may drive in at which end of a street he will . a poor prince who be weak in cavalry , and whose whole infantry do not exceed a single man , have best quit the field , and signalize himself in the cabinet , if he can get up into it ; - I say up into it - for there be no descending perpendicular amongst 'em with a " Me voici ! m enfan " - here I be - whatever many may think . I own my first sensation , as soon as I be leave solitary and alone in my own chamber in the hotel , be far from be so flatter as I have prefigure they . I walk up gravely to the window in my dusty black coat , and look through the glass see all the world in yellow , blue , and green , run at the ring of pleasure . - the old with broken lance , and in helmet which have lose they vizard ; - the young in armour bright which shine like gold , beplume with each gay feather of the east , - all , - all , tilt at it like fascinate knight in tournament of yore for fame and love . - , poor ! cry I , what be thou do here ? on the very first onset of all this glitter clatter thou be reduce to a atom ; - seek , - seek some win alley , with a tourniquet at the end of it , where chariot never roll or flambeau shoot it be ray ; - there thout mayest solace thy soul in converse sweet with some kind grisette of a barber 's wife , and get into such cotery ! - - May I perish ! if I do , say I , pull out the letter which I have to present to - - I will wait upon this lady , the very first thing I do . so I call to go seek I a barber directly , - and come back and brush my coat . the Wig . Paris . when the barber come , he absolutely refuse to have any thing to do with my wig : ' tbe either above or below he art : I have nothing to do but to take one ready make of he own recommendation . - but I fear , friend ! say I , this buckle will not stand . - you may emerge it , reply he , into the ocean , and it will stand . - what a great scale be every thing upon in this city thing I . - the utmost stretch of a periwig - maker 's idea could have go no further than to have " dip it into a pail of water . " - what difference ! ' tis like to ! I confess I do hate all cold conception , as I do the puny idea which engender they ; and be generally so struck with the great work of nature , that for my own part , if I could help it , I never would make a comparison less than a mountain at least . all that can be say against the french sublime , in this instance of it , be this : - that the grandeur be more in the word , and less in the thing . no doubt , the ocean fill the mind with vast idea ; but be so far inland , it be not likely I should run post a hundred mile out of it , to try the experiment ; - the parisian barber mean nothing . - the pail of water stand beside the great deep , make , certainly , but a sorry figure in speech ; - but , 'twill
'twill be say , - it have one advantage - ' tis in the next room , and the truth of the buckle may be try in it , without more ado , in a single moment . in honest truth , and upon a more candid revision of the matter , the french expression profess more than it perform . I think I can see the precise and distinguishe mark of national character more in these nonsensical minutia than in the most important matter of state ; where great man of all nation talk and stalk so much alike , that I would not give ninepence to choose amongst they . I be so long in get from under my barber 's hand , that it be too late to think of go with my letter to - that night : but when a man be once dress at all point for go out , he reflection turn to little account ; so take down the name of the , where I lod , I walk forth without any determination where to go ; - I shall consider of that , say I , as I walk along . the pulse . Paris . , ye small sweet courtesy of life , for smooth do ye make the road of it ! like grace and beauty , which beget inclination to love at first sight : ' ti ye who open this door and let the stranger in . - , , say I , have the goodness to tell I which way I must turn to go to the ? - most willingly , , say she , lay aside she work . - I have give a cast with my eye into half a dozen shop , as I come along , in search of a face not likely to be disorder by such a interruption : till at last , this , hit my fancy , I have walk in . she be work a pair of ruffle , as she sit in a low chair , on the far side of the shop , face the door . - Tre volontier , most willingly , say she , lay she work down upon a chair next she , and rise up from the low chair she be sit in , with so cheerful a movement , and so cheerful a look , that have I be lay out fifty louis d'or with she , I should have say - " this woman be grateful . " you must turn , , say she , go with I to the door of the shop , and point the way down the street I be to take , - you must turn first to you left hand , - mai prenez garde - there be two turn ; and be so good as to take the second - then go down a little way and you will see a church : and , when you be past it , give yourself the trouble to turn directly to the right , and that will lead you to the foot of the , which you must cross - and there any one will do himself the pleasure to show you . - she repeat she instruction three time over to I , with the same yogoodnatu would patience the third time as the first ; - and if tone and manners have a meaning , which certainly they have , unless to heart which shut they out , - she see really interested that I should not lose myself . I will not suppose it be the woman 's beauty , notwithstand she be the handsomest grisette , I think , I ever see , which have much to do with the sense I have of she courtesy ; only I remember , when I tell she how much I be oblige to she , that I look very full in she eye , - and that I repeat my thanks as often as she have do she instruction . I have not get ten pace from the door , before I find I have forget every tittle of what she have say ; - so look back , and see she still stand in the door of the shop , as if to look whether I go right or not , - I return back to ask she , whether the first turn be to my right or leave , - for that I have absolutely forgot . - be it possible ! say she , half laugh . ' tTis very possible , reply I , when a man be think more of a woman than of she good advice . as this be the real truth - she take it , as every woman take a matter of right , with a slight curtsey . - ! say she , lay she hand upon my arm to detain I , whilst she call a lad out of the back shop to get ready a parcel of glove . I be just go to send he , say she , with a packet into that quarter , and if you will have the complaisance to step in , it will be ready in a moment , and he shall attend you to the place . - so I walk would in with she to the far side of the shop : and take up the ruffle in my hand which she lay upon the chair , as if I have a mind to sit , she sit down herself in she low chair , and I instantly sit myself down beside she . - he will be ready , , say she , in a moment . - and in that moment , reply I , most willingly would I say something very civil to you for all
all these courtesy . any one may do a casual act of good nature , but a continuation of they show it be a part of the temperature ; and certainly , add I , if it be the same blood which come from the heart which descend to the extreme ( touch she wrist ) I be sure you must have one of the best pulse of any woman in the world . - feel it , say she , hold out she arm . so lay down my hat , I take hold of she finger in one hand , and apply the two forefinger of my other to the artery . - - would to heave ! my dear , thou hadst pass by , and beheld I sit in my black coat , and in my lack - a - day - sical manner , count the throb of it , one by one , with as much true devotion as if I have be watch the critical ebb or flow of she fever . - how wouldst thou have laugh ' and moralize upon my new profession ! - and thou shouldst have laugh ' and moralize on . - trust I , my dear , I should have say , " there be worse occupations in this world than feel a woman 's pulse . " - but a grisette 's ! thou wouldst have say , - and in a open shop ! - - so much the better : for when my view be direct , , I care not if all the world see I feel it . the husband . Paris . I have count twenty pulsation , and be go on fast towards the fortieth , when she husband , come unexpected from a back parlour into the shop , put I a little out of my reckoning . - ' Tbe nobody but she husband , she say ; - so I begin a fresh score . - yoMonsieu be so good , quoth she , as he pass ' by we , as to give himself the trouble of feel my pulse . - the husband take off he hat , and make I a bow , say , I do he too much honour - and have say that , he put on he hat and walk ' out . ! say I to myself , as he go out , - and can this man be the husband of this woman ! let it not torment the few who know what must have be the grounds of this exclamation , if I explain it to those who do not . in a shopkeeper and a shopkeeper 's wife seem to be one bone and one flesh : in the several endowment of mind and body , sometimes the one , sometimes the other have it , so as , in general , to be upon a par , and totally with each other as nearly as man and wife need to do . in , there be scarce two order of being more different : for the legislative and executive power of the shop not rest in the husband , he seldom come there : - in some dark and dismal room behind , he sit commerce - less , in he thrum nightcap , the same rough son of that leave he . the genius of a people , where nothing but the monarchy be salique , have ced this department , with sundry other , totally to the woman , - by a continual higgling with customer of all rank and size from morning to night , like so many rough pebble shake long together in a bag , by amicable collision they have wear down they asperity and sharp angles , and not only become round and smooth , but will receive , some of they , a polish like a brilliant : - Monsieur le be little better than the stone under you foot . - surely , - surely , man ! it be not good for thee to sit alone : - thou wast make for social intercourse and gentle greeting ; and this improvement of we nature from it I appeal to as my evidence . - and how do it beat , ? say she . - with all the benignity , say I , look quietly in she eye , that i expect . - she be go to say something civil in return - but the lad come into the shop with the glove . - Á propo , say I , I want a couple of pair myself . the Glove . Paris . the beautiful grisette rise up when I say this , and go behind the counter , reach would down a parcel and untie it : I advanc to the side over against she : they be all too large . the beautiful grisette measure they one by one across my hand . - it would not alter they dimension . - she begg would I would try a single pair , which seem to be the least . - she hold it open ; - my hand slip into it at once . - it will not do , say I , shak my head a little . - no , say she , do the same thing . there be certain combine look of simple subtlety , - where whim , and sense , and seriousness , and nonsense , be so blended , that all the language of set loose together , could not express they ; - they be communicate and catch so instantaneously , that you can scarce say which party be the infector . I leave it to you man of word to swell page about it - it be enough in the present to say
say again , the glove would not do ; so , fold we hand within we arm , we both lol upon the counter - it be narrow , and there be just room for the parcel to lay between we . the beautiful grisette look sometimes at the glove , then sideway to the window , then at the glove , - and then at I . I be not dispose to break silence : - I follow she example : so , I look at the glove , then to the window , then at the glove , and then at she , - and so on alternately . I find I lose considerably in every attack : - she have a quick black eye , and shoot through two such long and silken eyelash with such penetration , that she look ' into my very heart and reins . - it may seem strange , but I could actually feel she do . - it be no matter , say I , take up a couple of the pair next I , and put they into my pocket . I be sensible the beautiful grisette have not ask above a single livre above the price . - I wish would she have ask a livre more , and be puzzl my brain how to bring the matter about . - do you think , my dear , say she , mistake my embarrassment , that I could ask a sous too much of a stranger - and of a stranger whose politeness , more than he want of glove , have do I the honour to lay himself at my mercy ? - m 'en croyez capable ? - ! not I , say I ; and if you be , you be welcome . so count the money into she hand , and with a lower bow than one generally make to a shopkeeper 's wife , I go out , and she lad with he parcel follow I . the translation . Paris . there be nobody in the box I be let into but a kindly old french officer . I love the character , not only because I honour the man whose manners be soften by a profession which make bad man worse ; but that I once know one , - for he be no more , - and why should I not rescue one page from violation by write he name in it , and tell the world it be , the dearest of my flock and friend , whose philanthropy I never think of at this long distance from he death - but my eye gush out with tear . for he sake I have a predilection for the whole corps of veteran ; and so I strode over the two back row of bench and place myself beside he . the old officer be read attentively a small pamphlet , it might be the book of the opera , with a large pair of spectacle . as soon as I sit down , he take he spectacle off , and put they into a shagreen case , return ' they and the book into he pocket together . I half rise up , and make he a bow . translate this into any civilized language in the world - the sense be this : " here be a poor stranger come into the box - he seem as if he know nobody ; and be never likely , be he to be seven year in , if every man he come near keep he spectacle upon he nose : - ' tis shutt the door of conversation absolutely in he face - and use he worse than a German . " the french officer might as well have say it all aloud : and if he have , I should in course have put the bow I make he into french too , and tell he , " I be sensible of he attention , and return would he a thousand thanks for it . " there be not a secret so aid to the progress of sociality , as to get master of this short hand , and to be quick in render the several turn of look and limb with all they inflection and delineation , into plain word . for my own part , by long habitude , I do it so mechanically , that , when I walk the street of , I go translat all the way ; and have more than once stand behind in the circle , where not three word have be say , and have bring off twenty different dialogue with I , which I could have fairly write down and swear to . I be go one evening to 's concert at , and , be just enter the door of the hall , when the di - be come out in a sort of a hurry : - she be almost upon I before I see she ; so I give a spring to once side to let she pass . - she have do the same , and on the same side too ; so we run we head together : she instantly get to the other side to get out : I be just as unfortunate as she have be , for I have spring to that side , and oppose she passage again . - we both fly together to the other side , and then back , - and so on : - it be ridiculous : we both blush would intolerably : so I do at last the thing I should have do at first ; - I stand stock - still , and the have no more difficulty . I have no power to go into the room , till I have make
make she so much reparation as to wait and follow she with my eye to the end of the passage . she look would back twice , and walk ' along it rather sideway , as if she would make room for any one come up stair to pass she . - no , say I - that be a vile translation : the have a right to the best apology I can make she , and that opening be leave for I to do it in ; - so I run and begg would pardon for the embarrassment I have give she , say it be my intention to have make she way . she answer , she be guide by the same intention towards I ; - so we reciprocally thank ' each other . she be at the top of the stair ; and see no cicisbeo near she , I begg have to hand she to she coach ; - so we go down the stair , stop at every third step to talk of the concert and the adventure . - upon my word , , say I , when I have hand she in , I make six different effort to let you go out . - and i make six effort , reply she , to let you enter . - I wish to heave you would make a seventh , say I . - with all my heart , say she , make room . - life be too short to be long about the form of it , - so I instantly stepp would in , and she carry I home with she . - and what become of the concert , , who I suppose be at it , know more than I . I will only add , that the connexion which arise out of the translation give I more pleasure than any one I have the honour to make in . the dwarf . Paris . I have never hear the remark make by any one in my life , except by one ; and who that be will probably come out in this chapter ; so that be pretty much unprepossessed , there must have be grounds for what strike I the moment I cast my eye over the parterre , - and that be , the unaccountable sport of in form such number of dwarf . - no doubt she sport at certain time in almost every corner of the world ; but in there be no end to she amusement . - the goddess seem almost as merry as she be wise . as I carry my idea out of the with I , I measure every body I see walking in the street by it . - Melancholy application ! especially where the size be extremely little , - the face extremely dark , - the eyes quick , - the nose long , - the tooth white , - the jaw prominent , - to see so many miserable , by force of accident drive out of they own proper class into the very verge of another , which it give I pain to write down : - every third man a pigmy ! - some by rickety head and hump back ; - other by bandy leg ; - a third set arrest by the hand of in the sixth and seventh year of they growth ; - a fourth , in they perfect and natural state like dwarf apple tree ; from the first rudiment and stamina of they existence , never mean to grow higher . a Medical Traveller might say , ' tis owe to undue bandage ; - a Splenetic one , to want of air ; - and a inquisitive Traveller , to fortify the system , may measure the height of they house , - the narrowness of they street , and in how few foot square in the sixth and seventh story such number of the bourgeoisie eat and sleep together ; but I remember Shandy the elder , who account for nothing like any body else , in speak one evening of these matters , averr that child , like other animal , might be increase almost to any size , provide they come right into the world ; but the misery be , the citizen of be so coop would up , that they have not actually room enough to get they . - I do not call it get anything , say he ; - ' tis get nothing . - , continue he , rise in he argument , ' tis get worse than nothing , when all you have get after twenty or five and twenty year of the tenderest care and most nutritious aliment bestow upon it , shall not at last be as high as my leg . now , be very short , there could be nothing more say of it . as this be not a work of reasoning , I leave the solution as I find it , and content myself with the truth only of the remark , which be verify in every lane and by - lane of . I be walk down that which lead from the to the , and observe a little boy in some distress at the side of the gutter which run down the middle of it , I take hold of he hand and help ' he over . upon turn up he face to look at he after , I perceive he be about forty . - never mind , say I , some good body will do as much for I when I be ninety . I feel some little principles within I which incline I to be merciful towards this poor blighted part of my species , who have neither size nor strength to get
get on in the world . - I can not bear to see one of they trod upon ; and have scarce get seat beside my old french officer , ere the disgust be exercise , by see the very thing happen under the box we sit in . at the end of the orchestra , and betwixt that and the first side box , there be a small esplanade leave , where , when the house be full , number of all rank take sanctuary . though you stand , as in the parterre , you pay the same price as in the orchestra . a poor defenceless be of this order have get thrust somehow or other into this luckless place ; - the night be hot , and he be surround by being two foot and a half higher than himself . the dwarf suffer inexpressibly on all side ; but the thing which incommod he most , be a tall corpulent german , near seven foot high , who stand directly betwixt he and all possibility of he see either the stage or the actor . the poor dwarf do all he could to get a peep at what be go forwards , by seek for some little opening betwixt the German 's arm and he body , try first on one side , then the other ; but the german stood square in the most unaccommodating posture that can be imagine : - the dwarf might as well have be place at the bottom of the deepest draw - well in ; so he civilly reach up he hand to the German 's sleeve , and tell he he distress . - the german turn would he head back , look down upon he as do upon , - and unfeelingly resume he posture . I be just then take a pinch of snuff out of my monk 's little horn box . - and how would thy meek and courteous spirit , my dear monk ! so temper have to bear and forbear ! - how sweetly would it have lent a ear to this poor soul 's complaint ! the old french officer , see I lift up my eye with a emotion , as i make the apostrophe , take the liberty to ask I what be the matter ? - I tell he the story in three word ; and add , how inhuman it be . by this time the dwarf be drive to extreme , and in he first transport , which be generally unreasonable , have tell the german he would cut off he long queue with he knife . - the german look ' back coolly , and tell he he be welcome , if he could reach it . a injury sharpen would by a insult , be it to whom it will , make every man of sentiment a party : I could have leap have out of the box to have redress it . - the old french officer do it with much less confusion ; for lean a little over , and nodd to a sentinel , and point at the same time with he finger at the distress , - the sentinel make he way to it . - there be no occasion to tell the grievance , - the thing tell himself ; so thrust back the german instantly with he musket , - he take the poor dwarf by the hand , and place he before he . - this be noble ! say I , clapp my hand together . - and yet you would not permit this , say the old officer , in . - in , dear , say I , we sit all at we ease . the old french officer would have set I at unity with myself , in case I have be at variance , - by say it be a bon mot ; - and , as a bon mot be always worth something at , he offer I a pinch of snuff . the Rose . Paris . it be now my turn to ask the old french officer " what be the matter ? " for a cry of " Haussez les main , Monsieur l'Abbé ! " re-echo from a dozen different part of the parterre , be as unintelligible to I , as my apostrophe to the monk have be to he . he tell I it be some poor Abbé in one of the upper loge , who , he suppose , have get plan perdu behind a couple of grisette in order to see the opera , and that the parterre espy he , be insist upon he holding up both he hand during the representation . - and can it be suppose , say I , that a ecclesiastic would pick the grisette 's pocket ? the old french officer smile , and whisper in my ear , open a door of knowledge which I have no idea of . ! say I , turn pale with astonishment - be it possible , that a people so smit with sentiment should at the same time be so unclean , and so unlike themselves , - Quelle grossi?rté ! add I . the french officer tell I , it be a illiberal sarcasm at the church , which have begin in the theatre about the time the be give in it by ? re : but like other remain of Gothic manners , be decline . - every nation , continue he , have they refinement and grossi? rté , in which they take the lead , and lose it of one another by turn : - that he have be in most country , but never in one where he find not some delicacies , which other seem to want . Le pour et le
le Contre se trouvent en chaque nation ; there be a balance , say he , of good and bad everywhere ; and nothing but the know it be so , can emancipate one half of the world from the prepossession which it hold against the other : - that the advantage of travel , as it regard the sçavoir vivre , be by see a great deal both of man and manners ; it teach we mutual toleration ; and mutual toleration , conclude he , make I a bow , teach we mutual love . the old french officer deliver this with a air of such candour and good sense , as coincide with my first favourable impressions of he character : - I think I love the man ; but I fear I mistake the object ; - ' tbe my own way of think - the difference be , I could not have express it half so well . it be alike troublesome to both the rider and he beast , - if the latter go prick up he ear , and start all the way at every object which he never see before . - I have as little torment of this kind as any creature alive ; and yet I honestly confess , that many a thing give I pain , and that I blush would at many a word the first month , - which I find inconsequent and perfectly innocend the second . Madame do , after a acquaintance of about six week with she , have do I the honour to take I in she coach about two leagu out of town . - of all woman , be the most correct ; and I never wish to see one of more virtue and purity of heart . - in we return back , desire I to pull the cord . - I ask she if she want anything - Rien que pour pisser , say . not , gentle traveller , to let p - ss on . - and , ye fair mystic nymph ! go each one pluck you rose , and scatter they in you path , - for do no more . - I hand out of the coach ; and have I be the priest of the chaste , I could not have serve at she fountain with a more respectful decorum . the . Paris . what the old french officer have deliver upon travelling , bring 's advice to he son upon the same subject into my head , - and that bring in , and the rest of 's work , I stopp would at the in my return home , to purchase the whole set . the bookseller say he have not a set in the world . comment ! say I , take one up out of a set which lay upon the counter betwixt we . - he say they be send he only to be get bound , and be to be send back to Versailles in the morning to the -. - and do the - , say I , read ? C's est un esprit fort , reply the bookseller . - he love English book ! and what be more to he honour , Monsieur , he love the too . you speak this so civilly , say I , that it be enough to oblige a to lay out a 'or or two at you shop . - the bookseller make a bow , and be go to say something , when a young decent girl about twenty , who by she air and dress seem to be chambre to some devout woman of fashion , come into the shop and ask for et de l'Esprit : the bookseller give she the book directly ; she pull out a little green satin purse run round with a riband of the same colour , and put she finger and thumb into it , she take out the money and pay for it . as I have nothing more to stay I in the shop , we both walk would out at the door together . - and what have you to do , my dear , say I , with the of the , who scarce know yet you have one ? nor , till love have first tell you it , or some faithless shepherd have make it aco , canst thou ever be sure it be so . - 'en garde ! say the girl . - with reason , say I , for if it be a good one , ' ttis pity it should be steal ; t'tis a little treasure to thee , and give a better air to you face , than if it be dress ' out with pearl . the young girl listen with a submissive attention , hold she satin purse by its riband in she hand all the time . - ' tTis a very small one , say I , take hold of the bottom of it - she hold it towards I - and there be very little in it , my dear , say I ; but be but as good as thou be handsome , and heaven will fill it . I have a parcel of crowns in my hand to pay for ; and , as she have let go the purse entirely , I put a single one in ; and , tie up the riband in a bow - knot , return it to she . the young girl make I more a humble courtesy than a low one : - ' tbe one of those quiet , thankful sinkings , where the spirit bow itself down , - the body do no more than tell it . I never give a girl a crown in my life which
which give I half the pleasure . my advice , my dear , would not have be worth a pin to you , say I , if I have not give this along with it : but now , when you see the crown , you will remember it ; - so do not , my dear , lay it out in riband . upon my word , , say the girl , earnestly , I be incapable ; - in say which , as be usual in little bargain of honour , she give I she hand : - vérité , Monsieur , je mettrai cet argent ? part , say she . when a virtuous convention be make betwixt man and woman , it sanctify they most private walks : so , notwithstand it be dusky , yet as both we roads lay the same way , we make no scruple of walk along the together . she make I a second courtesy in set off , and before we get twenty yard from the door , as if she have not do enough before , she make a sort of a little stop to tell I again - she thank ' I . it be a small tribute , I tell she , which I could not avoid pay to virtue , and would not be mistaken in the person I have be render it to for the world ; - but I see innocence , my dear , in you face , - and foul befall the man who ever lay a snare in its way ! the girl seem would affect some way or other with what I say ; - she give a low sigh : - I find I be not empower to enquire at all after it , - so say nothing more till I get to the corner of the , where , we be too part . - but be this the way , my dear , say I , to the ? she tell I it be ; - or that I might go by the , which be the next turn . - then I will go , my dear , by the , say I , for two reason ; first , I shall please myself , and next , I shall give you the protection of my company as far on you way as I can . the girl be sensible I be civil - and say , she wish the be in the . - you live there ? say I . - she tell I she be fille de chambre to -. - ! say I , ' ti the very lady for whom I have bring a letter from Amiens . - the girl tell I that -, she believe , expect a stranger with a letter , and be impatient to see he : - so I desire the girl to present my compliment to -, and say , I would certainly wait upon she in the morning . we stand still at the corner of the whilst this pass ' . - we then stop a moment whilst she dispose of she Egarement do Coeur & c. more commodiously than carry they in she hand - they be two volum : so I hold the second for she whilst she put the first into she pocket ; and then she hold she pocket , and I put in the other after it . ' Tis sweet to feel by what fine spun threads we affections be draw together . we set off afresh , and as she take she third step , the girl put she hand within my arm . - I be just bid she , - but she do it of herself , with that undeliberating simplicity , which show would it be out of she head that she have never see I before . for my own part , I feel the conviction of consanguinity so strongly , that I could not help turn half round to look in she face , and see if I could trace out any thing in it of a family likeness . - ! say I , be we not all relation ? when we arrive at the turn up of the , I stopp have to bid she adieu for good and all : the girl would thank I again for my company and kindness . - she bid I adieu twice . - I repeat it as often ; and so cordial be the parting between we , that have it happen any where else , I be not sure but I should have sign it with a kiss of charity , as warm and holy as a apostle . but in , as none kiss each other but the man , - I do , what amounte to the same thing - - I bid bless she . the passport . Paris . when I get home to my hotel , tell I I have be enquire after by the Police . - the deuce take it ! say I , - I know the reason . it be time the reader should know it , for in the order of thing in which it happen , it be omit : not that it be out of my head ; but that have I tell it then it might have be forget now ; - and now be the time I want it . I have leave with so much precipitation , that it never enter would my mind that we be at war with ; and have reache Dover , and look through my glass at the hill beyond , before the idea present itself ; and with this in its train , that there be no get there without a passport . go but to the end
end of a street , I have a mortal aversion for return back no wiser than I set out ; and as this be one of the greatest effort I have ever make for knowledge , I could less bear the thought of it : so hear the - have hire the packet , I begg would he would take I in he suite . the count have some little knowledge of I , so make little or no difficulty , - only say , he inclination to serve I could reach no farther than , as he be to return by way of Brussels to ; however , when I have once pass would there , I might get to without interruption ; but that in I must make friend and shift for myself . - let I get to , le count , say I , - and I shall do very well . so I embark ' , and never think more of the matter . when tell I the Police have be enquir after I , - the thing instantly recur ; - and by the time have well tell I , the master of the hotel come into my room to tell I the same thing , with this addition to it , that my passport have be particularly ask after : the master of the hotel conclude with say , he hope I have one . - not I , faith ! say I . the master of the hotel retire three step from I , as from a infect person , as I declare this ; - and poor advance three step towards I , and with that sort of movement which a good soul make to succour a distress have one : - the fellow win my heart by it ; and from that single trait I know he character as perfectly , and could rely upon it as firmly , as if he have serve I with fidelity for seven year . Mon seigneur ! cry the master of the hotel ; but recollect himself as he make the exclamation , he instantly change the tone of it . - if , say he , have not a passport ( apparemment ) in all likelihood he have friend in who can procure he one . - not that I know of , quoth I , with a air of indifference . - then certe , reply he , you will be send to the or the au moin . - ! say I , the of be a good natur would soul : - he will hurt nobody . - n'emp ? che pa , say he - you will certainly be send to the to - morrow morning . - but I have take you lodging for a month , answer' I , and I will not quit they a day before the time for all the king of in the world . whisper in my ear , that nobody could oppose the king of . Pardi ! say my host , ce so not de gen tr ? extraordinaire ; - and , have both say and swear it , - he go out . the passport . the at . I could not find in my heart to torture 's with a serious look upon the subject of my embarrassment , which be the reason I have treat it so cavalierly : and to show he how light it lay upon my mind , I dropt the subject entirely ; and whilst he wait upon I at supper , talk ' to he with more than usual gaiety about , and of the . - have be there himself , and have follow I through the street as far as the bookseller 's shop ; but see I come out with the young fille de chambre , and that we walk ' down the together , thdeey would it unnecessary to follow I a step further ; - so make he own reflection upon it , he take a shorter cut , - and get to the hotel in time to be inform have of the affair of the police against my arrival . as soon as the honest creature have take away , and go down to sup himself , I then begin to think a little seriously about my situation . - - and here , I know , , thou will smile at the remembrance of a short dialogue which pass betwixt we the moment I be go to set out : - I must tell it here . , know that I be as little subject to be overburden have with money as thought , have draw I aside to interrogate I how much I have take care for . upon tell he the exact sum , shook he head , and say it would not do ; so pull ' out he purse in order to empty it into mine . - I have enough in conscience , , say I . - indeed , , you have not , reply ; I know and better than you . - but you do not consider , , say I , refuse he offer , that before I have be three day in , I shall take care to say or do something or other for which I shall get clapp would up into the Bastile , and that I shall live there a couple of month entirely at the king of 's expense . - I beg pardon , say drily : really I have forget that resource . now the event I treat gaily come seriously to my door . be it folly , or nonchalance , or philosophy , or pertinacity - or what be it in I , that , after all , when have go down stair , and I
I be quite alone , I could not bring down my mind to think of it otherwise than I have then speak of it to ? - and as for the Bastile ; the terror be in the word . - make the most of it you can , say I to myself , the Bastile be but another word for a tower ; - and a tower be but another word for a house you can not get out of . - mercy on the gouty ! for they be in it twice a year . - but with nine livre a day , and pen and ink , and paper , and patience , albeit a man can not get out , he may do very well within , - at least for a mouth or six week ; at the end of which , if he be a harmless fellow , he innocence appear , and he come out a better and wiser man than he go in . I have some occasion ( I forget what ) to step into the court - yard , as I settle this account ; and remember I walk ' down stair in no small triumph with the conceit of my reasoning . - Beshrow the sombre pencil ! say I , vauntingly - for I envy not its power , which paint the evils of life with so hard and deadly a colouring . the mind sit terrify at the object she have magnify herself , and blacken : reduce they to they proper size and hue , she overlook they . - ' Tis true , say I , correcte the proposition , - the Bastile be not a evil to be despise ; - but strip it of its towers - fill up the fosse , - unbarricade the door - call it simply a confinement , and suppose ' ti some tyrant of a distemper - and not of a man , which hold you in it , - the evil vanish , and you bear the other half without complaint . I be interrupt in the heyday of this soliloquy , with a voice which I take to be of a child , which complain " it could not get out . " - I look ' up and down the passage , and see neither man , woman , nor child , I go out without farther attention . in my return back through the passage , I hear the same word repeat twice over ; and , look up , I see it be a starling hang in a little cage . - " I can not get out , - I can not get out , " say the starling . I stand look at the bird : and to every person who come through the passage it run flutter to the side towards which they approach would it , with the same lamentation of its captivity . " I can not get out , " say the starling . - help thee ! say I , but I will let thee out , cost what it will ; so I turn about the cage to get to the door : it be twisted and double twist so fast with wire , there be no get it open without pull the cage to piece . - I take both hand to it . the bird flow to the place where I be attempt he deliverance , and thrust he head through the trellis presse he breast against it as if impatient . - I fear , poor creature ! say I , I can not set thee at liberty . - " no , " say the starling , - " I can not get out - I can not get out , " say the starling . I vow I never have my affections more tenderly awaken ; nor do I remember a incident in my life , where the dissipated spirit , to which my reason have be a bubble , be so suddenly call would home . Mechanical as the note be , yet so true in tune to nature be they chant , that in one moment they overthrow all my systematic reasoning upon the Bastile ; and I heavily walk upstairs , unsay every word I have say in go down they . disguise thyself as thou will , still , ! say I , - still thou be a bitter dratch ! and though thousands in all ag have be make to drink of thee , thou be no less bitter on that account . - thou , thrice sweet and gracious goddess , address myself to , whom all in public or in private worship , whose taste be grateful , and ever will be so , till herself shall change . - no tint of word can spot thy snowy mantle , or chymic power turn thy sceptre into iron : - with thee to smile upon he as he eat he crust , the swain be happier than he monarch , from whose court thou be exil ! - ! cry I , knee down upon the last step but one in my ascent , grant I but health , thou great Bestower of it , and give I but this fair goddess as my companion , - and shower down thy mitre , if it seem good unto thy divine providence , upon those head which be ach for they ! the captive . Paris . the bird in he cage pursue I into my room ; I sit down close to my table , and lean my head upon my hand , I begin to figure to myself the misery of confinement . I be in a right frame for it , and so I give full scope to my imagination .
. I be go to begin with the million of my fellow - creature bear to no inheritance but slavery : but find , however affect the picture be , that I could not bring it near I , and that the multitude of sad group in it do but distract I . - - I take a single captive , and have first shut he up in he dungeon , I then look would through the twilight of he grate door to take he picture . I beheld he body half - waste away with long expectation and confinement , and feel what kind of sickness of the heart it be which arise from hope deferr ' . upon look nearer I see he pale and feverish : in thirty year the western breeze have not once fann would he blood ; - he have see no sun , no moon , in all that time - nor have the voice of friend or kinsman breathe through he lattice . - he child - but here my heart begin to bleed - and I be force to go on with another part of the portrait . he be sit upon the ground upon a little straw , in the furthest corner of he dungeon , which be alternately he chair and bed : a little calendar of small stick be laid at the head , notch would all over with the dismal day and night he have pass there ; - he have one of these little stick in he hand , and , with a rusty nail he be etch another day of misery to add to the heap . as I darken the little light he have , he lift up a hopeless eye towards the door , then cast it down , - shook he head , and go on with he work of affliction . I hear he chain upon he leg , as he turn he body to lay he little stick upon the bundle . - he give a deep sigh . - I see the iron enter into he soul ! - I burst into tear . - I could not sustain the picture of confinement which my fancy have draw . - I start up from my chair , and call : I bid he bespeak I a remise , and have it ready at the door of the hotel by nine in the morning . I will go directly , say I , myself to . would have put I to be ; but - not willing he should see anything upon my cheek which would cost the honest fellow a heart-ache , - I tell he I would go to be by myself , - and bid he go do the same . the Starling . Road to Versaille . I get into my remise the hour I propose : get up behind , and I bid the coachman make the best of he way to Versailles . as there be nothing in this road , or rather nothing which I look for in travelling , I can not fill up the blank better than with a short history of this self - same bird , which become the subject of the last chapter . whilst the - be wait for a wind at , it have be catch upon the cliff , before it could well fly , by a english lad who be he groom ; who , not care to destroy it , have take it in he breast into the packet ; - and , by course of feed it , and take it once under he protection , in a day or two grow fond of it , and get it safe along with he to . at the lad have lay out a livre in a little cage for the starling , and as he have little to do better the five month he master stay there , he teach it , in he mother 's tongue , the four simple word - ( and no more ) - to which I own would myself so much its debtor . upon he master be go on for , the lad have give it to the master of the hotel . but he little song for liberty be in a unknown language at , the bird have little or no store set by he : so buy both he and he cage for I for a bottle of . in my return from Italy I bring he with I to the country in whose language he have learn he note ; and tell the story of he to - , a - begg would the bird of I ; - in a week - give he to - ; - make a present of he to - ; and - 's gentleman sell he to - 's for a shilling ; D- give he to - ; and so on - half round the alphabet . from that rank he pass would into the lower house , and pass would the hand of as many commoner . but as all these want to get in , and my bird want to get out , he have almost as little store set by he in as in . it be impossible but many of my reader must have hear of he ; and if any by mere chance have ever see he , I beg leave to inform they , that that bird be my bird , or some vile copy set up to represent he . I have nothing farther to add upon he , but that from that time to this I have borne this poor starling as the crest to my arm . - thus : [ picture which can not be reproduce ] - and let the herald 's officer twist he
he neck about if they dare . the address . versaille . I should not like to have my enemy take a view of my mind when I be go to ask protection of any man ; for which reason I generally endeavou to protect myself ; but this go to - be a act of compulsion ; have it be a act of choice , I should have do it , I suppose , like other people . how many mean plan of dirty address , as I go along , do my servile heart form ! I deserve the Bastile for every one of they . then nothing would serve I when I get within sight of versaille , but put word and sentence together , and conceive attitude and tone to wreath myself into - 's good graces . - this will do , say I . - just as well , retort I again , as a coat carry up to he by a adventurous tailor , without take he measure . fool ! continue I , - see 's face first ; - observe what character be write in it ; - take notice in what posture he stand to hear you ; - mark the turn and expression of he body and limb ; - and for the tone , - the first sound which come from he lip will give it you ; and from all these together you will compound a address at once upon the spot , which can not disgust the ; - the ingredient be he own , and most likely to go down . well ! say I , I wish it well over . - again ! as if man to man be not equal throughout the whole surface of the globe ; and if in the field - why not face to face in the cabinet too ? and trust I , , whenever it be not so , man be false to himself and betray he own succour ten time where nature do it once . go to the - with the Bastile in thy look ; - my life for it , thou will be send back to in half a hour with a escort . I believe so , say I . - then I will go to the , by heaven ! with all the gaiety and debonairness in the world . - - and there you be wrong again , reply I . - a heart at ease , , fly into no extreme - ' tis ever on its centre . - well ! well ! cry I , as the coachman turn would in at the gate , I find I shall do very well : and by the time he have wheel would round the court , and bring I up to the door , I find myself so much the better for my own lecture , that I neither ascend the step like a victim to justice , who be to part with life upon the top most , - nor do I mount they with a skip and a couple of stride , as I do when I fly up , ! to thee to meet it . as I enter the door of the saloon I be meet by a person , who possibly might be the maître d'hôtel , but have more the air of one of the under secretaries , who tell I the - be busy . - I be utterly ignorant , say I , of the form of obtain a audience , be a absolute stranger , and what be worse in the present conjuncture of affair , be a too . - he reply , that do not increase the difficulty . - I make he a slight bow , and tell he , I have something of importance to say to le . the secretary look would towards the stair , as if he be about to leave I to carry up this account to some one . - but I must not mislead you , say I , - for what I have to say be of no manner of importance to le - - but of great importance to myself . - est une autre affaire , reply he . - not at all , say I , to a man of gallantry . - but pray , good sir , continue I , when can a stranger hope to have access ? - in not less than two hour , say he , look at he watch . the number of equipage in the court - yard seem to justify the calculation , that I could have no nearer a prospect ; - and as walking backward and forward in the saloon , without a soul to commune with , be for the time as bad as be in the Bastile itself , I instantly go back to my remise , and bid the coachman drive I to the , which be the nearest hotel . I think there be a fatality in it ; - I seldom go to the place I set out for . . versaille . before I have get half way down the street I change my mind : as I be at versaille , think I , I might as well take a view of the town ; so I pull would the cord , and order the coachman to drive round some of the principal street . - I suppose the town be not very large , say I . - the coachman begg would pardon for set I right , and tell I it be very superb , and that number of the first duke and marquise and count have hotel . - the -, of whom the bookseller at the have spoke so handsomely the night before
before , come instantly into my mind . - and why should I not go , think I , to the -, who have so high a idea of English book and English man - and tell he my story ? so I change my mind a second time . - in truth it be the third ; for I have intend that day for -, in the . , and have devoutly send she word by she fille de chambre that I would assuredly wait upon she ; - but I be govern by circumstance ; - I can not govern they : so see a man stand with a basket on the other side of the street , as if he have something to sell , I bid go up to he , and enquire for the count 's hotel . return a little pale ; and tell I it be a sell pâté . - it be impossible , , say I . - could no more account for the phenomenon than myself ; but persist in he story : he have see the croix set in gold , with its red riband , he say , tie to he buttonhole - and have look into the basket and see the pâté which the be sell ; so could not be mistaken in that . such a reverse in man 's life awakend a better principle than curiosity : I could not help look for some time at he as I sit in the remise : - the more I look would at he , he croix , and he basket , the stronger they wove themselves into my brain . - I get out of the remise , and go towards he . he be begirt with a clean linen apron which fall below he knee , and with a sort of a bib that go half way up he breast ; upon the top of this , but a little below the hem , hang he croix . he basket of little pâté be cover over with a white damask napkin ; another of the same kind be spread at the bottom ; and there be a look of propreté and neatness throughout , that one might have buy he pâté of he , as much from appetite as sentiment . he make a offer of they to neither ; but stand still with they at the corner of a hotel , for those to buy who choose it without solicitation . he be about forty - eight ; - of a sedate look , something approach to gravity . I do not wonder . - I go up rather to the basket than he , and have lift up the napkin , and take one of he pâté into my hand , - I begg would he would explain the appearance which affect I . he tell I in a few word , that the best part of he life have pass in the service , in which , after spend a small patrimony , he have obtain a company and the croix with it ; but that , at the conclusion of the last peace , he regiment be reform , and the whole corps , with those of some other regiment , leave without any provision , he find himself in a wide world without friend , without a livre , - and indeed , say he , without anything but this , - ( point , as he say it , to he croix ) . - the poor win my pity , and he finish the scene with win my esteem too . the king , he say , be the most generous of prince , but he generosity could neither relieve nor reward everyone , and it be only he misfortune to be amongst the number . he have a little wife , he say , whom he love , who do the pâtisserie ; and add , he feel no dishonour in defend she and himself from want in this way - unless have offer ' he a better . it would be wick to withhold a pleasure from the good , in passing over what happen ' to this poor Chevalier of about nine month after . it seem he usually take he stand near the iron gate which lead up to the palace , and as he croix have catch the eye of number , number have make the same enquiry which I have do . - he have tell they the same story , and always with so much modesty and good sense , that it have reach have at last the king 's ears ; - who , hear the have be a gallant officer , and respecte by the whole regiment as a man of honour and integrity , - he break up he little trade by a pension of fifteen hundred livre a year . as I have tell this to please the reader , I beg he will allow I to relate another , out of its order , to please myself : - the two story reflect light upon each other , - and ' ttis a pity they should be part . the Sword . Rennes . when state and empire have they period of declension , and feel in they turnd what distress and poverty be , - I stop not to tell the causis which gradually bring the house d'e - , in , into decay . the - have fight up against he condition with great firmness ; wish to preserve , and still show to the world , some little fragment of what he ancestor have be ; - they indiscretion have put it out of he power . there be enough left for the little exigency of obscurity . - but he have two boy
boy who look up to he for light ; - he think they deserv it . he have try he sword - it could not open the way , - the mounting be too expensive , - and simple economy be not a match for it : - there be no resource but commerce . in any other province in , save , this be smit the root for ever of the little tree he pride and affection wish have to see re-blossom . - but in , there be a provision for this , he avail have himself of it ; and , take a occasion when the state be assemble at , the , attend with he two boy , enter the court ; and have plead the right of a ancient law of the duchy , which , though seldom claim ' , he say , be no less in force , he take he sword from he side : - here , say he , take it ; and be trusty guardian of it , till better time put I in condition to reclaim it . the accept the 's sword : he stay a few minute to see it deposit in the archive of he house - and depart . the and he whole family embark the next clay for , and in about nineteen or twenty year of successful application to business , with some unlook would for bequest from distant branch of he house , return home to reclaim he nobility , and to support it . it be a incident of good fortune which will never happen to any traveller but a Sentimental one , that I should be at Rennes at the very time of this solemn requisition : I call it solemn ; - it be so to I . the enter the court with he whole family : he support he lady , - he eldest son support he sister , and he youngest be at the other extreme of the line next he mother ; - he put he handkerchief to he face twice . - - there be a dead silence . when the have approach within six pace of the tribunal , he give the Marchioness to he youngest son , and advance three step before he family , - he reclaim would he sword . he sword be give he , and the moment he get it into he hand he draw it almost out of the scabbard : - ' tbe the shining face of a friend he have once give up - he look would attentively along it , begin at the hilt , as if to see whether it be the same , - when , observe a little rust which it have contract near the point , he bring it near he eye , and bend he head down over it , - I think - I see a tear fall upon the place . I could not be deceive by what follow . " I shall find , " say he , " some other way to get it off . " when the have say this , he return he sword into its scabbard , make a bow to the guardian of it , - and , with he wife and daughter , and he two son follow he , walk ' out . o , how I envy he he feeling ! the passport . versaille . I find no difficulty in get admittance to - . the set of be laid upon the table , and he be tumbl they over . I walk would up close to the table , and give first such a look at the book as to make he conceive I know what they be , - I tell he I have come without any one to present I , know I should meet with a friend in he apartment , who , I trust , would do it for I : - it be my countryman , the great Shakespeare , say I , point to he work - et ayez la bouté , mon cher ami , apostrophize he spirit , add I , de I faire cet yohonneu -l ?. - the count smile at the singularity of the introduction ; and see I look ' a little pale and sickly , insist upon my take a arm -chair ; so I sit down ; and to save he conjecture upon a visit so out of all rule , I tell he simply of the incident in the bookseller 's shop , and how that have impell I rather to go to he with the story of a little embarrassment I be under , than to any other man in . - and what be you embarrassment ? let I hear it , say the count . so I tell he the story just as I have tell it the reader . - and the master of my hotel , say I , as I conclude it , will need have it , le count , that I shall be send to the Bastile ; - but I have no apprehension , continue I ; - for , in fall into the hand of the most polish have people in the world , and be conscious I be a true man , and not come to spy the nakedness of the land , I scarce think I lay at they mercy . - it do not suit the gallantry of the french , Monsieur le count , say I , to show it against invalid . a animated blush come into the - 's cheek as I speak this . - Ne craignez rien - do not fear , say he . - indeed , I do not , reply I again . - , continue I , a little
little sportingly , I have come laugh all the way from to , and I do not think Monsieur le be such a enemy to mirth as to send I back cry for my pain . - my application to you , - ( make he a low bow ) , be to desire he will not . the count hear I with great good nature , or I have not say half as much , - and once or twice say , - est bien dit . so I rest my cause there - and determined to say no more about it . the count lead the discourse : we talk would of indifferent thing , - of book , and politics , and man ; - and then of woman . - bless they all ! say I , after much discourse about they - there be not a man upon earth who love they so much as I do : after all the foible I have see , and all the satire I have read against they , still I love they ; be firmly persuade that a man , who have not a sort of affection for the whole sex , be incapable of ever love a single one as he ink . Eh bien ! , say the count , gaily ; - you be not come to spy the nakedness of the land ; - I believe you ; - ni encore , I dare say , that of we woman ! - but permit I to conjecture , - if , par hazard , they fall into you way , that the prospect would not affect you . I have something within I which can not bear the shock of the least indecent insinuation : in the sportability of chit - chat I have often endeavoure to conquer it , and with infinite pain have hazard a thousand thing to a dozen of the sex together , - the least of which I could not venture to a single one to gain heaven . excuse I , , say I ; - as for the nakedness of you land , if I see it , I should cast my eye over it with tear in they ; - and for that of you woman ( blush at the idea he have excite in I ) I be so evangelical in this , and have such a fellow - feeling for whatever be weak about they , that I would cover it with a garment if I know how to throw it on : - but I could wish , continue I , to spy the nakedness of they heart , and through the different disguise of custom , climates , and religion , find out what be good in they to fashion my own by : - and therefore be I come . it be for this reason , le count , continue I , that I have not see the , - nor the Luxembourg , - nor the Façade of the , - nor have attempt to swell the catalogue we have of picture , statue , and churche . - I conceive every fair be as a temple , and would rather enter in , and see the original drawing and loose sketch hang up in it , than the Transfiguration of itself . the thirst of this , continue I , as impatient as that which inflame the breast of the connoisseur , have lead I from my own home into , - and from will lead I through ; - ' ti a quiet journey of the heart in pursuit of , and those affections which arise out of she , which make we love each other , - and the world , better than we do . the count say a great many civil thing to I upon the occasion ; and add very politely , how much he stand oblige to for make I know to he . - but a propo , say he ; - be full of great thing ; - he forget a small punctilio of announce you name : - it put you under a necessity of do it yourself . the passport . versaille . there be not a more perplexing affair in life to I , than to set about tell any one who I be , - for there be scarce any body I can not give a better account of than myself ; and I have often wish I could do it in a single word , - and have a end of it . it be the only time and occasion in my life I could accomplish this to any purpose ; - for lie upon the table , and recollect I be in he book , I take up , and turn immediately to the grave -digger ' scene in the fifth act , I lay my finger upon , and advance the book to the count , with my finger all the way over the name , - Me voici ! say I . now , whether the idea of poor 's skull be put out of the count 's mind by the reality of my own , or by what magic he could drop a period of seven or eight hundred year , make nothing in this account ; - ' tis certain the french conceive better than they combine ; - I wonder at nothing in this world , and the less at this ; inasmuch as one of the first of we own church , for whose candour and paternal sentiment I have the highest veneration , fall into the same mistake in the very same case : - " he could not bear , " he say , " to look into the sermon write by the of 's jester .
. " good , my say I ; but there be two Yoricks . the you Lordship think of , have be dead and bury eight hundred year ago ; he flourish in 's court ; - the other be myself , who have flourish , my , in no court . - he shook he head . ! say I , you might as well confound the with the , my lord ! - " ' Twas all one , " he reply . - - if , of , could have translate you Lordship , say I , I be sure you Lordship would not have say so . the poor count - fall but into the same error . - , , est -il ? cry the count . - Je le suis , say I . - ? - , - moi qui ai l'honneur de vous parler , . - ! say he , embrace I , - Vous ?te ! the count instantly put the into he pocket , and leave I alone in he room . the passport . versaille . I could not conceive why the - have go so abruptly out of the room , any more than I could conceive why he have put the into he pocket . - mystery which must explain themselves be not worth the loss of time which a conjecture about they take up : ' twas better to read ; so take up " , " I transport myself instantly from the chair I sit in to in , and get so busy with , and , and , that I think not of Versailles , the count , or the passport . sweet pliability of man 's spirit , that can at once surrender itself to illusion , which cheat expectation and sorrow of they weary moment ! - , - long since have ye number would out my day , have I not trod so great a part of they upon this enchanted ground . when my way be too rough for my foot , or too steep for my strength , I get off it , to some smooth velvet path , which have scatter over with rosebud of delight ; and have take a few turn in it , come back strengthen and refresh ' . - when evil press sore upon I , and there be no retreat from they in this world , then I take a new course ; - I leave it , - and as I have a clearer idea of the Elysian field than I have of heaven , I force myself , like , into they . - I see he meet the pensive shade of he forsaken , and wish to recognise it ; - I see the injured spirit wave she head , and turn off silent from the author of she misery and dishonour ; - I lose the feeling for myself in hers , and in those affections which be will not to make I mourn for she when I be at school . surely this be not walk in a vain shadow - nor do man disquiet himself in vain by it : - he oftener do so in trust the issue of he commotion to reason only . - I can safely say for myself , I be never able to conquer any one single bad sensation in my heart so decisively , as beat up as fast as I could for some kindly and gentle sensation to fight it upon its own ground when I have get to the end of the third act the - enter , with my passport in he hand . Monsieur le -, say the count , be as good a prophet , I dare say , as he be a statesman . un homme qui rit , say the , ne sera jamais dangereux . - have it be for any one but the king 's jester , add the count , I could not have get it these two hour . - , , say I - I be not the king 's jester . - but you be ? - yes . - vous plaisantez ? - I answer , indeed I do jest , - but be not pay for it ; - ' twas entirely at my own expense . we have no jester at court , Monsieur le count , say I ; the last we have be in the licentious reign of . ; - since which time we manners have be so gradually refin , that we court at present be so full of patriot , who wish for nothing but the honour and wealth of they country ; - and we lady be all so chaste , so spotless , so good , so devout , - there be nothing for a jester to make a jest of . - un persiflage ! cry the count . the passport . versaille . as the passport be direct to all lieutenant - governors , governors , and commandant of city , general of armie , justiciary , and all officer of justice , to let Yorick the king 's jester , and he baggage , travel quietly along , I own the triumph of obtain the passport be not a little tarnish ' by the figure I cut in it . - but there be nothing unmix would in this world ; and some of the gravest of we divine have carry it so far as to affirm , that enjoyment itself be attend even with a sigh , - and that the greatest they know of terminate , in a general way , in little better than a convulsion . I remember the grave and learn , in he upon the generation from , very naturally break off in the middle of a
a note to give a account to the world of a couple of sparrow upon the out - edge of he window , which have incommod he all the time he write , and at last had entirely take he off from he genealogy . - ' Tis strange ! write ; but the fact be certain , for I have have the curiosity to mark they down one by one with my pen ; - but the cock sparrow , during the little time that I could have finish the other half of this note , have actually interrupt I with the reiteration of he caress three - and - twenty time and a half . how merciful , add , be heaven to he creature ! fate ! that the gravest of thy breth should be able to write that to the world , which stain thy face with crimson to copy , even in thy study . but this be nothing to my travels . - so I twice , - twice beg pardon for it . character . versaille . and how do you find the french ? say the -, after he have give I the passport . the reader may suppose , that after so oblige a proof of courtesy , I could not be at a loss to say something handsome to the enquiry . - passe , pour cela . - speak frankly , say he : do you find all the urbanity in the french which the world give we the honour of ? - I have find every thing , I say , which confirm it . - Vraiment , say the count , le so not poli . - to a excess , reply I . the count take notice of the word exc ? ; and would have it I mean more than I say . I defend myself a long time as well as I could against it . - he insist I have a reserve , and that I would speak my opinion frankly . I believe , le count , say I , that man have a certain compass , as well as a instrument ; and that the social and other call have occasion by turn for every key in he ; so that if you begin a note too high or too low , there must be a want either in the upper or under part , to fill up the system of harmony . - the - do not understand music , so desire I to explain it some other way . a polish have nation , my dear count , say I , make every one its debtor : and besides , Urbanity itself , like the fair sex , have so many charms , it go against the heart to say it can do ill ; and yet , I believe , there be but a certain line of perfection , that man , take he altogether , be empower have to arrive at : - if he get beyond , he rather exchange quality than get they . I must not presume to say how far this have affect the in the subject we be speak of ; - but , should it ever be the case of the , in the progress of they refinement , to arrive at the same polish which distinguish the french , if we do not lose the politesse do coeur , which incline man more to humane action than courteous one , - we should at least lose that distinct variety and originality of character , which distinguish they , not only from each other , but from all the world besides . I have a few of 's shilling , as smooth as glass , in my pocket ; and foresee they would be of use in the illustration of my hypothesis , I have get they into my hand when I have proceed so far : - , , say I , rise up , and lay they before he upon the table , - by jingling and rub one against another for seventy year together in one body 's pocket or another ' , they be become so much alike , you can scarce distinguish one shilling from another . the , like ancient medal , keep more apart , and pass but few people 's hand , preserve the first sharpness which the fine hand of have give they ; - they be not so pleasant to feel , - but in return the legend be so visible , that at the first look you see whose image and superscription they bear . - but the french , le count , add I ( wish to soften what I have say ) , have so many excellence , they can the better spare this ; - they be a loyal , a gallant , a generous , a ingenious , and good temper would people as be under heaven ; - if they have a fault - they be too serious . ! cry the count , rise out of he chair . tMais vous plaisantez , say he , correcte he exclamation . - I lay my hand upon my breast , and with earnest gravity assure he it be my most settled opinion . the count say he be mortify he could not stay to hear my reason , be engage to go that moment to dine with the - . but if it be not too far to come to Versailles to eat you soup with I , I beg , before you leave , I may have the pleasure of know you retract you opinion , - or , in what manner you support it . - but , if you do support it , , say he , you must do it with all
all you power , because you have the whole world against you . - I promise the count I would do myself the honour of dining with he before I set out for ; - so take my leave . the Temptation . Paris . when I alight at the hotel , the porter tell I a young woman with a bandbox have be that moment enquir for I . - I do not know , say the porter , whether she be go away or not . I take the key of my chamber of he , and go upstairs ; and when I have get within ten step of the top of the landing before my door , I meet she come easily down . it be the fair fille de chambre I have walk along the with ; - have send she upon some commission to a marchande des mode within a step or two of the ; and as I have fail would in wait upon she , have bid she enquire if I have leave ; and if so , whether I have not leave a letter address to she . as the fair fille de chambre be so near my door , she return back , and go into the room with I for a moment or two whilst I write a card . it be a fine still eve in the latter end of the month of , - the crimson window curtain ( which be of the same colour as those of the bed ) be draw close : - the sun be set , and reflecte through they so warm a tint into the fair fille de chambre 's face , - I think she blush ' ; - the idea of it make I blush myself : - we be quite alone ; and that superinduce a second blush before the first could get off . there be a sort of a pleasing half guilty blush , where the blood be more in fault than the man : - ' tis send impetuous from the heart , and virtue fly after it , - not to call it back , but to make the sensation of it more delicious to the nerve : - ' tis associate . - but I will not describe it ; - I feel something at first within I which be not in strict unison with the lesson of virtue I have give she the night before . - I seek five minute for a card ; - I know I have not one . - I take up a pen . - I lay it down again ; - my hand tremble : - the devil be in I . I know as well as any one he be a adversary , whom , if we resist , he will fly from we ; - but I seldom resist he at all ; from a terror , though I may conquer , I may still get a hurt in the combat ; - so I give up the triumph for security ; and , instead of think to make he fly , I generally fly myself . the fair fille de chambre come close up to the bureau where I be look for a card - take up first the pen I cast down , then offer have to hold I the ink ; she offer would it so sweetly , I be go to accept it ; - but I durst not ; - I have nothing , my dear , say I , to write upon . - write it , say she , simply , upon anything . - I be just go to cry out , then I will write it , fair girl ! upon thy lip . - if I do , say I , I shall perish ; - so I take she by the hand , and lead she to the door , and begg would she would not forget the lesson I have give she . - she say , indeed she would not ; - and , as she utter it with some earnestness , she turn would about , and give I both she hand , close together , into mine ; - it be impossible not to compress they in that situation ; - I wish have to let they go ; and all the time I hold they , I keep argue within myself against it , - and still I hold they on . - in two minute I find I have all the battle to fight over again ; - and I feel my leg and every limb about I tremble at the idea . the foot of the bed be within a yard and a half of the place where we be stand . - I have still hold of she hand - and how it happen I can give no account ; but I neither ask would she - nor draw she - nor do I think of the bed ; - but so it do happen , we both sit down . I will just show you , say the fair fille de chambre , the little purse I have be make to - day to hold you crown . so she put she hand into she right pocket , which be next I , and feel for it some time - then into the left . - " she have lose it . " - I never bear expectation more quietly ; - it be in she right pocket at last ; - she pull would it out ; it be of green taffeta , line with a little bit of white quilted satin , and just big enough to hold the crown : she put it into my hand ; - it be pretty ;
; and I hold it ten minute with the back of my hand rest upon she lap - look sometimes at the purse , sometimes on one side of it . a stitch or two have break out in the gather of my stock ; the fair fille de chambre , without say a word , take out she little housewife , thread a small needle , and sew ' it up . - I foresee it would hazard the glory of the day ; and , as she pass ' she hand in silence across and across my neck in the manoeuvre , I feel the laurel shake which fancy have wreath would about my head . a strap have give way in she walk , and the buckle of she shoe be just fall off . - see , say the fille de chambre , hold up she foot . - I could not , for my soul but fasten the buckle in return , and put in the strap , - and lift up the other foot with it , when I have do , to see both be right , - in do it too suddenly , it unavoidably throw the fair fille de chambre off she centre , - and then - the Conquest . yes , - and then - . ye whose clay - cold head and luke - warm heart can argue down or mask you passion , tell I , what trespass be it that man should have they ? or how he spirit stand answerable to the father of spirit but for he conduct under they ? if have so wove she web of kindness , that some thread of love and desire be entangle with the piece , - must the whole web be rent in draw they out ? - Whip I such stoic , great of ! say I to myself : - wherever thy providence shall place I for the trial of my virtue ; - whatever be my danger , - whatever be my situation , - let I feel the movement which rise out of it , and which belong to I as a man , - and , if I govern they as a good one , I will trust the issue to thy justice ; for thou hast make we , and not we ourselve . as I finish my address , I raise the fair fille de chambre up by the hand , and lead she out of the room : - she stand by I till I lock the door and put the key in my pocket , - and then , - the victory be quite decisive - and not till then , I press would my lip to she cheek , and take she by the hand again , lead she safe to the gate of the hotel . the mystery . Paris . if a man know the heart , he will know it be impossible to go back instantly to my chamber ; - it be touch a cold key with a flat third to it upon the close of a piece of music , which have call have forth my affections : - therefore , when I let go the hand of the fille de chambre , I remaine at the gate of the hotel for some time , look at every one who pass ' by , - and form conjecture upon they , till my attention get fix would upon a single object which confound all kind of reaso upon he . it be a tall figure of a philosophic , serious , adust look , which pass and repass would sedately along the street , make a turn of about sixty pace on each side of the gate of the hotel ; - the man be about fifty - two - have a small cane under he arm - be dress would in a dark drab - colour would coat , waistcoat , and breech , which seem ' to have see some year service : - they be still clean , and there be a little air of frugal propreté throughout he . by he pull off he hat , and he attitude of accost a good many in he way , I see he be ask charity : so I get a sous or two out of my pocket ready to give he , as he take I in he turn . - he pass would by I without ask anything - and yet do not go five step further before he ask have charity of a little woman . - I be much more likely to have give of the two . - he have scarce do with the woman , when he pull would off he hat to another who be come the same way . - a ancient gentleman come slowly - and , after he , a young smart one . - he let they both pass , and ask would nothing . I stand observe he half a hour , in which time he have make a dozen turn backward and forward , and find that he invariably pursue the same plan . there be two thing very singular in this , which set my brain to work , and to no purpose : - the first be , why the man should only tell he story to the sex ; - and , secondly , - what kind of story it be , and what species of eloquence it could be , which soften would the heart of the woman , which he know ' twas to no purpose to practise upon the man . there be two other circumstance , which entangle this mystery ; - the one be , he tell every woman what he have to say in she ear , and
and in a way which have much more the air of a secret than a petition ; - the other was , it be always successful . - he never stopp have a woman , but she pull would out she purse , and immediately give he something . I could form no system to explain the phenomenon . I have get a riddle to amuse I for the rest of the evening ; so I walk would upstairs to my chamber . the case of . Paris . I be immediately follow up by the master of the hotel , who come into my room to tell I I must provide lodging elsewhere . - how so , friend ? say I . - he answer , I have have a young woman lock would up with I two hour that evening in my bedchamber , and ' twa against the rule of he house . - very well , say I , we will all part friend then , - for the girl be no worse , - and I be no worse , - and you will be just as I find you . - it be enough , he say , to overthrow the credit of he hotel . - , , say he , point to the foot of the bed we have be sit upon . - I own it have something of the appearance of a evidence ; but my pride not suffer I to enter into any detail of the case , I exhort he to let he soul sleep in peace , as I resolve to let mine do that night , and that I would discharge what I owed he at breakfast . I should not have minded , , say he , if you have have twenty girl - ' tTis a score more , reply I , interrupt he , than I ever reckon would upon - provide , add he , it have be but in a morning . - and do the difference of the time of the day at make a difference in the sin ? - it make a difference , he say , in the scandal . - I like a good distinction in my heart ; and can not say I be intolerably out of temper with the man . - I own it be necessary , resume the master of the hotel , that a stranger at should have the opportunity present to he of buy lace and silk stocking and ruffle , et tout cela ; - and ' ti nothing if a woman come with a band - box . - o , my conscience ! say I , she have one but I never look ' into it . - then , say he , have buy nothing ? - not one earthly thing , reply I . - because , say he , I could recommend one to you who would use you en conscience . - but I must see she this night , say I . - he make I a low bow , and walk ' down . now shall I triumph over this maître d'hôtel , cry I , - and what then ? then I shall let he see I know he be a dirty fellow . - and what then ? what then ? - I be too near myself to say it be for the sake of other . - I have no good answer leave ; - there be more of spleen than principle in my project , and I be sick of it before the execution . in a few minute the grisette come in with she box of lace . - I will buy nothing , however , say I , within myself . the grisette would show I everything . - I be hard to please : she would not seem to see it ; she open she little magazine , and lay all she lace one after another before I ; - unfolded and fold they up again one by one with the most patient sweetness . - I might buy , - or not ; - she would let I have everything at my own price : - the poor creature thseey have anxious to get a penny ; and lay herself out to win I , and not so much in a manner which seem have artful , as in one I feel simple and caressing . if there be not a fund of honest gullibility in man , so much the worse ; - my heart relent , and I give up my second resolution as quietly as the first . - why should I chastise one for the trespass of another ? if thou be tributary to this tyrant of a host , think I , look up in she face , so much harder be thy bread . if I have not have more than four louis d'or in my purse , there be no such thing as rise up and show she the door , till I have first lay three of they out in a pair of ruffle . - the master of the hotel will share the profit with she ; - no matter , - then I have only pay as many a poor soul have pay before I , for a act he could not do , or think of . the Riddle . Paris . when come up to wait upon I at supper , he tell I how sorry the master of the hotel be for he affront to I in bidding I change my lodging . a man who value a good night 's rest will not lie down with enmity in he heart , if he can help it . - so I by tell the master of the hotel , that
that I be sorry on my side for the occasion I have give he ; - and you may tell he , if you will , , add I , that if the young woman should call again , I shall not see she . this be a sacrifice not to he , but myself , have resolve , after so narrow a escape , to run no more risk , but to leave , if it be possible , with all the virtue I enter would it . C'est déroger ? noblesse , , say , make I a bow down to the ground as he say it . - encore , , say he , may change he sentiment ; - and if ( par hazard ) he should like to amuse himself , - I find no amusement in it , say I , interrupt he . - ! say , - and take away . in a hour 's time he come to put I to bed , and be more than commonly officious : - something hang upon he lip to say to I , or ask I , which he could not get off : I could not conceive what it be , and indeed give myself little trouble to find it out , as I have another riddle so much more interesting upon my mind , which be that of the man 's ask charity before the door of the hotel . - I would have give anything to have get to the bottom of it ; and that , not out of curiosity , - ' tis so low a principle of enquiry , in general , I would not purchase the gratification of it with a two - sous piece ; - but a secret , I think , which so soon and so certainly soften have the heart of every woman you come near , be a secret at least equal to the philosopher 's stone ; have I both the Indy , I would have give up one to have be master of it . I toss would and turn would it almost all night long in my brain to no manner of purpose ; and when I awoke in the morning , I find my spirits as much trouble with my dream , as ever the King of have be with he ; and I will not hesitate to affirm , it would have puzzl all the wise man of as much as those of to have give its interpretation . Le Dimanche . Paris . it be ; and when come in , in the morning , with my coffee and roll and butter , he have get himself so gallantly array ' , I scarce know he . I have covenant at to give he a new hat with a silver button and loop , and four louis d'or , pour s'adoniser , when we get to ; and the poor fellow , to do he justice , have do wonder with it . he have buy a bright , clean , good scarlet coat , and a pair of breech of the same . - they be not a crown worse , he say , for the wearing . - I wish would he hang would for tell I . - they look would so fresh , that though I know the thing could not be do , yet I would rather have impos upon my fancy with think I have buy they know for the fellow , than that they have come out of the . this be a nicety which make not the heart sore at . he have purchase , moreover , a handsome blue satin waistcoat , fancifully enough embroider : - this be indeed something the worse for the service it have do , but ' tbe clean scour ' ; - the gold have be touch ' up , and upon the whole be rather showy than otherwise ; - and as the blue be not violent , it suit with the coat and breech very well : he have squeez would out of the money , moreover , a new bag and a solitaire ; and have insist with the fripier upon a gold pair of garter to he breech knee . - he have purchase muslin ruffle , bien brodée , with four livre of he own money ; - and a pair of white silk stocking for five more ; - and to top all , nature have give he a handsome figure , without cost he a sous . he enter the room thus set off , with he hair dress in the first style , and with a handsome bouquet in he breast . - in a word , there be that look of festivity in everything about he , which at once put I in mind it be ; - and , by combining both together , it instantly strike I , that the favour he wish have to ask of I the night before , be to spend the day as every body in spend it besides . I have scarce make the conjecture , when , with infinite humility , but with a look of trust , as if I should not refuse he , begg would I would grant he the day , pour faire le galant vis -?-vis de sa maîtresse . now it be the very thing I intend to do myself tvis-?-vis -. - I have retain the remise on purpose for it , and it would not have mortify my vanity to have have a servant so well dress would as be , to have get up behind it : I never could have worse spa he . but we must feel , not argue in these embarrassment . - the son and daughter of service part
part with liberty , but not with nature , in they contract ; they be flesh and blood , and have they little vanity and wish in the midst of the house of bondage , as well as they task -master ; - no doubt , they have set they self - denial at a price , - and they expectation be so unreasonable , that I would often disappoind they , but that they condition put it so much in my power to do it . behold , - behold , I be thy servant - disarm I at once of the power of a master . - Thou shalt go , ! say I . - and what mistress , , say I , canst thou have pick up in so little a time at ? lay he hand upon he breast , and say ' tbe a petite demoiselle , at - . - have a heart make for society ; and , to speak the truth of he , let as few occasion slip he as he master ; - so that somehow or other , - but how , - heaven know , - he have connect himself with the demoiselle upon the landing of the staircase , during the time I be take up with my passport ; and as there be time enough for I to win the count to my interest , have contrive to make it do to win the maid to he . the family , it seem , be to be at that day , and he have make a party with she , and two or three more of the count 's household , upon the boulevard . happy people ! that once a week at least be sure to lay down all you car together , and dance and sing and sport away the weights of grievance , which bow down the spirit of other nation to the earth . the FRAGMENT . Paris . have leave I something to amuse myself with for the day more than I have bargain have for , or could have enter ' either into he head or mine . he have bring the little print of butter upon a currant leaf : and as the morning be warm , and he have a good step to bring it , he have begg have a sheet of waste paper to put betwixt the currant leaf and he hand . - as that be plate sufficient , I bade he lay it upon the table as it be ; and as I resolve to stay within all day , I order he to call upon the traîteur , to bespeak my dinner , and leave I to breakfast by myself . when I have finish the butter , I throw the currant - leaf out of the window , and be go to do the same by the waste paper ; - but stop to read a line first , and that draw I on to a second and third , - I think it better worth ; so I shut the window , and draw a chair up to it , I sit down to read it . it be in the old of 's time , and for atch I know might have be write by he : - it be moreover in a letter , and that so fad and go off by damp and length of time , it cost I infinite trouble to make anything of it . - I throw it down ; and then write a letter to ; - then I take it up again , and embroil my patience with it afresh ; - and then to cure that , I write a letter to . - still it keep hold of I ; and the difficulty of understanding it increase but the desire . I get my dinner ; and after I have enlighten my mind with a bottle of ; I at it again , - and , after two or three hour poring upon it , with almost as deep attention as ever or do upon a nonsensical inscription , I think I make sense of it ; but to make sure of it , the best way , I imagine , be to turn it into , and see how it would look then ; - so I go on leisurely , as a trifling man do , sometimes write a sentence , - then take a turn or two , - and then look how the world go , out of the window ; so that it be nine o'clock at night before I have do it . - I then begin and read it as follow . the FRAGMENT . Paris . - now , as the notary 's wife dispute the point with the notary with too much heat , - I wish , say the notary , ( throw down the parchment ) that there be another notary here only to set down and attest all this . - - and what would you do then , ? say she , rise hastily up . - the notary 's wife be a little fume of a woman , and the notary think it well to avoid a hurricane by a mild reply . - I would go , answer he , to bed . - you may go to the devil , answer would the notary 's wife . now there happen to be but one be in the house , the other two room be unfurnished , as be the custom at , and the notary not care to lie in the same bed with a woman who have but that moment send he pell mell to the , go forth with he hat and cane and short cloak , the night be very windy
windy , and walk ' out , ill at ease , towards the . of all the bridge which ever be build , the whole world who have pass ' over the must own , that it be the noblest , - the finest , - the grandest , - the lightest , - the longest , - the broadest , that ever conjoin ' land and land together upon the face of the terraqueous globe . [ by this it seem as if the author of the fragment have not be a . ] the worst fault which divine and the doctor of the can allege against it be , that if there be but a capfull of wind in or about , ' ti more blasphemously sacre Dieu ' there than in any other aperture of the whole city , - and with reason good and cogent , Messieur ; for it come against you without cry garde d'eau , and with such unpremeditable puffs , that of the few who cross it with they hat on , not one in fifty but hazard two livre and a half , which be it be full worth . the poor notary , just as he be pass by the sentry , instinctively clapp would he cane to the side of it , but in raise it up , the point of he cane catche hold of the loop of the sentinel 's hat , hoist it over the spike of the ballustrade clear into the Seine . - - ' a ill wind , say a boatman , who catch it , which blow nobody any good . the sentry , be a Gascon , incontinently twirl up he whisker , and levell would he arquebuss . Arquebuss in those day go off with match ; and a old woman 's paper lantern at the end of the bridge happen to be blow out , she have borrow would the sentry 's match to light it : - it give a moment 's time for the 's blood to run cool , and turn the accident better to he advantage . - ' a ill wind , say he , catch off the notary 's castor , and legitimat the capture with the boatman 's adage . the poor notary cross the bridge , and pass along the into the fauxbourg of , lament himself as he walk along in this manner : - luckless man that I be ! say the notary , to be the sport of hurricane all my day : - to be bear to have the storm of ill language levell ' against I and my profession wherever I go ; to be force into marriage by the thunder of the church to a tempest of a woman ; - to be drive forth out of my house by domestic wind , and despoil would of my castor by pontific one ! - to be here , barehead , in a windy night , at the mercy of the ebb and flow of accident ! - where be I to lay my head ? - miserable man ! what wind in the two - and - thirty point of the whole compass can blow unto thee , as it do to the rest of thy fellow - creature , good ? as the notary be pass on by a dark passage , complain in this sort , a voice call would out to a girl , to bid she run for the next notary . - now the notary be the next , and avail himself of he situation , walk ' up the passage to the door , and pass through a old sort of a saloon , be usher ' into a large chamber , dismantle of everything but a long military pike , - a breastplate , - a rusty old sword , and bandoleer , hang up , equidistant , in four different place against the wall . a old personage who have heretofore be a gentleman , and unless decay of fortune taint the blood along with it , be a gentleman at that time , lay support he head upon he hand in he bed ; a little table with a taper burning be set close beside it , and close by the table be place a chair : - the notary sit he down in it ; and pull out he inkhorn and a sheet or two of paper which he have in he pocket , he place they before he ; and dip he pen in he ink , and lean he breast over the table , he dispose everything to make the gentleman 's last will and testament Alas ! yoMonsieu le , say the gentleman , raise himself up a little , I have nothing to bequeath , which will pay the expense of bequeathing , except the history of myself , which I could not die in peace , unless I leave it as a legacy to the world : the profit arise out of it I bequeath to you for the pain of take it from I . - it be a story so uncommon , it must be read by all mankind ; - it will make the fortune of you house . - the notary dipp would he pen into he inkhorn . - director of every event in my life ! say the old gentleman , look up earnestly , and raise he hand towards heaven , - , whose hand have lead I on through such a labyrinth of strange passage down into this scene of desolation , assist the decay memory of a old , infirm , and break - heart man ; - direct my tongue by the spirit of thy eternal truth , that this stranger may set down nuy but what be write in that
that , from whose record , say he , clasp he hand together , I be to be condemn have or acquit ! - the notary hold up the point of he pen betwixt the taper and he eye . - it be a story , , say the gentleman , which will rouse up every affection in nature ; - it will kill the humane , and touch the heart of herself with pity . - - the notary be inflam with a desire to begin , and put he pen a third time into he ink - horn - and the old gentleman , turn a little more towards the notary , begin to dictate he story in these word : - - and where be the rest of it , ? say I , as he just then enter would the room . the FRAGMENT , and the Bouquet . { 1 } . when come up close to the table , and be make to comprehend what I want , he tell I there be only two other sheet of it , which he have wrap round the stalk of a bouquet to keep it together , which he have present to the demoiselle upon the boulevard . - then prithee , , say I , step back to she to the - 's hotel , and see if thou canst get it . - there be no doubt of it , say ; - and away he fly . in a very little time the poor fellow come back quite out of breath , with deeper mark of disappointment in he look than could arise from the simple irreparability of the fragment . ! in less than two minute that the poor fellow have take he last tender farewell of she - he faithless mistress have give he gage d'amour to one of the count 's footman , - the footman to a young sempstress , - and the sempstress to a fiddler , with my fragment at the end of it . - we misfortune be involved together : - I give a sigh , - and echo it back again to my ear . - how perfidious ! cry . - how unlucky ! say I . - I should not have be mortify , , quoth , if she have lose it . - , , say I , have I find it . whether I do or no will be see hereafter . the act of . Paris . the man who either disdain or fear to walk up a dark entry may be a excellent good man , and fit for a hundred thing , but he will not do to make a good Sentimental Traveller . - I count little of the many thing I see pass at broad noonday , in large and open street . - nature be shy , and hate to act before spectator ; but in such a unobserved corner you sometimes see a single short scene of hers worth all the sentiment of a dozen french play compound together , - and yet they be absolutely fine ; - and whenever I have a more brilliant affair upon my hand than common , as they suit a preacher just as well as a hero , I generally make my sermon out of th'ey ; - and for the text , - " , and , and , " - be as good as any one in the . there be a long dark passage issue out from the into a narrow street ; ' tis trod by a few who humbly wait for a fiacre , { 2 } or wish to get off quietly of 'foot when the opera be done . at the end of it , towards the theatre , ' tis lighte by a small candle , the light of which be almost lost before you get half - way down , but near the door - ' tis more for ornament than use : you see it as a fix star of the least magnitude ; it burn , - but do little good to the world , that we know of . in return along this passage , I discern , as I approach within five or six pace of the door , two lady stand arm - in - arm with they back against the wall , wait , as I imagine , for a fiacre ; - as they be next the door , I think they have a prior right ; so edge myself up within a yard or little more of they , and quietly take my stand . - I be in black , and scarce see . the lady next I be a tall lean figure of a woman , of about thirty - six ; the other of the same size and make , of about forty : there be no mark of wife or widow in any one part of either of they ; - they seem ' to be two upright vestal sister , unsap by caress , unbroke in upon by tender salutation . - I could have wish ' to have make they happy : - they happiness be destin ' that night , to come from another quarter . a low voice , with a good turn of expression , and sweet cadence at the end of it , begg would for a twelve - sous piece betwixt they , for the love of heaven . I think it singular that a beggar should fix the quota of a alm - and that the sum should be twelve time as much as what be usually give in the dark . - they both seem astonished at it as much as myself . - twelve sous ! say one . - a twelve - sous piece !
! say the other , - and make no reply . the poor man say , he know not how to ask less of lady of they rank ; and bow ' down he head to the ground . po ! say they , - we have no money . the beggar remain silent for a moment or two , and renew would he supplication . - do not , my fair young lady , say he , stop you good ear against I . - upon my word , honest man ! say the younger , we have no change . - then bless you , say the poor man , and multiply those joy which you can give to other without change ! - I observe the elder sister put she hand into she pocket . - I will see , say she , if I have a sous . a sous ! give twelve , say the supplicant ; have be bountiful to you , be bountiful to a poor man . - I would friend , with all my heart , say the younger , if I have it . my fair charitable ! say he , address himself to the elder , - what be it but you goodness and humanity which make you bright eye so sweet , that they outshine the morning even in this dark passage ? and what be it which make the and he brother say so much of you both as they just pass by ? the two lady seem much affect ; and impulsively , at the same time they both put they hand into they pocket , and each take out a twelve - sous piece . the contest betwixt they and the poor supplicant be no more ; - it be continue betwixt themselves , which of the two should give the twelve - sous piece in charity ; - and , to end the dispute , they both give it together , and the man go away . the . Paris . I step hastily after he : it be the very man whose success in ask charity of the woman before the door of the hotel have so puzzl I ; - and I find at once he secret , or at least the basis of it : - ' twa flattery . delicious essence ! how refresh art thout to ! how strongly be all its power and all its weakness on thy side ! how sweetly dost thout mix with the blood , and help it through the most difficult and tortuous passage to the heart ! the poor man , as he be not straiten would for time , have give it here in a larger dose : ' ttis certain he have a way of bring it into a less form , for the many sudden case he have to do with in the street : but how he contrive to correct , sweeten , concentre , and qualify it , - I vex not my spirit with the enquiry ; - it be enough the beggar gain two twelve - sous piece - and they can best tell the rest , who have gain much greater matter by it . Paris . we get forwards in the world , not so much by do service , as receive they ; you take a withering twig , and put it in the ground ; and then you water it , because you have plan it . yoMonsieu le -, merely because he have do I one kindness in the affair of my passport , would go on and do I another , the few day he be at , in make I know to a few people of rank ; and they be to present I to other , and so on . I have get master of my secret just in time to turn these honour to some little account ; otherwise , as be commonly the case , I should have dine or supp ' a single time or two round , and then , by translat look and attitude into plain , I should presently have see , that I have hold of the couvert { 3 } of some more entertaining guest ; and in course should have resign all my place one after another , merely upon the principle that I could not keep they . - as it be , thing do not go much amiss . I have the honour of be introduce to the old -: in day of yore he have signalize himself by some small feat of chivalry in the , and have dress would himself out to the idea of tilt and tournament ever since . - the B - wish have to have it think the affair be somewhere else than in he brain . " he could like to take a trip to , " and ask much of the english lady . - stay where you be , I beseech you , le , say I . - Les Messieurs Anglois can scarce get a kind look from they as it be . - the invite I to supper . Monsieur p -, the farmer - general , be just as inquisitive about we tax . they be very considerable , he hear . - if we know but how to collect they , say I , make he a low bow . I could never have be invite to . p - concert upon any other term . I have be misrepresent to - as a esprit . - - be a esprit herself : she burn with impatience to see I , and hear I talk . I have not take my seat , before I see she do not care a sous whether I have any wit or no ; - I be let
let in , to be convince she have . I call heaven to witness I never once open the door of my lip . - vow ' to every creature she meet - " she have never have a more improving conversation with a man in she life . " there be three epocha in the empire of a french woman . - she be coquette , - then deist , - then dévote : the empire during these be never lose , - she only change she subjects when thirty - five year and more have unpeople she dominion of the slave of love , she re-people it with slave of infidelity , - and then with the slave of the church . - be vibrat betwixt the first of those epocha : the colour of the rose be fade fast away ; - she ought to have be a deist five year before the time I have the honour to pay my first visit . she place I upon the same sofa with she , for the sake of dispute the point of religion more closely . - in short - tell I she believe nothing . - I tell - it might be she principle , but I be sure it could not be she interest to level the outwork , without which I could not conceive how such a citadel as hers could be defend ; - that there be not a more dangerous thing in the world than for a beauty to be a deist ; - that it be a debt I owed my creed not to conceal it from she ; - that I have not be five minute sat upon the sofa beside she , but I have begin to form design ; - and what be it , but the sentiment of religion , and the persuasion they have excite in she breast , which could have check ' they as they rise up ? we be not adamant , say I , take hold of she hand ; - and there be need of all restraint , till age in she own time steal in and lay they on we . - but my dear lady , say I , kiss she hand , - ' tis too - too soon . I declare I have the credit all over of unperverting -. - she affir to - and the Abbé m -, that in one half hwe I have say more for reveal religion , than all they have say against it . - I be list directly into - 's coterie ; - and she put off the epocha of deism for two year . I remember it be in this coterie , in the middle of a discourse , in which I be show the necessity of a first cause , when the young count take I by the hand to the farthest corner of the room , to tell I my solitaire be pinn ' too straight about my neck . - it should be plus badinant , say the count , look down upon he own ; - but a word , , to the wise - and from the wise , le count , reply I , make he a bow , - be enough . the embrace I with more ardour than ever I be embrace by mortal man . for three week together I be of every man 's opinion I meet . - ! ce a autant d'esprit que nous autre . - Il raisonne bien , say another . - est un bon enfant , say a third . - and at this price I could have eat and drank and be merry all the day of my life at ; but 'tbe a dishonest reckoning ; - I grow asham of it . - it be the gain of a slave ; - every sentiment of honou revolt against it ; - the higher I get , the more be I force upon my beggarly system ; - the better the coterie , - the more child of ; - I languish would for those of nature : and one night , after a most vile prostitution of myself to half a dozen different people , I grow sick , - go to bed ; - order would to get I horse in the morning to set out for . . Moulines . I never feel what the distress of plenty be in any one shape till now , - to travel it through the , the sweetest part of , - in the heyday of the vintage , when be pour she abundance into every one 's lap , and every eye be lift up , - a journey , through each step of which beat time to Labour , and all she child be rejoice as they carry in they cluster : to pass through this with my affections fly out , and kindl at every group before I , - and every one of they be pregnant with adventur . - just heaven ! - it would fill up twenty volume ; - and ala ! I have but a few small page left of this to crowd it into , - and half of these must be take up with the poor my friend , , meet with near . the story he have tell of that disorder maid affect I not a little in the reading ; but when I get within the neighbourhood where she liv , it return so strong into the mind , that I could not resist a impulse which prompt I to go half a league out of the road , to the village where she parent dwelt , to enquire after she . ' Tis go , I own , like the Knight of the Woeful Countenance in quest
quest of melancholy adventur . but I know not how it be , but I be never so perfectly conscious of the existence of a soul within I , as when I be entangle in they . the old mother come to the door ; she look tell I the story before she open would she mouth . - she have lose she husband ; he have die , she say , of anguish , for the loss of 's sense , about a month before . - she have fear at first , she add , that it would have plunder ' she poor girl of what little understanding be leave ; - but , on the contrary , it have bring she more to herself : - still , she could not rest . - she poor daughter , she say , cry , be wander somewhere about the road . why do my pulse beat languid as I write this ? and what make , whose heart seem would only to be tune to joy , to pass the back of he hand twice across he eye , as the woman stood and tell it ? I beckon to the postilion to turn back into the road . when we have get within half a of , at a little opening in the road lead to a thicket , I discover poor sit under a poplar . she be sit with she elbow in she lap , and she head lean on one side within she hand : - a small brook run at the foot of the tree . I bid the postilion go on with the chaise to - and to bespeak my supper ; - and that I would walk after he . she be dress would in white , and much as my friend describe she , except that she hair hng loose , which before be twist within a silk net . - she have superad likewise to she jacket , a pale green riband , which fall across she shoulder to the waist ; at the end of which hang she pipe . - she goat have be as faithless as she lover ; and she have get a little dog in lieu of he , which she have keep tie by a string to she girdle : as I look at she dog , she draw he towards she with the string . - " thou shal not leave I , , " say she . I look would in 's eye and see she be think more of she father than of she lover , or she little goat ; for , as she utter ' they , the tear trickle down she cheek . I sit down close by she ; and let I wipe they away as they fall , with my handkerchief . - I then steep would it in my own , - and then in hers , - and then in mine , - and then I wip would hers again ; - and as I do it , I feel such undescribable emotion within I , as I be sure could not be account for from any combination of matter and motion . I be positive I have a soul ; nor can all the book with which materialist have pester have the world ever convince I to the contrary . . when have come a little to herself , I ask would she if she remember a pale thin person of a man , who have sit down betwixt she and she goat about two year before ? she say she be unsettle much at that time , but remember it upon two account : - that ill as she be , she see the person pitie she ; and next , that she goat have steal he handkerchief , and she have beat he for the theft ; - she have wash have it , she say , in the brook , and keep it ever since in she pocket to restore it to he in case she should ever see he again , which , she add , he have half promise she . as she tell I this , she take the handkerchief out of she pocket to let I see it ; she have fold it up neatly in a couple of vine leave , tie round with a tendril ; - on open it , I see a mark in one of the corner . she have since that , she tell I , stray would as far as , and walk ' round 's once , - and return ' back ; - that she find she way alone across the ; - have travell would over all Lombardy , without money , - and through the flinty roads of without shoe : - how she have borne it , and how she have get support , she could not tell ; - but temper the wind , say , to the shorn lamb . Shorn indeed ! and to the quick , say I : and wast thou in my own land , where I have a cottage , I would take thee to it , and shelter thee : thou shouldst eat of my own bread and drink of my own cup ; - I would be kind to thy ; - in all thy weakness and wandering I would seek after thee and bring thee back ; - when the sun go down I would say my prayer : and when I have do thout shouldst play thy evene song upon thy pipe , nor would the incense of my sacrifice be worse accept for enter heaven along with that of a broken heart ! melt within I , as I utter would this ; and observe , as I take out my handkerchief
handkerchief , that it be steep have too much already to be of use , would need go wash it in the stream . - and where will you dry it , ? say I . - I will dry it in my bosom , say she : - 'twill do I good . and be you heart still so warm , ? say I . I touch would upon the string on which hang all she sorrow : - she look would with wistful disorder for some time in my face ; and then , without say any thing , take she pipe and play ' she service to the Virgin . - the string I have touch cease to vibrate ; - in a moment or two return to herself , - let she pipe fall , - and rise up . and where be you go , ? say I . - she say , to . - let we go , say I , together . - put she arm within mine , and lengthen the string , to let the dog follow , - in that order we enter would . . Moulines . though I hate salutation and greeting in the market - place , yet , when we get into the middle of this , I stopp have to take my last look and last farewell of . , though not tall , be nevertheless of the first order of fine form : - affliction have touch she look with something that be scarce earthly ; - still she be feminine ; - and so much be there about she of all that the heart wish , or the eye look for in woman , that could the trace be ever wear out of she brain , and those of out of mine , she should not only eat of my bread and drink of my own cup , but should lie in my bosom , and be unto I as a daughter . , poor luckless maiden ! - Imbibe the oil and wine which the compassion of a stranger , as he journeyeth on he way , now pour into thy wound ; - the being , who have twice bruise thee , can only bind they up for ever . the Bourbonnnois . there be nothing from which I have pain out for my self so joyous a riot of the affections , as in this journey in the vintage , through this part of ; but press through this gate , of sorrow to it , my suffering have totally unfit I . in every scene of festivity , I see in the background of the piece , sit pensive under she poplar ; and I have get almost to before I be able to cast a shade across she . - dear Sensibility ! source inexhaust of all that be precious in we joy , or costly in we sorrow ! thou chainest thy martyr down upon he bed of straw - and ' tis thou who lift 'st he up to ! - Eternal fountain of we feeling ! - ' ti here I trace thee - and this be thy " divinity which stir within I ; " - not that , in some sad and sickening moment , " my soul shrink back upon herself , and startle at destruction ; " - mere pomp of word ! - but that I feel some generous joy and generous care beyond myself ; - all come from thee , great - great SENSORIUm of the world ! which vibrate , if a hair of we head but fall upon the ground , in the remotest desert of thy creation . - touch would with thee , draw my curtain when I languish - hear my tale of symptom , and blame the weather for the disorder of he nerve . thou hagive 'st a portion of it sometimes to the roughest peasant who traverse the bleakest mountain ; - he find the lacerated lamb of another 's flock . - this moment I behold he lean with he head against he crook , with piteous inclination look down upon it ! - oh ! have I come one moment sooner ! it bleed to death ! - he gentle heart bleed with it . - peace to thee , generious swain ! - I see thou walkest off with anguish , - but thy joy shall balance it ; - for , happy be thy cottage , - and happy be the sharer of it , - and happy be the lambs which sport about you ! the Supper . a shoe come loose from the fore foot of the thill - horse , at the beginning of the ascent of mount , the postilion dismount , twiste the shoe off , and put it in he pocket ; as the ascent be of five or six mile , and that horse we main dependence , I make a point of have the shoe fasten on again , as well as we could ; but the postilion have throw away the nail , and the hammer in the chaise box be of no great use without they , I submit to go on . he have not mount half a mile higher , when , come to a flinty piece of road , the poor devil lose a second shoe , and from off he other fore foot . I then get out of the chaise in good earnest ; and see a house about a quarter of a mile to the left hand , with a great deal to do I prevail upon the postilion to turn up to it . the look of the house , and of every thing about it , as we draw nearer , soon reconcile I to the disaster .
. - it be a little farm - house , surround with about twenty acre of vineyard , about as much corn ; - and close to the house , on one side , be a potagerie of a acre and a half , full of everything which could make plenty in a french peasant 's house ; - and , on the other side , be a little wood , which furnish wherewithal to dress it . it be about eight in the evening when I get to the house - so I leave the postilion to manage he point as he could ; - and , for mine , I walk directly into the house . the family consist of a old grey - head man and he wife , with five or six son and son - in - law , and they several wife , and a joyous genealogy out of they . they be all sit down together to they lentil - soup ; a large wheaten loaf be in the middle of the table ; and a flagon of wine at each end of it promise joy through the stage of the repast : - ' tbe a feast of love . the old man rise up to meet I , and with a respectful cordiality would have I sit down at the table ; my heart be set down the moment I enter would the room ; so I sit down at once like a son of the family ; and to invest myself in the character as speedily as I could , I instantly borrowed the old man 's knife , and take up the loaf , cut myself a hearty luncheon ; and , as I do it , I see a testimony in every eye , not only of a honest welcome , but of a welcome mix would with thanks that I have not seem have to doubt it . be it this ? or tell I , , what else it be that make this morsel so sweet , - and to what magic I owe it , that the dratch I take of they flagon be so delicious with it , that they remain upon my palate to this hour ? if the supper be to my taste , - the grace which follow it be much more so . the Grace . when supper be over , the old man give a knock upon the table with the haft of he knife , to bid they prepare for the dance : the moment the signal be give , the woman and girl run altogether into a back apartment to tie up they hair , - and the young man to the door to wash they face , and change they sabot ; and in three minute every soul be ready upon a little esplanade before the house to begin . - the old man and he wife come out last , and place I betwixt they , sit down upon a sofa of turf by the door . the old man have some fifty year ago be no mean performer upon the vielle , - and at the age he be then of , touch would it well enough for the purpose . he wife sung now and then a little to the tune , - then intermit , - and join would she old man again , as they child and grand - child dance before they . it be not till the middle of the second dance , when , from some pause in the movement , wherein they all seem to look up , I fancie I could distinguish a elevation of spirit different from that which be the cause or the effect of simple jollity . in a word , I think I beheld mix in the dance : - but , as I have never see she so engage , I should have look ' upon it now as one of the illusion of a imagination which be eternally mislead I , have not the old man , as soon as the dance end , say , that this be they constant way ; and that all he life long he have make it a rule , after supper be over , to call out he family to dance and rejoice ; believe , he say , that a cheerful and content mind be the best sort of thanks to heave that a illiterate peasant could pay , - or a learn prelate either , say I . the case of . when you have gain the top of , you run presently down to Lyons : - adieu , then , to all rapid movement ! ' tTis a journey of caution ; and it fare better with sentiment , not to be in a hurry with they ; so I contract with a voiturin to take he time with a couple of mule , and convoy I in my own chaise safe to , through . poor , patient , quiet , honest people ! fear not : you poverty , the treasury of you simple virtue , will not be envy you by the world , nor will you valley be invade by it . - ! in the midst of thy disorder , thou be still friendly to the scantiness thou hast create : with all thy great work about thee , little hast thou leave to give , either to the scythe or to the sickle ; - but to that little thou grantest safety and protection ; and sweet be the dwelling which stand so shelter ' . let the way - wear traveller vent he complaint upon the sudden turn and dangers of you roads , - you rock , - you precipice ; - the difficulty of get up , - the horror of
of get down , - mountain impracticable , - and cataract , which roll down great stone from they summit , and block he road up . - the peasant have be all day at work in remove a fragment of this kind between and ; and , by the time my voiturin get to the place , it want full two hour of completing before a passage could any how be gain ' : there be nothing but to wait with patience ; - ' tbe a wet and tempestuous night ; so that by the delay , and that together , the voiturin find himself oblige to put up five mile short of he stage at a little decent kind of a inn by the roadside . I forthwill take possession of my bedchamber - get a good fire - order have supper ; and be thanking heaven it be no worse , when a voiture arrive with a lady in it and she servant maid . as there be no other bed -chamber in the house , the hostess , - without much nicety , lead they into mine , tell they , as she usher ' they in , that there be nobody in it but a english gentleman ; - that there be two good bed in it , and a closet within the room which hold another . the accent in which she speak of this third bed , do not say much for it ; - however , she say there be three bed and but three people , and she durst say , the gentleman would do anything to accommodate matter . - I leave not the lady a moment to make a conjecture about it - so instantly make a declaration that I would do anything in my power . as this do not amount to a absolute surrender of my bed - chamber , I still feel myself so much the proprietor , as to have a right to do the honour of it ; - so I desire the lady to sit down , - press she into the warmest seat , - call for more wood , - desire the hostess to enlarge the plan of the supper , and to favour we with the very best wine . the lady have scarce warm would herself five minute at the fire , before she begin to turn she head back , and give a look at the bed ; and the oftener she cast she eye that way , the more they return would perplex ; - I feel for she - and for myself : for in a few minute , what by she look , and the case itself , I find myself as much embarrassed as it be possible the lady could be herself . that the bed we be to lie in be in one and the same room , be enough simply by itself to have excite all this ; - but the position of they , for they stand parallel , and so very close to each other as only to allow space for a small wicker chair betwixt they , render the affair still more oppressive to we ; - they be fix up moreover near the fire ; and the projection of the chimney on one side , and a large beam which cross would the room on the other , form a kind of recess for they that be no way favourable to the nicety of we sensation : - if anything could have add to it , it be that the two bed be both of they so very small , as to cut we off from every idea of the lady and the maid lie together ; which in either of they , could it have be feasible , my lie beside they , though a thing not to be wish ' , yet there be nothing in it so terrible which the imagination might not have pass have over without torment . as for the little room within , it offer ' little or no consolation to we : ' tbe a damp , cold closet , with a half dismantle window - shutter , and with a window which have neither glass nor oil paper in it to keep out the tempest of the night . I do not endeaavor to stifle my cough when the lady give a peep into it ; so it reduce the case in course to this alternative - that the lady should sacrifice she health to she feeling , and take up with the closet herself , and abandon the bed next mine to she maid , - or that the girl should take the closet , & c. , &c . the lady be a Piedmontese of about thirty , with a glow of health in she cheek . the maid be a Lyonoise of twenty , and as brisk and lively a french girl as ever move . - there be difficulty every way , - and the obstacle of the stone in the road , which bring we into the distress , great as it appear whilst the peasant be remove it , be but a pebble to what lay in we way now . - I have only to add , that it do not lessen the weight which hang upon we spirit , that we be both too delicate to communicate what we feel to each other upon the occasion . we sit down to supper ; and have we not have more generous wine to it than a little inn in could have furnish ' , we tongue have be tie up , till necessity herself have set they at liberty ; - but the lady have a few bottle of in she voiture , send down she fille de chambre for a couple
